Mr. Jurica (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Mike Smith, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), for his comprehensive and informative
briefing on CTED's revised organizational plan.

Furthermore, Croatia is pleased to be a sponsor of
the draft resolution to be adopted on the renewal of
CTED's mandate until 31 December 2010.
08-27612

Terrorism is a serious threat to international
peace and security, as it attempts to undermine the core
values of the modern democratic world. Terrorism
poses a serious challenge to our security, to the basic
principles of democratic societies and to the rights and
freedoms of our citizens. Terrorist acts are criminal in
nature and cannot be justified under any circumstances.
We appreciate the efforts being made in the global
struggle against terrorism.

Since the beginning of this year, Croatia has had
the privilege and responsibility of chairing the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), which was
established in the immediate aftermath of the
devastating terrorist attacks against not only the United
States but the entire democratic world on 11 September
2001. The mandate of the Committee is to monitor the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), to provide advice to Member States regarding
the implementation of their provisions and to help
States receive the necessary technical assistance to
reinforce their counter-terrorism measures and
initiatives. Today's meeting therefore has particular
significance, as the new draft resolution will not only
chart the way forward for CTED, but also outline the
basic parameters for the Committee's activities in the
future.

In that respect, I would like to emphasize that
CTED plays a crucial supporting role in fulfilling the
mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. I would
like to express my gratitude for the excellent
cooperation we have received so far from the
Executive Director and his team. In the coming
months, the Committee should finalize the process of
adopting the remaining preliminary implementation
assessments, so that ultimately every Member State of
the United Nations receives a standardized evaluation
of its counter-terrorism performance. We believe that,
by working in a collaborative manner, the Committee
and CTED could increase the effectiveness of this
important subsidiary body and reinvigorate the
operations of the Security Council in this area.

The Croatian delegation welcomes the proposal
in the revised organizational plan to develop a
comprehensive strategy to engage with donors who are
active in the counter-terrorism field, as well as to
intensify a tailored dialogue with recipient countries
with a view to identifying their counter-terrorism
needs. Facilitating technical assistance is one of the
most efficient ways of improving counter-terrorism

capacity. It is also instrumental in raising the visibility
of the Security Council's engagement in this area.

Terrorism is a common threat that can be
successfully suppressed only by working together. We
support the call for enhanced cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
but we also reiterate the need for regular experience-
and expertise-sharing with the relevant counter-
terrorism experts. In that context, let me inform the
Council that my country is active in the various
international counter-terrorism arrangements, and a
Croatian representative is currently chairing the
Council of Europe's Committee of Experts on
Terrorism.

As the Counter-Terrorism Committee moves
towards its seventh anniversary, we must acknowledge
that the struggle against international terrorism is still
ongoing. We have achieved commendable results,
especially in the areas of increased cooperation and
information-sharing. But terrorist groups are finding
ways to adjust and to use more advanced methods in
recruiting new members and in carrying out their
terrorist acts. The responsibility of the Security
Council and the Committee is to make sure everyone
remains vigilant in addressing this threat. But it is also
to explain what ideas and values we stand for and what
results have been achieved so far.

