I wish to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Acting Assistant Secretary- General Ramesh Rajasingham for their updates. It is unfortunate that, despite the robust efforts of these gentlemen and their teams, things are still worrisome on the ground. Nevertheless, we are pleased to hear from the Special Envoy that the Government of Yemen has engaged constructively with the Special Envoy's proposals and that the Houthis also responded. We hope that these efforts will soon bear fruit. Almost every day we read about incidents involving an escalation of the violence, armed groups taking control in the south, open conflict in the north, an increasing number of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) infections, a deterioration of the economy and the plummeting value of the Yemeni rial. Such news is in addition to reports that 80 per cent of the population - about 24 million people - are still relying on humanitarian aid, with 10 million at risk of starvation. If nothing changes in the coming months, there could be complete collapse in Yemen, with no one gaining anything from the struggle for control. We therefore fully support the efforts made by the Special Envoy to end the conflict and the suffering of the people of Yemen. My delegation would like to highlight three points. First, I would recall all of the agreed commitments. Considering how difficult it has been for the parties to even sit at the same table, the commitments laid out in the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements are monumental. We must therefore avoid the temptation to toss aside already implemented commitments just because others cannot yet be implemented. In our view, where there are contentious issues, the parties should focus on what can be implemented and work hard to make progress incrementally, as every step towards peace counts. In that connection, we reiterate our strong concern at the declaration made by the Southern Transitional Council and reaffirm our commitment to Yemen's unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. It is critical to expedite the implementation of the Riyadh agreement. Secondly, I would touch on the issue of permitting humanitarian assistance and supporting the authorities in addressing COVID-19. COVID-19 is a potent threat in Yemen, with the pandemic spreading fast and capable of being as deadly as the war itself. As the Assistant Secretary-General mentioned, as of this morning there were 72 confirmed cases, including 13 deaths; previous reports indicated that Yemen had only one confirmed case. Sadly, with the health care system worn down by war, there is no capability in the country to respond. Indonesia therefore calls on the authorities to be transparent so as to enable the international community to respond accordingly and to allow the delivery of appropriate humanitarian assistance. Thirdly, I would make a plea for the parties to work with the Special Envoy. We are in the holy month of Ramadan and will soon celebrate Eid al-Fitr, a wonderful time for the Ummah. There is no better time than this for the parties to lay down their weapons and focus on crafting a political settlement. At least we can have a humanitarian pause at least until Eid al-Fitr, allowing room for dialogue and for the Special Envoy to work on the proposals and humanitarian workers to assist in the COVID-19 response. In that connection, we welcome the coalition's extension of the unilateral ceasefire and urge the Houthi to reciprocate immediately so as to stop the hostilities as well as counter COVID-19. We all hope for a miracle in Yemen, but that can happen only if all parties commit to implementing previous agreements and engage constructively with the Special Envoy to resume the political process.
