Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is indeed appropriate that we should meet
on the issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict at this particular time. Despite the legal
developments and international agreements on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict that have
emerged since the establishment of the United Nations,
starting with the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and the
numerous resolutions subsequently adopted by the
Security Council, civilians are still paying the heaviest
price in armed conflicts.

It is indeed ironic that the gap between text and
implementation - between what the law dictates, on
the one hand, and what is practiced on the ground, on
the other - is gradually growing wider. We are
referring, of course, to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Although some theorists like to commend what
they call the great developments in and evolution of
international law, civilians in armed conflict and those
living under foreign occupation and settlement are still
suffering from all forms of violence and forced
displacement; as well as the intentional deprivation of
humanitarian aid, not to mention the confiscation of
land. In short, those civilians are still being subjected
to everything that is contrary to the law, their only fault
being that they reside in so-called areas of armed
conflict or that their lands have been occupied by
others and have been managed and administered in
their absence - or even in their presence. These lands
are being manipulated in a way that is very close to
genocide and ethnic cleansing.

In a statement I made to this Council on 27 May
2008, I referred to Mr. Holmes' statement to the
Council in November 2007 on the deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
especially Gaza, which he described at the time as
reaching the limits of what is bearable for any
community. I would now like to recall what Mr.
Holmes said in his statement of 27 May 2008. "In
Gaza, Israeli air attacks and ground incursions continue
to result in unacceptable Palestinian civilian
casualties" (S/PV.5898, p. 3).

At that time, seven months ago - which happens
to be the duration of the truce with Israel - I
described the inhuman situation of civilians in Gaza as
a result of collective punishment policies that are
legally actionable and that are embodied in the siege
and in the deprivation, oppression and tyranny that
Israel has practiced against civilians under the
umbrella of a so-called truce. This so-called truce has
in fact led to the transformation of the Gaza Strip into
the biggest collective detention camp in the world,
while its residents have been deprived of the most
basic requirements of life. The situation I described
was the tragic situation during the truce of the past
seven months, as Mr. Holmes, who is sitting to my left,
can attest.

According to the science of philosophy, rational
thought would presume that repeated calls upon Israel
to put an end to these practices should logically lead to
its immediate cessation of these illegitimate policies
and practices. That is what the rational thought of
philosophy would assume. Unfortunately, Israel did not
just ignore these calls and the demands issued several
months ago, during the truce. Rather, it escalated its
aggressive practices and launched a cowardly military
operation targeting the unarmed civilians that it is
holding prisoner in this detention camp called the Gaza
Strip. It has killed and wounded thousands and is
continuing to do so at this very moment, thus
completely undermining the concepts of international
legitimacy, international law and international
humanitarian law.
Incidentally, we would like to remind the Council
that this collective prison called Gaza occupies an area
of only approximately 363 square kilometres. It is a
strip of land that is 35 kilometres long and about 6 to
12 kilometres wide. It is equivalent to the area of one
of the Nazi detention camps that humanity mistakenly
thought were a painful experience never to be repeated
in the future. However, Israel has insisted on such a
repetition.

Let us review together what was stated in the
Security Council's statement on the protection of
civilians, of 27 May 2008 (S/PRST/2008/18). The
Council reaffirmed that parties to armed conflict are
responsible to take all feasible steps to ensure the
protection of affected civilians, in particular giving
attention to the specific needs of women and children.
What was Israel's response to these words? Its
response was to kill more than 400 children and
approximately 200 women, not to mention the
elimination of entire families.

Moreover, the Security Council statement
stipulated the need to grant safe and unhindered access
of humanitarian personnel to provide aid to civilians in
armed conflict in accordance with international law.
What was Israel's response to this statement? Its
response was to deny medical and food aid completely
despite international calls to the contrary, the most
recent of which was resolution 1860 (2009). And what
were its aims through this? To kill those it could not
kill directly by depriving them of food, medicine,
water and electricity.

The Israeli forces also rounded up several
families and led them to an empty house, then bombed
them from aircraft in a flagrant breach of the Third
Geneva Convention relative to the treatment of
prisoners. Moreover it has used internationally banned
weapons such as white phosphorus in bombing its
enemies, who are women and children.

The criminal acts that Israel is perpetrating
constitute a unique case of wholesale violation of all
the principles and tenets of international law and
international humanitarian law, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols, as
well as international conventions on the protection of
children. These crimes are war crimes and genocide
that must be prosecuted.
Let us admit here that Israel's aggressive
behaviour has a unique trait - let us call it a
shortcoming - that no usurper in history has yet
achieved: it violates humanity's entire legal tradition in
one go, with no exception. Here we ask this Council to
tell us which legal obligations Israel has upheld since
the Security Council placed the item of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict on its agenda in the late
1990s. We also ask the Council to inform us where and
when has it held Israel accountable for its violation of
international criteria and laws pertaining to the
protection of civilians.

The important question, whose answer would be
much appreciated by us and by many others, is why are
there two standards in the implementation of
international law, and why is Israel exempt from the
implementation of these standards? Is this so-called
international law designed on the basis of criteria that
have nothing to do with the criteria of our Member
States but much to do with the narrow interests of some
influential States in the Security Council, with the aim
of protecting Israel and holding it above international
law? Is this the reason? Or is there a problem in
understanding the terminology so that some do not
consider the Palestinians unarmed civilians like all
others in the free world?

We note here that the Charter of the United
Nations does not give a State the right to violate
civilians' rights, including the rights of civilians under
occupation, using the excuse of self-defence. Rather,
the Charter obliges the occupying Power to meet clear
requirements. It is not permissible for some, even with
good intentions, to repeat in this Chamber Israel's lie
that its aggression against the Palestinians is in self-
defence, in application of Article 51 of the Charter,
because that Article does not apply to invading forces
that forcibly occupy others' lands and have done so for
decades. Quite to the contrary, Article 51 of the Charter
applies by default to the Palestinians' resistance against
Israeli occupation, in self-defence. In other words, the
right to self-defence must not be manipulated by some
to justify their silence over Israel's crimes. There is an
Arabic proverb that says "Those who do not speak out
against wrong are but a silent Satan".

The situation of Syrian residents in the occupied
Golan is not much different from that of the
Palestinians. The Israeli occupation forces continue to
confiscate land and to expand illegal settlements. The
so-called regional settlement council in the Golan, with
the support of the occupation Government, has
endorsed plans to build a new settlement tourism
village that would occupy 40 dunams near the Israeli
settlement of Ani'am, which was built over the ruins of
the Syrian town of Nakhila Taibeh. Moreover, that
council, in cooperation with the religious Yonatan
settlement administration, which is an extremist
organization, has set up a plan to attract thousands of
settlers so that their numbers would increase to over
50,000 in the near future. Also, representatives of
Israeli parties in the settlement of Ketzarin, which was
also built on the rubble of a Syrian town, Qazrin, have
signed a coalition agreement within the framework of
the regional settlement council that aims to establish
cooperation and coordination among them in order to
oppose any Israeli withdrawal from the Golan in light
of the resumption of indirect negotiations to that end.

Israel continues to impose a policy of oppressing
civilian Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan. It
continues to imprison them with no due cause and to
subject them to situations that could jeopardize their
lives. We would like to call attention here to the case of
prisoner Bashir A1 Moqt. My Government has called
on the Secretary-General, the Red Cross and others to
intervene to save his life.

Israel also continues with its policy of cutting off
all forms of communication and contact between Syrian
family members who have been separated as a result of
the occupation. Moreover, the Israeli forces have
confiscated Syrian identity cards given to students from
the occupied Golan attending Damascus University
when they returned to their towns in the occupied
Golan. Here, Syria calls upon this Council to pressure
Israel to allow Syrian citizens to visit their Syrian
motherland, through the Quneitra crossing immediately
and without delay, in order to give credibility to this
particular debate,. My country has dispatched messages
in this regard to the Secretary-General, the Presidents
of the Security Council and General Assembly and
governmental and non-governmental organizations
requesting them to intervene to help in resolving this
1ssue.

We hope that all of these parties would translate
the positions that they have taken today into real
actions, especially since international law stipulates
that Israel's occupation of the Golan is actually several
occupations, thus requiring that the Council issue
several incriminations. Israel has not been occupying
the Syrian Golan since 1967, but also adopted a
provocative and unjust resolution claiming to annex the
occupied Golan, which was unanimously rejected by
this Council in its resolution 497 (1981). The Council
considered the decision to annex as void and demanded
that Israel immediately rescind it.

