Lieutenant General Kamanzi: Like my colleagues,
I would like to first make some general comments,
beginning with the issue of mandate implementation,
or the ability to achieve a mandate. The achievement
of a mission mandate is indeed a whole-of-mission
task comprising all the components that constitute the
mission: the civilian component and, most important,
the civilian leadership, and uniformed components,
namely, the police component, which, in our case, is
also composed of formed police units and individual
police officers, as well as the military component.

For us to achieve our mission, all the components
need to make their contribution. The contribution of
the military component, for the most part, is protecting
civilians but also - most important - as an enabler
and a platform if we want the other components to
achieve or make their contribution. In that regard, I
mean being able to protect and facilitate access - for
example in human rights, political affairs and other
components - so that they can do their work in the
various places.

We have the responsibility of ensuring the access
of humanitarian actors and delivery of humanitarian
aid for the recipients. We have the responsibility of
supporting the peace process and the peace agreement.
In particular, we are talking about support to the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism (CTSAMM), which is supposed
to monitor and follow up on violations, which in the end
helps the force to move the peace process forward.

What I am saying here is that, in the achievement
of our mandate, the military component makes its
contribution and, in our case, if the question is whether
or not we have an understandable and implementable
mandate and whether the military component
understands us and is ready to make its contribution,
the answer is yes. But, for that to happen, we need to
address some of the challenges such as those I made
reference to previously, which include having the
numbers mandated.

I made reference to the fact that we have not
reached the ceiling in the number of troops and
enablers that the Council has made available to us. For
example, the Regional Protection Force (RPF), whose
various components are supposed to be at a strength of
4,000 personnel, has stood at slightly over 50 per cent
inducted since 2016. Even then, critical enablers such as
tactical helicopters and combat engineering elements,
which are supposed to help protect and improve our
security, are not with us yet. It is therefore important
that, while we understand and are ready, we need to be
supported and given the resources, especially those that
are within our ceiling.

We have talked about intelligence and information
as important components for being able to do our work.
Information, specifically peacekeeping intelligence,
is critical to proper planning and the utilization of the
resources at our disposal. Once we have information,
we are able to prioritize and employ our resources
appropriately and, in doing so, become efficient and
protect our troops and those whom we are charged
with protecting.

I made reference to looking into the use of
surveillance and other technologies to help us efficiently
manage the protection-of-civilian sites and allow us to
get more troops into other areas, thereby enabling us to
create a better environment for the return of those in the
protection sites and a more secure environment for the
return of those who fled the country. That is happening
in places where I indicated that, after inducting the
initial elements of the RPF, we will be able to send out
troops from Juba and deploy them in the Equitorias so
that we improve access as well as security. That has
been done to the extent that some people are already
coming back from Uganda, where they had fled to
refugee camps. Some have come back, not necessarily
to permanently settle, but to see what they can do in
the areas they left. That should improve as we receive
more troops who are transitioning from static functions
to deployment in areas where people were displaced or
fled from during the conflict.

I will quickly address some specific questions,
starting with the question from the representative
of the United Kingdom on sexual exploitation and
abuse. I would first say that, as a mission, we are
committed to implementing the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse. For the peacekeeping force, that translates into
critical and serious command responsibility, because
it also constitutes a protection issue. We cannot allow
our forces to abuse or disrespect the people whom
we are charged to protect. It is therefore, first and
foremost, command responsibility to ensure that policy
is implemented.

As a mission, we have also been able to undertake
risk assessments of all the positions and areas of
operation of our troops. Moreover, we have created an
environment in which information is easy to access
and transmit, which bolsters prevention. In instances
where we unfortunately receive allegations of sexual
exploitation or abuse, action is swiftly taken to initiate
thorough investigations and collective measures by both
the Mission and, where required, national investigators,
who receive our full support and cooperation so that
we are able to get to the bottom of allegations and take
corrective measures. Those are some of the mechanisms
in place, which we are working on and continuously
improving to ensure that the policy is adhered to.

There was a question about further increasing the
number of female members among our contingents.
That is primarily the responsibility of the troop-
contributing countries, as we employ and deploy the
human resources that we receive. We appreciate that
some troop-contributing countries have yet to achieve
the quotas and numbers required. However, I wish to
recognize the contribution from Headquarters and
troop-contributing countries. I think that, in response
to our meeting last year on 7 July in New York, where
Chiefs of Defence pledged to make a difference and
increase the numbers of female personnel, we have seen
a slight increase of both female officers and female
members of contingents in the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS). I would like to commend
Headquarters and troop-contributing countries, and I
urge for such progress to be continued; we cannot over-
emphasize the importance of the contribution of the
female members of our contingents.

The representative of Sweden also asked about
the flexibility and employment of brigade unit
intervention, such as the Regional Protection Force
and, if I am correct, the Force Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. With regard
to UNMISS and the Regional Protection Force in
particular, when the RPF was conceived, in 2016, it
was mandated with carrying out specific tasks in Juba.
However, since 2016 the situation in Juba has changed,
and requirements and changes have arisen in other parts
of the country, leading to demands on the Mission. As
such, our current mandate includes some flexibility.
In addition to making a difference and carrying out its
originally mandated tasks in Juba, the RPF has also
been able to intervene and make a difference, where
required, together with UNMISS forces.

In that regard, I also mentioned in my briefing that
we had taken advantage of the deployment of the RPF
and its induction into the Mission to move UNMISS
forces that were originally elsewhere to the south of the
country by first reinforcing company operating bases,
so that we can improve security and outreach and also
open new bases, particularly in Yei, where I mentioned
the impact of improved security and access. It is the
same engineers and enablers ofthe RPF who are helping
to build bases and open roads, which are generally
supporting the Mission. As such, the employment and
deployment of the RPF and its enablers is improving
the situation in Juba. The Force is carrying out the
currently required tasks and is also helping to make
a difference outside of Juba. As I said, we would like
to receive combat engineers, who are supposed to be a
component of the RPF, as well as tactical helicopters,
which would enable us to project and protect our forces
and improve the chances of the Mission achieving
its mandate.

In conclusion, I would like to return to the question
asked by the representative of Equatorial Guinea on
whose responsibility it is to achieve mission mandates.
It is the responsibility of everyone, because the primacy
of a political solution has been underlined. That is the
responsibility of everyone, including - or starting
from - the Security Council, the United Nations
Headquarters, regional actors and, most important,
the parties to the conflict. For their part, missions are
responsible for the tasks that create an environment that
is going to help enable the actors or the parties to the
conflict to achieve a political settlement. Therefore, all
of us have a role to play. For a mission to be achieved,
or for a mandate to be achieved, everybody has a role.
But, as underlined again by one of my colleagues, it is
us - the missions - who are in the tactical position or
environment that requires action, especially in terms of
protecting civilians who are vulnerable.

Creating that important environment for political
discussions and engagement is therefore an important
responsibility. But, again, it is important that everyone
contribute - starting from the political to the
tactical, security and protective environment that is
required for the achievement of the different mandates
that we have been given. The mandates are clear,
workable and achievable so long as everybody makes
their contribution.

On that note, I want to thank everyone and express
my gratitude for the opportunity to express our ideas,
as well as to appreciate and ask once again for the
Council's support as we carry out our mandate and
our responsibilities.

The meeting rose at 6.15 pm.
