Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
would like to start by thanking Special Representative
Yamamoto and Executive Director Fedotov for
their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Umarov of
Kazakhstan for his annual briefing on the excellent
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). I would also like
to express my gratitude to Ms. Haress for sharing
her in-depth analysis and valuable recommendations,
as well as to Ambassador Saikal for his insightful
statement. I also wish to thank him for the kind words
he expressed regarding our penholdership, which I shall
credit my team for, as they did all the hard work.

In previous debates the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has always stressed the need for an integrated and
inclusive approach to the challenges in Afghanistan.
With that in mind, I will focus on three issues: first,
human rights and the rule of law; secondly, the elections;
and, thirdly, peace.

This month we celebrated 70 years of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Under Taliban rule,
human rights were denied to most of the Afghan people.

Seventeen years since the end of brutal Taliban
rule, a great deal of progress has been made, but many
challenges remain, as our briefers pointed out. The
Afghan people cannot enjoy many of the fundamental
rights enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. We support
the efforts of United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to work closely with all Afghan
institutions in overcoming challenges relating to those
rights. That includes a justice system that is able to
fully implement the progress the country has made
in legislative reform and in constitutional provisions
guaranteeing women's rights and the elimination of
violence against women.

The security situation also constitutes a major
obstacle for safeguarding fundamental rights. In that
regard, we are concerned about the continuously high
level of civilian casualties. The deliberate targeting
of civilians by anti-Government forces is entirely
unacceptable; we condemn it in the strongest terms.

An estimated 4 million Afghans contributed to
shaping the future of Afghanistan by casting their
vote in the parliamentary elections in October. They
sent a very hopeful and powerful message. We hope
the turnout for the presidential elections will prove to
be even higher, with further increased participation by
youth and women.

The parliamentary elections showed that

improvements must be made to the electoral process.

The Afghan Government and the Independent Election

Commission will have to do their utmost to ensure that

the presidential elections planned for 2019 take place in

an orderly and credible fashion. We strongly urge them
to implement the lessons learned, and we call on the
United Nations Development Programme and UNAMA
to support the process. There must be improvements
in the implementation of biometric verification, the
training of election staff and voter education.

Also, the Independent Election Commission and
Electoral Complaints Commission both have their
respective roles and mandates, which are separate yet
interdependent. It is important that both institutions
work together towards the common goal of organizing
credible, legitimate and free and fair elections. All
stakeholders across the political spectrum need to engage
in political campaigning in a constructive and peaceful
way, while upholding the highest democratic standards.

Peace is possible, and the moment is now. We
urge the Taliban to reciprocate the offer of the Afghan
Government to engage in direct peace negotiations.
We commend President Ghani for his courageous
leadership in preparation for negotiations. There is
no alternative to an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace process, supported by UNAMA and the
international community.

Besides agreeing on new benchmarks for the
important implementation of reforms, the Geneva
communique once more reiterated the support of the
international community for peace in Afghanistan. But
peace should not roll back the progress made over the
past 17 years, and can never come at the expense of the
fundamental rights of all Afghans.

A new generation of Afghans is knocking on the door
of a new Afghanistan - young, educated and talented
women and men who do not want to return to the dark
period of clerical rule. That was put on clear display by
Ramiz Bakhtiar, the first Afghan youth representative
to the United Nations, whom we invited to brief the
Council in September (see S/PV.8354). Ramiz was
elected as part of a joint initiative by Afghanistan and
the Kingdom of the Netherlands. It was also reflected
on 8 March (see S/PV.8199), when many members of the
Council underscored the importance of the women and
peace and security agenda in Afghanistan, a message
that was reinforced by the fact that the majority of
Council members at that meeting were represented by
female leaders.

The voice ofAfghanistan's people is clear: we need a

workable peace deal. That will require political courage
on the part of all the parties involved; it will require
perseverance; and it will require the unity of effort of
the Council. That unity of effort is something that we, as
penholder this year, have consistently strived towards.
By acting collectively and in an agile manner, the
Council was able to give clear guidance and messaging
on important developments in Afghanistan, including
with regard to the peace process, the elections, the
reform efforts and the many terrorist attacks affecting
the daily lives of the Afghan people. Outside the
Council, the Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue
to focus on those important themes and challenges.
They need to be carefully addressed along the difficult
road towards the sustainable peace and development
that the people of Afghanistan so rightfully deserve.

Finally, I want to thank both Ambassador Saikal
and Special Representative Yamamoto personally,
as well as their respective teams, for their excellent
cooperation over the past year. They can count on our
continued support, including outside the Council.

