Mr. Cooney (Ireland): Ireland joins with others
in welcoming Foreign Minister Kerim to the Security
Council today. We, too, strongly condemn the recent
violence by armed extremists along the border region
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, including the
attacks on Sunday near Tanusevci that resulted in the
deaths of three Macedonian soldiers. These incidents
endanger the stability not only of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, but of the entire region, and
they contradict the positive signals of the recent South
East European Cooperation Process summit in Skopje.

Ireland fully subscribes to the statement that will
be delivered by the Permanent Representative of
Sweden, representing the Presidency of the European
Union. I would like to take this opportunity to
highlight just a few points of particular significance
and to ask the Foreign Minister a question. We
encourage the political leaders in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Kosovo to take action
aimed at establishing peace and stability in the region.
We commend the sensible restraint displayed to date by
the Skopje authorities and take note of the action plan
that Foreign Minister Kerim outlined today; we will be
examining it carefully.

Ireland supports the dialogue between the
authorities of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the Kosovo Force aimed at taking
further practical steps in controlling the border region.
We believe it is essential that the efforts of all relevant
international organizations, including the European
Union, the United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization aimed at establishing
stability should be properly coordinated. Ireland fully
supports the territorial integrity of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, a partner in our common
European endeavour, and expects all parties to respect
the border demarcation agreement signed in Skopje on
23 February.

Finally, the current situation serves to underline
the importance of reinforcing ethnic relations in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and I would
be interested to hear from the Foreign Minister if there
is anything further that the international community
can do to assist the efforts of the Skopje Government in
this regard.

