Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): I should like to begin by
welcoming to the Council the Minister of Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Mozambique, His Excellency

 

Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao, and to thank him for his very
important statement.

The Nigerian delegation is particularly delighted that
Mozambique, a brotherly country, has succeeded in
overcoming a very difficult phase of its history in its effort
to build a virile and united political entity. In this major
effort, Mozambique has chosen, after the trauma of over 30
years of internal strife and political instability, to pursue the
logic of peace. We cannot but commend the courage and
vision of the Mozambican leadership in pursuing national
reconciliation in the higher interest of the country.

The United Nations Operation in Mozambique
(ONUMOZ) provides both a lesson in and an example of
how to intervene in a conflict with the consent of the
concerned parties and achieve the desired result. We
commend the United Nations for this bold initiative and for
sustaining it until a resolution of the problem was achieved.
We hope that the model of this experience will be applied
to other conflict areas in which the United Nations is
involved. In evaluating the reasons for the overall success
of this United Nations enterprise, we agree that a number
of factors could be identified. However, one of the most
salient, in our view, was the demonstrable interest and
cooperation of the three observer States - the United
States, the Russian Federation and Portugal - which, in
conjunction with other members of the international
community, generously invested their ideas and resources
to make the peace process work.

National reconciliation remains but an important first
step in a country's political development after the trauma of
a protracted conflict. Mozambique needs resources to
develop structures that were battered during the long years
of civil strife. In the aftermath of the war, national
rehabilitation, reconstruction and de-mining have become
urgent, requiring the assistance of the international
community. It is in this connection that we commend the
significant contributions already made by the United
Kingdom and Italy, among others, to institution-building
and to the development of civil society in Mozambique. We
call for continued support by the international community,
including the United Nations, donor agencies and non-
governmental organizations, in this regard. Having invested
so much effort in helping to end the conflict in
Mozambique, we cannot fail to assist in sustaining the
peace.

In concluding, we wish to congratulate President
Chissano on the dawn of a new era in Mozambique. We
trust that the new Government will build on this
achievement and consolidate the democratic process in the
higher interest of national survival, well-being and
development. The tasks ahead will by no means be easy,
but we are confident that, together with the courageous
people of Mozambique, it will undertake the journey
ahead with determination and purpose. The Nigerian
Government and people fully associate themselves with
this expectation and would wish to assure the Government
and people of Mozambique of their solidarity.

