Mr. Dumitru (Romania): Mr. President, let me
begin by congratulating you for having arranged this
important discussion on a topical theme. I would also
like to welcome the presence in this meeting of
Ambassador Marjatta Rasi, President of the Economic
and Social Council, and of Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

My presentation will focus first on the definition
of complex crises; secondly, on the progress made by
the United Nations family in formulating a
comprehensive and integrated response to complex
crises; and, thirdly, on recommendations aimed at
overcoming existing theoretical and practical
challenges confronting the development of a
sustainable approach.

From the definitional point of view, complex
crises are raging in numerous parts of the world, with
the situations in Somalia, Haiti and Cote d'Ivoire - to
mention but a few of them - serving as compelling
examples. They encompass an array of issues ranging
from failed economic policies, social services
incapable of responding to population growth or
pandemics such as HIV/AIDS, poor and corrupt
governance, religious tension, ethnic discrimination,
natural resource scarcity or competition, widespread
poverty and absence of hope. Appearing at a critical
juncture of the conflict cycle, complex crises require
specific and immediate attention. Left unattended, the
persistence of underdevelopment, political repression,
social injustice and deep-rooted grievances results in a
complete disruption of authority, as violence erupts and
the State implodes, threatening regional stability.

A comprehensive and integrated strategy aimed at
responding to complex crises must support structures
aimed at strengthening peace, thus transforming the
conditions that allow crises to grow. The symptoms and
root causes of complex crises are intertwined in a
mutually reinforcing relationship. For that reason, a
sustainable approach to complex crises must include
complementary and systematic security and
development components in order to resolve crises and
address their structural derivations. As pointed out in
the non-paper for today's meeting, the intrinsic link
between peace and development must remain at the
core of the United Nations response.

Romania welcomes the advances made by the
United Nations family in formulating a comprehensive
and integrated response to complex crises. Here we can
point to the fact that the development agencies are
revisiting traditional conceptions of economic aid.

In full appreciation of the fact that good domestic
policies and institutions are necessary for aid to have a
positive impact, United Nations agencies have
established tools and mechanisms to bridge the gap
between relief and development, linking their
approaches to that of the security community. In
addition, approaches to development focus on long-
term and locally driven capacity-building development
programmes, contributing to the establishment of a
positive environment for sustainable stability.

Similarly, the United Nations security community
has expanded its conflict-management activities. The
Security Council has broadened its conception of peace
and security, acknowledging the human dimension as a
security threat. In addition to mandating a number of
multidimensional peacekeeping operations, the Council
has chosen as the subject of its monthly debates issues
such as peace-building, HIV/AIDS and the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

Central coordination mechanisms now exist,
allowing for cross-sectoral cooperation on thematic and
country-specific task forces in the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the Department for
Political Affairs (DPA) and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).

While those developments demonstrate the
emerging trend within the United Nations of the
convergence of the development and security sides of
the House, challenges remain at the political,
institutional and operational levels. I would like to
suggest a few recommendations aimed at improving the
United Nations response to complex crises as well as
the effectiveness of peace-building programmes and
activities.

First, in cases of complex crises with prolonged
Violence, development programmes should not focus
on short-term humanitarian assistance to the exclusion
of support for long-term needs, as this makes the
civilian population dependent on external aid and less
capable of recovering from war.

Second, the United Nations family should
increasingly rely on regional and subregional
organizations, given the success achieved by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union in preventing and
resolving crises in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-
Bissau, Burundi and, most recently, in the Sudan. In
recognition of the importance of regional organizations
in the prevention, resolution and management of
conflicts, Romania will host a debate on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
during its presidency of the Security Council in the
month of July.

Third, further to its presidential statement on its
role in the pacific settlement of disputes of 13 May
2003, the Security Council should make greater use of
Chapter VI procedures to promote conflict prevention.
Mechanisms such as commissions, fact-finding
missions and direct dialogue with the parties to a
dispute offer opportunities to identify and address the
root causes of complex crises in the early stages of
their development.

Fourth, the practice of forming groups of friends
and of appointing special representatives and envoys of
the Secretary-General should be continued as a means
of enhancing cooperation and harnessing collaboration
with the Secretary-General, building on the successes
achieved in Afghanistan and in Haiti.

Fifth, the Security Council should further support
United Nations organs and mechanisms in their
security and development efforts. It should convene a
meeting to review the relationship between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, drawing
from the experience in Guinea-Bissau, and explore the
possibility of greater interaction with the General
Assembly.

Sixth, mechanisms for cooperation and
collaboration among security and development
communities should be enhanced, as development
agencies are often the only international presence in a
pre-crisis country and thus have the ability to foresee
and perhaps avert violence.

Seventh, the evaluation of lessons learned and
best practices should be initiated. It should, for
instance, determine whether appointing the resident
coordinator as deputy to the special representative, as
applied in United Nations missions in Sierra Leone,
Tajikistan and Haiti, is indeed the most effective
method of improving coordination between conflict
management and development practitioners. It should
also assess the possibility of creating future integrated
mission task forces, as used in Afghanistan. Generally,
consideration should be given to using UNAMA as a
model for a new integrated approach to complex crises.

Eighth, Member States should provide increased
support and clear mandates to United Nations efforts in
integrated and comprehensive activities. Programmes
should be better planned and delivered and mandates
should be flexible enough to allow the fulfilment of
tasks.

Finally, to enhance the capacity of the United
Nations in the implementation of a response to
complex crises, the participation of non-governmental
organizations, civil society, the business sector and
international financial institutions should include
devising methods for generating resources from a
peace-building perspective.

