Mr. Khan (Indonesia): The delegation ofIndonesia
is pleased to participate in this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. We are also grateful to the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for
his briefing.

Before I continue, the delegation of Indonesia
would like to associate itself with the statements that
will be delivered later by the Permanent Representative
of Kazakhstan, on behalf of the Organization ofIslamic
Cooperation, and the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Indonesia remains deeply committed to the
resolution of the situation in the Middle East, although,
regrettably, there has been next to no progress in the
peace process between Israel and Palestine. Despite that
fact, Indonesia remains fervently supportive of the two-
State solution. We believe that the kernel of a permanent
solution lies in two States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security, on the basis of the
principle of land for peace and a just and comprehensive
regional peace consistent with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Quartet road map and the Arab
Peace Initiative. It is realistic and desirable that both
parties, encouraged by the international community,
make progress in that direction.

Israeli policy in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, especially its continued
illegal settlement activity, continues to prove a difficult
obstacle to that objective, in addition to being a grave
violation of international law. Settlements may be good
for the Israeli ego, but they indicate no commitment
to meeting the Palestinians in fair and realistic
negotiations. The continued construction of settlements
and their expansion simply compounds the problem of

the fragmentation of the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and complicates prospects for negotiations.

Similarly, Israel, ignoring and defying the advisory
opinion ofthe International Court ofJustice, has further
continued its illegal construction of the separation wall
in the West Bank, including in and around occupied
East Jerusalem.

As we all know, Gaza remains pervaded by general
suffering following Israel's menacing blockade there,
which hinders the movement of people and goods,
leading to increasingly greater unemployment and the
shrinking of private-sector businesses.

Indonesia fully supports Palestine's application
for full membership in the United Nations, which was
submitted last year by President Mahmoud Abbas.
This year, in his speech to the General Assembly, the
President indicated that, for the same purpose, Palestine
had begun intensive consultations with the objective of
having the General Assembly adopt a resolution during
its sixty-seventh session by which it would consider the
State of Palestine to have non-member State observer
status in the United Nations. We are pleased to place our
support behind this effort and to invite other Member
States to support it as well.

The two-State solution is meaningful only if it is
comprehensive and embraces other relevant political
tracks such as the Israel-Syria and Israel-Lebanon
tracks. Thus Israel must withdraw completely from
the remaining occupied Lebanese land, as well as from
the occupied Syrian Golan, and comply fully with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

Finally, with respect to the current situation in
Syria, I wish to highlight President Yudhoyono's
address to the general debate, only a few weeks ago, in
which he stated:

"The world community is witnessing, with
great pain, the worsening violence and unfolding
humanitarian catastrophe on the ground; at the same
time, the United Nations is a state of in paralysis in
responding to the situation... Indonesia therefore
reiterates its call for the immediate cessation of
violence in Syria, which has taken a high toll in
innocent civilian lives. The Security Council must
now unite and act decisively, as mandated by the
United Nations Charter, to bring the situation under
control."(A/67/PV.6, p33)

Therefore, Indonesia sincerely hopes that the
world, including the Council, will now unite to end the
violence in Syria.

