Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your initiative to organize this meeting. I should also
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Force Commanders
of the peacekeeping missions represented here for
providing a clear perspective of their efforts on the
ground.

As the Security Council is aware, France wants
very much to participate in improving the functioning
of peacekeeping operations. Since they were first
established, such operations have been a valuable tool
in helping the United Nations to respond to the major
task assigned us by the Charter - maintaining
international peace and security. We are also keen to
improve their effectiveness and, as a result, their
strategic importance.

To that end, during our presidency of the Security
Council in January 2009, we launched an initiative
with the British Mission whose goal was to improve
the Council's political and military follow-up to
peacekeeping operations, ensure more effective
management of administrative, logistical and financial
aspects of missions, and further develop doctrines on
complex peacekeeping issues such as protecting
civilians and peacebuilding.

We have made progress on that whole host of
issues thanks to the consideration everyone has given
to the questions concerned, far beyond the confines of
the Security Council, thanks to the Secretariat's New
Horizon non-paper and the August 2009 and February
2010 presidential statements (S/PRST/2009/24 and S/PRST/2010/2), as well as the work done by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. We
would also like to welcome the green light given to the
global support strategy, which France will monitor
closely to ensure that it results in the necessary
improvements in mission support.

We shall in particular pursue our efforts to
strengthen the operational chain of command, improve
cooperation with troop and police personnel
contributors and provide more rigorous financial
follow-up of peacekeeping operations. Operational
budgets have indeed grown exponentially in recent
years. We need to consider how to manage those
budgets responsibly. The results achieved with regard
to financing peacekeeping operations at the most recent
session of the Fifth Committee demonstrate that such
concerns are increasingly being taken into account. We
have no doubt that the Secretariat will step up its
efforts in that regard.

The perspective developed on the ground by
mission heads is essential. I should therefore like them
to share with us their thoughts on how their working
methods and their relationship with Headquarters have
evolved in the past two years. What do they think
could be done to improve the functioning of
peacekeeping operations? In particular, I should like to
know their views on the following issues.

An exercise was launched to consider the
protection of civilians following the issuance of the
joint study requested by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in June 2010.
To that end, operational documents were developed to
allow peacekeeping operations to translate into deed
the mandates we give to them to protect civilians. The
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
have now developed protection strategies, which the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) is currently implementing. What main
conclusions have been drawn? What are the primary
difficulties facing operations in discharging their
civilian protection mandate?
With regard to MINUSTAH, the January
earthquake forced it to take on tasks that are not
usually part of a peacekeeping operation's tasks. In
particular, that has included improving its engineering
capacities to clear rubble, restore basic infrastructure
and so on. What conclusions have the Force
Commanders drawn from the involvement of those
engineering capacities?

Working alongside Congolese armed forces,
MONUSCO is undertaking several military operations
in the eastern part of the country. The Security Council
has asked the Mission to develop a specific and limited
system for providing conditional support. How do the
Commanders believe that this support, which
henceforth will be more limited and focused only on
certain battalions, will contribute both to improving
civilian protection and to facilitating or hindering their
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
mandate?

Lastly, with regard to the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, how is the Force Commander preparing for
its inevitable drawdown and what are the lessons
learned from the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding? Where does the mission of the
peacekeeping forces end?

Before I conclude, I would like to commend
General Obiakor, as others have, thank him for his
work at the head of the Office of Military Affairs, and
wish him every success as he continues his career.

