The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ejeviome Otobo,
Director and Deputy Head of the Peacebuilding
Support Office.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Otobo to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2010/557, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

On behalf of Council members, I would like to
thank the co-facilitators - Ambassador Heller of
Mexico, Ambassador Anderson of Ireland and
Ambassador Sangqu of South Africa - who successfully
accomplished the task assigned to them of reviewing the
arrangements set out in resolution 1645 (2005), which
established the Peacebuilding Commission.
The co-facilitators' report on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture is the
product of extensive consultations with Member States
and a wide range of stakeholders. The draft resolution
before us seeks to take forward, as appropriate, the
recommendations of the report, with the aim of further
improving the effectiveness of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1947 (2010).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

As this may be the last Council meeting under the
presidency of Uganda, I wish to take this opportunity
to express my sincere thanks to all of my colleagues in
the Council, who have extended most valuable
cooperation to my delegation. I also wish to thank the
team of the Security Council secretariat and all other
United Nations Secretariat staff, who have worked
behind the scenes to support the work of the
presidency.

The meeting rose at 3.10p.m.
10-61020

