Major General Deconinck: I would have liked
to be in Kidal this week to officially and proudly
initiate the build-up of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism unit. I was in the famous capital of Kidal
exactly one year ago. That is just to say that time is
passing, but we must be patient.

I am also proud to be at this meeting today and
to interact with the Security Council on Mali and
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The
Mission in Mali is made up of peacekeepers with
great dedication and a commitment to bring peace
and stability to the people of Mali. Nevertheless, we
are extremely aware that our peacekeepers are making
the highest sacrifice to bring lasting peace to Mali. To
the many troop-contributing countries from around the
world, I would like to express a sincere debt of gratitude
for their commitment, and I call for their continued
support to peace and stability in Mali.

With that in mind, I believe the way that
peacekeeping operations are conducted is shifting.
The Santos Cruz report compellingly defines the
environment in which we now operate. We owe it to our
peacekeepers, both civilian and military, to implement
the Action for Peacekeeping, to change our mind-
sets and to adapt how we lead at all levels to the new
challenges we face. Allow me to share my perspective
on the security context.

The capture of the central region town of Kona
marked the southernmost advance of the jihadist groups
in Mali during the rebellion of 2012-2013. In that
connection, the inner Niger delta, to the west of Kona,
served as a fortunate natural obstacle to further jihadist
movement southward. Last month, a MINUSMA force
operation to Kona aimed to deliver security and stability
in the face of the insurgent activities of Jama'at Nusrat
al-Islam wal-Muslimin terrorist armed groups

Other than by geography, those two events are
not directly related - there has not been an enduring
jihadist or terrorist presence in Kona since 2013. From
2015, however, terrorist armed groups have steadily
re-established themselves in Kona and across the
central region, particularly since the founding of the
Jama'at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin organization, at
the start of 2017.

I perceive that as an example ofa changing security
and operational environment. Perhaps more important,
I believe we have to recognize the significance of the
central region in relation to the 2015 Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which is at the heart
of MINUSMA's mandate.

From the perspective of peacekeeping in a
changing security and operational environment, how
we understand the current security situation in Mali
is as important as what the situation currently is. In a
contested security environment, where the force and the
civil population are targeted, the attitude of the force and
of MINUSMA towards terrorist and insurgent armed
groups is put to the test. Understanding the character of
the conflict between those groups and the strategy they
are waging against us is key to determining what our
response should be - within our mandate and our rules
of engagement. We have to adapt to the circumstances
that define the current challenges.

The north is sparsely populated. There the force

remains fully committed to the implementation of
the Peace Agreement and to achieving stability in the
regions as well as the restoration and deployment of
the Malian State. In key population centres, the force,
in coordination with the Malian Defence and Security
Forces and armed groups compliant with the Peace
Agreement, provides security to the local population
and to the good offices of the MINUSMA Mission.
The force also plays a key role in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process to establish
inclusive and representative Malian Defence and
Security Forces in the north.

Nevertheless, the north is also the seat of the
Jama'at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin terrorist
organization and its many subordinate groups, which
actively seek to undermine MINUSMA's efforts
to bring about peace and stability. Those groups
frequently conduct complex attacks on the force
involving improvised explosive devices and indirect
fire, giving MINUSMA its reputation as the most
dangerous peacekeeping mission in the world. Jama'at
Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin attacks on MINUSMA's
bases, such as the one last month in Timbuktu, have
targeted civilian and military peacekeepers alike. The
criminal trafficking networks sustain the activities of
the Jama'at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin groups in
the north of Mali, but their regional influence is also
evident in the attacks in Ouagadougou earlier this
year. The regional dimensions of such attacks call for
a regional approach to the crisis in Mali. We also see
activity by the Jama'at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin
in Mali's central region as exemplifying a changing
security and operational environment, which calls for
a robust approach to peacekeeping.

Rightly, MINUSMA has invested in understanding
the changing character of the conflict in Mali and
the Sahel, but now we have to adapt to that changing
security and operational environment in order to
support the people and to support peace, stability and
the fulfilment of our mandate, pursuant to resolution
2364 (2017). It is in that sense that robust peacekeeping
is required. A commitment from the Security Council
to Mali must be supported by a number of measures to
deliver this new, more robust approach and to provide
the necessary means to support the Government of Mali.

As outlined in the Santos Cruz report, we have
to change our mindset. The force requires competent
leaders and commanders with the right knowledge,
skills and experience to lead in a complex security
environment. In return, we must decentralize some of
our decision-making processes in order to enable them
to deliver what we ask of them, in particular the means
to ensure a lasting effect on operations.

In complex conflict environments, intelligence
analysts must support our commanders with the ability
and the means to collect and process all forms of
intelligence. We also need to guard more effectively
against intelligence collected on our force elements.
We must invest in improving the training standards for
our military peacekeepers both before and during their
missions. We know the challenges they will face and
we must ensure they come prepared. Within the force
headquarters we have adapted our structure to provide
more support to training, and we now need to create
mobile training teams to support our contingents and
troop-contributing countries.

We must insist on appropriate and universal
standards of first-line medical equipment, in
conjunction with a mandatory combat casualty care
course for all troops. In addition, current United Nations
procedures for casualty and medical evacuation need to
be reviewed.

In Mali, as in many other peacekeeping missions,
airborne intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
platforms, helicopters and aircraft are essential force
multipliers. MINUSMA's access to the population,
for both civilian and military peacekeepers, is greatly
constrained by the shortfall in aviation assets.

Furthermore, a robust approach also calls for
military components to take greater ownership of their
operational logistics - to be able to set priorities, to
control military transport assets and to determine
convoy composition. In MINUSMA, every convoy has
to be considered as a military operation of its own.

Finally, the added value of a multidimensional
and integrated mission cannot be overstated. Complex
conflict environments call for such missions to
confront the multitude of factors needed to address the
crisis in Mali, and nowhere more so than in the central
region. A multidimensional mission must also include a
regional approach to addressing the crisis from all the
dimensions, in all countries of the Sahel region. The
force is committed to facilitating several missions and
to further developing and implementing such effective
multidimensional policies to generate the conditions
for sustainable peace and security in Mali and for the
Malian people.

