Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
initiative in organizing this open debate on the close
relationship between two pillars of the Organization,
namely, development and the maintenance of
international security. We thank the presidency for
drafting the concept note (S/2015/845, annex), and the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

At the outset, we would like to reiterate our
condolences to, and solidarity with, France in
connection with the barbarous it suffered recently.

The Charter of the United Nations sets out the
tasks of the Organization under three fundamental and
interdependent pillars - ensuring international peace
and security, achieving development and promoting
and protecting human rights. On that basis, we believe
that the work of the Organization ought to be focused
on individual persons and on ensuring their human
rights, including the right to development, all the while
fostering peaceful and inclusive societies in order to
ensure sustainable development, while leaving no one
behind.

In the same vein, the international community
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) at the highest level
possible. Its implementation is now our priority and
requires a renewed and strengthened global partnership
to ensure the appropriate means of implementation.
As noted in Agenda 2030, sustainable development
cannot be achieved without peace and security. In
turn, peace and security are at risk without sustainable
development. On the one hand, that implies the need
to revitalize cooperation in the area of international
security through disarmament and non-proliferation
initiatives and by generating confidence-building
measures to prevent conflicts and an arms race and
having at our disposal tools to address humanitarian
crises. On the other hand, we must recognize that many
of today's armed conflicts are embedded in contexts
of deep structural gaps. That makes it imperative to
address the structural causes of violence, among which
are inequality, exclusion and discrimination for any
reason.

It is therefore urgent and necessary to implement
policies aimed at social, economic and financial
inclusion, with the goal of reducing the inequality
and disparity that generate dissatisfaction and so
as to create the conditions for an inclusive society
in which all individuals enjoy equal opportunities.
That is particularly important in societies with ethnic
and cultural diversity, where there is a greater risk
for discrimination and exclusion. Aware that social
inclusion policies allow the building of stable, just and
peaceful societies, my country sponsors the General
Assembly resolution entitled "Promoting social
integration through social inclusion", a draft of which
the Third Committee adopted this morning.

Similarly, the Goals of the 2030 Agenda for

Sustainable Development - specifically Goal 10,
on equitable societies, and Goal 16, on peaceful
societies - are consistent with that view. While

the implementation of the ambitious Agenda is the
responsibility of each State, it is essential to have a
favourable international environment in which peace
and security prevail. In that regard, we need the Security
Council to comply with its role in the promotion of
peace so that the enormous budgets we allocate to
military expenditures can be reallocated to finance the
means of implementation required to eradicate poverty.

Peru believes that combating economic inequality
and social exclusion, promoting respect for the rule
of law, ensuring the full and effective enjoyment of
all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
individuals, and safeguarding and promoting cultural
diversity contribute to the stability and social cohesion
that foster a climate of peace. That holistic vision is
reflected in the multidimensional mandates in many of
the peacekeeping operations established by the Council.
Therefore, the work aimed at development and restoring
the rule of law plays an increasingly important role in
the mandate ofthose missions. The United Nations must
also support development and social inclusion efforts in
post-conflict situations in order to definitively break the
cycle of conflict by directly attacking its root causes.
My country therefore wishes to underline the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in that undertaking.

To conclude, I wish to emphasize that Peru, which
has suffered violence in the past, is committed to
building peaceful and inclusive societies at the national
level. That is the best way to guarantee international
peace and security.

