Mr. Okamura (Japan): Allow me to express my
gratitude to you, Sir, for convening today's important
and timely meeting on aviation security. I also thank
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), for her briefing.
Above all, I would like to thank the United Kingdom
and Mr. Boris Johnson for taking the lead in putting
today's meeting together. We believe that it is timely
for the Security Council to take this issue up, given the
growing threat to the security of aircraft and airports
in recent years.

Civil aviation has been an attractive target for
terrorists over the past decades, as this city remembers
very vividly and literally through what it witnessed
15 years ago. There has been much progress in improving
aviation security worldwide since that tragedy, but
there have been enough instances to remind us that the
threat against aviation security remains high.

Resolution 2309 (2016), which was just adopted
unanimously, provides the political momentum to
accelerate global efforts to address the issue. Japan
was therefore pleased to co-sponsor the resolution. We
believe that it sends a strong political message of our
unified determination to the international community.

According to statistics published by ICAO, Japan
is the world's seventh largest air-transport State. That
single statistic is indicative of the critical importance
of aviation security in our national interests. Today, I
would like to highlight three ways in which Japan has
been working to improve aviation security worldwide.

First, there are our domestic efforts. Japan is
widely known for its public safety, and, at the same
time, Japanese authorities are nevertheless working
tirelessly to mitigate possible threats of terrorism to
civil aviation. For example, the installation of body
scanners in airports throughout the country is under
progress, a measure driven by the Ministry of Land,
Infrastructure, Transportation and Tourism.

Secondly, we provide international assistance to
partner States. Last year, Japan funded the placement
of surveillance cameras in international airports in
Africa to bolster their security. In South Asia, over
the past three years, Japan has provided assistance
that can mitigate terrorism risks to civilian aviation
to Pakistan and Bangladesh. We have also hosted a
seminar on aviation security with our partners from
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
through the Japan-ASEAN Integration Fund. In
addition to those past efforts, Prime Minister Abe
announced earlier this month that Japan will provide
approximately $450 million over the next three years
to Asia for comprehensive counter-terrorism measures,
including the enhancement of airport security. Japan
will remain engaged in assisting other countries to
address the threat.

Thirdly, I would like to touch upon the role that
Japan has played in ICAO. Japan firmly supports
the important role that ICAO has played in the area
of aviation security and has been actively working
on the Aviation Security Panel and various working
groups under the Panel, including the meeting of the
working group on guidance material that Japan hosted
in Fukuoka last January. Beyond our activities on the
Panel, Japan has been the second largest contributor to
the regular ICAO budget since 1987 and makes large
contributions to activities related to security.

There is a strong need for the international
community to keep taking steps to improve aviation
security. In that context, I would like to refer to the Group
of Seven (G-7) action plan on countering terrorism and
violent extremism, which was developed in May under
the Japanese presidency of the G-7 to strengthen the
overall capacity ofthe international community to fight
against terrorism and violent extremism, including in
the area of aviation security. As mentioned in the action
plan, Japan calls upon all States to duly implement the
standards of annex 17 to the Chicago Convention on
International Civil Aciation and also to recognize and
address the threat to access control and other airport
landside-security-related measures covered therein.

We also believe that there is room for improvement
to fill the gaps between the outcome of ICAO audits
and aviation security measures on the ground. We
look forward to furthering our discussions at the
upcoming session of the ICAO Assembly, which will
start next week and at which Japan will contribute to
the discussion on the development of a global aviation
security plan.

Our fight against terrorist threats to civil aviation
is far from over. As a responsible member of the
international community and of the Security Council,
Japan will continue its efforts in tackling our common
threat.

