Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I would like to express
our special gratitude to Ambassador Fowler for his efforts
and for his excellent briefing on the results of his recent
visit to Angola.

Let me also warmly welcome the Vice-Minister for
External Relations of Angola.

We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement made by Ambassador Lavrov of the Russian
Federation on behalf of the troika, including the special
concern expressed over the fate of the passengers of the
Russian and Ukrainian airplanes shot down over Angola.

It is absolutely fair, Sir, that Angola has been given
special prominence in your momentous initiative naming
this the "month of Africa" in the Security Council.
Taking into account significant developments during last
few months, it is essential for the Council not only to
review the overall situation in Angola, but also to refresh

 

its own policy towards that conflict. In view of the
information just provided, I would like to present briefly
my country's vision of how the Security Council could
better contribute to the ultimate goal of restoring peace and
security in Angola at this particular stage.

First, we strongly maintain that, in its approach to the
present developments in Angola, the Council should never
leave the impression that it favours military solutions over
political ones. At the same time, it should continue
exposing the real sources of the resumed fighting in
Angola, and we are glad to ascertain that, so far, this has
been done in very clear and unambiguous terms. Ukraine
endorses completely the charge that the primary cause of
the present situation in Angola is the failure of UNITA,
under the leadership of Mr. Savimbi, to comply with its
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol and relevant Security
Council resolutions.

On the other hand, we are greatly encouraged by the
statements of President Dos Santos indicating that he
continues to consider the Lusaka Protocol to be a valid
basis for the peace process. This is yet another important
confirmation that the Secretary-General has to continue his
consultations with the Government of Angola on the precise
role to be played by the United Nations in facilitating
national reconciliation in the country.

Secondly, the Council should draw practical and
action-oriented conclusions from the fact that the current
humanitarian situation in Angola is unquestionably one of
the most critical on the African continent. Ukraine will
encourage the Council to use all its authority to mobilize
international efforts to meet the urgent humanitarian needs
of the Angolan people. At the same time, we support the
conclusion that the re-establishment of state authority in the
vast territory previously occupied by UNITA would remove
any constraints to international humanitarian work in
Angola. In our view, the Council should also support the
judgement made by the Secretary-General in his report that
efforts to improve the human rights environment would
have a beneficial effect on the overall situation in Angola.

Improving the implementation of the measures
imposed against UNITA, as the current Chairman of the
Angola sanctions Committee has already convincingly
proved, is another major dimension in which the Security
Council is in a position to make a difference. Besides
decreasing substantially UNITA's abilities to wage war, the
proactive approach of Ambassador Fowler has largely
contributed to the restoration of Angola's reliance on the
United Nations.

For its part, Ukraine is determined to continue
providing assistance to both the Angola sanctions
Committee and the expert panel established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1237 (1999). I would like to
reiterate that the Government of Ukraine attaches great
importance to their energetic efforts, which are expected
to result, among other things, in identifying the real
sources of military and financial support to UNITA.

