Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): The Angolan
delegation, which voted in favour of the resolution,
welcomes the outcome of the vote. The delegation of
Angola extends its appreciation to the sponsors of the
resolution - Spain, the United States and the United
Kingdom - as well as to the other members of the
Council for the constructive spirit of compromise in the
process leading to the adoption of the resolution. We
commend the efforts undertaken by all to ensure that
the resolution could obtain the largest possible support
from Council members.
My delegation supported the resolution on the
understanding that its adoption would contribute to
restoring the necessary unity of purpose of the Security
Council - unity that was bruised by the divisions over
the question of Iraq that characterized recent months.
The vote also reinstates the spirit of the principle of
multilateralism in the Council's decisions and actions,
thus enabling the Council to better play the role in the
maintenance of international peace and security
entrusted to it by the international community. It is also
our understanding that, through the adoption of the
resolution and by compliance with its provisions, the
occupying Powers of Iraq are legally bound to strictly
respect international law, the Iraqi people's sovereign
rights and their right to the natural resources of the
country, as well as the right to freely determine, in due
course -I hope, soon - their political future.

The role that the United Nations will play in
Iraq's post-war processes is an important feature of the
resolution. My Government looks forward to working
with the United Nations with a view to ensuring that
the objectives set out in the resolution are fully met.
The resolution takes into account the United Nations
wealth of experience, which will guarantee that this
role is indeed vital in all respects.

It is my Government's conviction that the
resolution safeguards the fundamental rights of the
Iraqi people. We hope that an environment permitting
Iraqis to govern themselves and to choose a
representative Government will very soon be created in
Iraq.

It is my delegation's expectation that the bitter
lessons learned with regard to the issue of Iraq will
contribute throughout the world to strengthening
respect for human rights, compliance with international
law and the upholding of multilateralism as the
cornerstone of the work of the Security Council.

