The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany.

By adopting resolution 1999 (2011)
recommending the membership of the Republic of
South Sudan in the United Nations, we have written
history for Africa and the whole world. We want to
welcome South Sudan as the 193rd member in the
family of nations.

Last Saturday, over 500,000 people celebrated
independence in Juba. The images went around the
world. President Salva Kiir underlined in his
outstanding speech the importance of good-
neighbourliness, respect for human rights and good
governance. We congratulate the people of South
Sudan on that day of joy. The people and the parties in
the Sudan, both North and South, have worked hard to
make this moment possible. Independence was brought
about by peaceful negotiation among the political
actors in the Sudan, supported by the international
community, the African Union and, especially, this
Council.

But the real work is starting now. I have just
visited the Sudan. My stay in Khartoum, Darfur and
Juba showed me both the vast extent of the lands and
of the work that still needs to be done. Both the Sudan
and South Sudan now face great challenges, and both
South Sudan and the Sudan need our support. The
Sudan must see benefits from continued constructive
steps in this regard, such as progress on debt relief.
Germany is ready to contribute.

Above all, peace is needed. Recent violence
reminds us that the destructive logic of violence must
finally end. The Addis Ababa agreements are important
steps in the right direction and must be implemented. I
am confident that the United Nations and the Council
in particular will continue to stand at the side of the
peoples of the Sudan and South Sudan. The
international community will continue to take a strong
interest in the future development of the two countries.
Germany will continue to assist in the great task of
developing open, just and prosperous societies in North
and South.

This is also a moment to honour the achievements
of all those working for peace under the big umbrella
of the United Nations. I would therefore like to pay
tribute to the women and men who have served in the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan. The officers and
staff who have contributed to this great effort through
all these years deserve our sincere gratitude.

Last week, we adopted a mandate for the new
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS). The new Mission will be the best
proof of our commitment to peace and stability in the
Sudan. I am confident that UNMISS will be
instrumental in ending conflicts and promoting peace,
development and reconciliation in South Sudan.

In the meantime, the situation in Darfur must not
be forgotten. I was there two weeks ago and saw first-
hand how serious the situation is. A comprehensive
peace agreement must finally be signed. I look forward
to the day when the parties return to the negotiation
table. The Council plans to extend the mandate of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) later this month. This will also
improve security and freedom of movement for those
on the ground helping the people of Darfur. I
encourage the Sudanese Government to work closely
with UNAMID.
1141279

The Darfur crisis has challenged all of us, and it
has lifted cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union to a new level. Thabo Mbeki has
shown remarkable leadership. He can count on our
continued support in his efforts to find a solution to the
Darfur crisis. Above all, I would like to express my
appreciation for the enormous commitment of African
nations to UNAMID.

Our discussions here in New York give reason for
hope that a spirit of reconciliation will govern future
relations between the Sudan and South Sudan.

Peaceful coexistence is the fundament of
sustainable development and a good future for the
peoples of both States. This will require effort and
cooperation. The Sudan and South Sudan will not be
left alone in their endeavours. The United Nations and
Germany, as a member of this community, as well as
the European Union, will be at their sides. I am
convinced that, in a few years from now, we will be
proud to have been part of this new beginning for the
Sudan and South Sudan.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.
23
