Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for
their briefings. We would like to express our support
for Mr. Griffiths, who has just begun his work and
is conducting it appropriately. We hope that with the
support of the Security Council and all stakeholders
he can succeed in overcoming the impasse in this
protracted crisis. We will support him in his efforts.

We have been closely following the military,
political and humanitarian developments in Yemen.
We are seriously concerned about the fact that as a
result of the ongoing hostilities, the numbers of dead
and wounded are increasing, as is the extent of the
damage to civilian infrastructure, including medical
facilities. So far, unfortunately, the escalating trend in
the conflict is only increasing, and the humanitarian
disaster is getting worse. More than 80 per cent of
the population of Yemen is in need of assistance.
Millions of Yemenis are starving. The country has been
swamped by an epidemic of cholera and diphtheria.
We greatly appreciate the efforts of all who are taking
steps to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people
and welcome the outcome of the pledging conference
held in Geneva on 3 April and the pledges that were
announced there, especially by Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates.

Russia is also providing assistance to the Yemeni
people both through Aden and Sana'a. Since the acute
stage ofthe conflict began in 2015, the Russian Ministry
of Emergency Situations has delivered planeloads
bringing a total of more than 70 tons of various
humanitarian goods to Yemen. We are working both
bilaterally and through the World Food Programme.
Nevertheless, we believe that humanitarian assistance
alone cannot result in viable, long-term solutions.
We continue to believe that the only way to end this
protracted civil conflict is through dialogue that takes
into consideration the interests of all the participants.

We emphatically condemn indiscriminate strikes,
of which civilians are usually the victims. Targeting
civilian areas of Saudi Arabia with ballistic missiles is
also absolutely unacceptable. We urge the perpetrators
to halt such efforts, which do not help the political
process or an eventual political settlement in any
way. We reaffirm our principled position in favour of
an immediate halt to the armed confrontation in the
Republic of Yemen and to the use of force and attempts
to settle their differences militarily by the parties to
the conflict. That can be achieved only by focusing
on Yemen itself, not by introducing geopolitical
calculations into the conflict. Through desire and
political will, Yemen can become an example of a
successful settlement to other conflicts in the region
and a factor contributing to regional stability, which the
area so desperately needs.

We hope that Mr. Griffiths can succeed in
reversing those trends. We believe that the international
community, and first and foremost the United Nations,
to which we traditionally assign a central role, should
continue their efforts to induce Yemeni stakeholders
to reject violence and sit down at the negotiating table
to create a consolidated vision for the country's next
incarnation, on the basis of a broad national dialogue
and mutual consideration of the interests of its main
political forces, as well as the relevant decisions of
the international community. Rather than ostracizing
anyone, it is important to involve all the countries and
forces that can bring genuine influence to bear on the
parties to the conflict.
For our part, we intend to continue to contribute to
those efforts. We have been doing so since the start of
the civil conflict in Yemen, and have been in regular
communication with everyone who is crucial to putting
the situation in Yemen back on a path to peace.

