The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity as
representative of Togo.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Edmond
Mulet for the presentation he has just made of the
Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2012/72). I also welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and of Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

UNMIK's mandate, we should recall, is to
re-establish the institutions of a country devastated by
war and to establish democratic governance. Within the
framework of a process of reconstruction, the essential
goals to be achieved were the security of individuals
and goods, as well as a legal system in which all
populations could have confidence. According to the
report, despite tangible progress, those goals have been
but imperfectly reached, and the support of
international actors remains necessary for Kosovo's
stability. Indeed, even if the threat of war seems to
have faded and if peace processes have been set in
motion between the Kosovar and Serbian people, much
remains to be done with respect to security in terms of
community cohesion in Kosovo.

Acts of violence, in particular against border posts
in northern Kosovo during the night of 27-28 July 2011,
are a perfect demonstration of the climate of insecurity
and of this difficult cohabitation. Those events
contributed to the deterioration of the security situation
in northern Kosovo, to the polarization of positions and
to the worsening of separatist tendencies among the
local populations. That instability is tangible proof that
underlying problems that have yet to be resolved
remain a threat to the peace and stability of the region.
They also justify the importance of the presence of
UNMIK and other partner organizations in Kosovo.

Togo regrets that those incidents have put a hold
on peace negotiations between Kosovo and Serbia,
which had begun well in the spring of 2011. In this
tense situation, we welcome UNMIK's continued
activities. Under difficult conditions it acts as an
impartial mediator, helping to bring the different
Kosovo communities closer together. UNMIK strives
to encourage both Serb and Kosovar authorities to
work with a View to leading all parties in the conflict to
engage in an open, sincere dialogue in order to find a
durable, peaceful solution to their differences.

In that regard, we welcome the thaw seen in recent
weeks in relations between Pristina and Belgrade.
Indeed, the report indicates that on 2 December 2011,
with European Union mediation, the two parties adopted
the agreed integrated border management conclusions.
That paves the way for normalizing the situation at
border crossings and for re-establishing freedom of
peaceful movement. That agreement allows Serb and
Kosovar police and customs officers to jointly manage
those crossing points under the supervision of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX). This is
likely to reinforce trust between the two parties. My
delegation believes that that shows significant progress
towards normalizing relations between the two parties.
We would also like to welcome the two parties'
agreement on the recognition of university diplomas.

Of course, there are still differences over the
definition of Kosovo's common borders, which is,
moreover, the main stumbling block. My country
therefore urges the two parties to pursue their
constructive efforts with a view to a full and complete
normalization of their relations. It is through a shared
resolve to reach a compromise that Serb and Kosovar
authorities will be able to find a lasting solution to the
conflict.

Finally, we welcome the presence in Kosovo of
other international organizations, in particular the
International Security Force in Kosovo, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, and we salute
them for working together towards their common goal,
which is the return of peace and stability to Kosovo.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Mr. Jeremic' has requested the floor to make a
further statement. I now call on him.

