Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Brazil
congratulates Jordan for organizing this meeting. It is
a welcome development that improving prevention is at
the centre of this debate. In order to overcome terrorism,
structural causes, such as exclusion, marginalization
and discrimination, cannot be overlooked.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and extend my thanks to Mr. Peter Neumann
and Mr. Scott Atran as well.

Countering terrorism is a goal that has a galvanizing
potential. This can be demonstrated by the fact that the
Security Council has often been able to reach consensus
on counter-terrorism issues, even as it has remained
divided on other equally important topics. While the
ultimate goal potentially brings us together, some of the
tools chosen to implement counter-terrorism efforts,
particularly the use of force, have been divisive and
ultimately counterproductive.

Counter-terrorism efforts will be effective to the
extent that they are consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations, international refugee and humanitarian
law, human rights. including the freedom of speech and
the right to privacy, and other norms of international
law. If the fight against terrorism takes place at the
expense of international legal parameters, it will have
defeated its purpose.

Unemployment and marginalization are factors
that have contributed to creating a sense of lack of
opportunities for youth. Social inequities and political
injustices have been known to erode young people's
prospects, thereby increasing their vulnerability to
extremist narratives. As precisely diagnosed in this
debate's concept paper (S/2015/231, annex), terrorist
entities have been attracting young people by offering
them a false sense of purpose, belonging and identity.

In order to counter these narratives, we must
stand united in underscoring the importance of
dialogue among cultures and religions and promoting
a culture of peace. Initiatives such as the Alliance of
Civilizations, which promotes tolerance and mutual
respect, contribute to dispel the stereotypes that tend
to associate terrorism with specific cultures, religions
or ethnic groups. Initiatives on youth education which
combat the perpetuation of a culture of animosity also
assist in the establishment of an environment less
prone to radicalization. The legitimate grievances that
have been pushing young people towards Violence and
extremism need to be tackled with a sense of urgency.
Intolerance thrives where social, political, economic
or cultural exclusion exists. Promoting social justice is
key to eliminating the underlying causes of terrorism.
While it would be erroneous to establish an automatic
chain of causality between poverty and terrorism,
young people are less vulnerable to radicalism in
inclusive societies where there is social justice and
there are equal job opportunities.

We also believe that there is a need for a more
comprehensive approach to public policies aimed at
young people and their empowerment. Policies and
programmes focused on the concession of grants
and loans for university studies, access to vocational
training and the creation of decent jobs for youth should
be seriously considered.

We are concerned by the lack of coherence between
the consensus on the need to promote the welfare of
youth and the reduction of the United Nations budget for
development assistance. Any consistent commitment
to protect youth from radicalism will be undermined
if United Nations activities dedicated to promoting
development continue to be the preferential victims of
budgetary cuts.

Countering extremism necessarily involves
diplomatic efforts to bring about peace, founded on
justice,toconflictsthatdirectlyorindirectlyfuelterrorist
agendas. Our collective failure to deal adequately with
the ongoing crises in the Middle East - including the
Israel-Palestine conflict - deprives us of a powerful
argument to counter the dissemination ofradicalization.
The recurrent use of force as a means to solve conflicts,
at the expense of diplomacy and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, has only contributed to generating further
violence and strengthening the discourse of extremism.

There are no excuses for terrorist acts. We reiterate
our commitment to a multidimensional response to
the challenges posed by extremism, and we remain
convinced that cooperation and dialogue within the
United Nations will enhance our capacity to counter
that plague. We will only succeed if we join efforts on
the basis of shared values and enhanced multilateral
cooperation.

