Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate to assess the
implementation of the measures set out in the annex to
the note by the President of the Security Council
(S/2006/507) and recent Security Council practice.

At the outset, Uganda commends the Council's
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, chaired by Japan, for the good
work it has done related to the working methods of the
Council.

This debate provides an opportunity for a
constructive exchange of views by Members of the
United Nations on how the working methods of the
Security Council can be further improved. The Security
Council's agenda and workload are increasing in
tandem with the fact that the international community
is faced with challenging, complex situations and
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security. It is therefore essential that the Council
conduct its work in an efficient and effective manner,
while at the same time enhancing transparency.
Although more needs to be done to that end, the
Security Council has made some significant
improvements in this regard.

We welcome the holding of more public
meetings, as evidenced by the fact that 205 out of 228
formal meetings held from August 2008 to July 2009
were public. Some of the other notable improvements
in transparency include the following: giving States
figuring on the Council's agenda an opportunity to
express their views and their concerns; holding
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries at least a week before the Council considers
the reports of the Secretary-General on the respective
missions; strengthening the working relationship
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly, through monthly meetings between their
respective Presidents; and holding informal
consultations with Member States on a wide range of
issues, including on how the annual report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly can be
continuously improved. The proposals and suggestions
of Member States need to be taken into account.

We welcome the provision of timely, substantive
and detailed briefings to Member States on the
Council's programme of work. It is important to afford
interested Member States the opportunity to hear
briefings on matters of concern to them.

On the question of efficiency, given the workload
of the Council and its subsidiary bodies, it is important
to build on the increasing spirit of constructive
discussion and consensus-seeking. That will reduce
instances of lengthy deliberation.

The Security Council continues to emphasize the
important role that regional and subregional
organizations play in conflict prevention, mediation
and resolution and in peacebuilding. We welcome the
strengthening of strategic partnerships with the African
Union and other regional and subregional
organizations, and we emphasize the need to further
support building their respective capacities.

In conclusion, Uganda underscores the
importance of the ongoing deliberations on the urgent
need to reform the Security Council to better reflect
present realities. The ongoing intergovernmental
negotiations need to be calm and more effective, and
they need to make definite progress.

