Mr. Kolby (Norway): I would like to join the two
previous speakers in commending you, Mr. President,
for allowing non-members of the Council to participate
in this debate. I also wish to thank Mr. Vieira de Mello
for his interesting presentation.

The Government of Norway is pleased to note the
very positive developments in East Timor since the
establishment of an interim Administration under
United Nations leadership less than a year ago.
Remarkable progress has been made in recent months
in establishing the basis for a new central
administration, in building up the social sectors and in
the training of civil servants, as well as in rebuilding
infrastructure. However, the challenges are formidable.

East Timor will emerge as an independent
country within a few years. But it will carry a heavy
burden of development needs. The leadership of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) has our confidence and support in
laying the foundation for a new democratic and
prosperous nation. We realize the difficulties and
recognize the need for appropriate planning and
coordination. We also share the frustration of East
Timorese over a process that has at times been slow. At
this juncture, all parties involved must focus on a
speedy implementation of programmes that facilitate a
rapid recovery of the economy and create employment
activity, so that the people of East Timor can
participate directly in the recovery of their country.

We must never lose sight of the primary goal,
namely, that the East Timorese themselves, within a
short period of time, will be able to govern their own
country and lead their own administration. Norway
urges the United Nations to make every effort to
increase the participation of East Timorese in the
building of this new nation. We feel that the transfer of
competencies, investment in human resources and
training of personnel for the public sector could be
even more concentrated and efficient. We would again
like to request, as we stated at last week's donors'
meeting in Lisbon, that the greatest possible effort be
made with regard to these processes.

Coordination of aid in support of reconstruction
and development in East Timor is essential. We are
particularly pleased in this context with the cooperation
between the Asian Development Bank and the World
Bank in establishing the Trust Fund for East Timor
jointly. Aid coordination also implies that we as donors
effectively design our own respective projects and
programmes in such a manner that they meet the
priorities of the East Timorese and that they do not
overlap or leave any gaps. Projects can be sustainable
only if they are in accordance with the future resources
of an independent East Timor.

Progress on implementing decisions from the
Tokyo donors' meeting in December last year has been
uneven and, in some cases, too slow. We urge the donor
community to ensure that pledges and commitments are
translated into disbursements. At the same time, we
urge UNTAET and international organizations to
review their operational procedures to speed up the
implementation of programmes on the ground.

Norway has provided strong support for East
Timor since long before the crisis of 1999. My
Government has supported the East Timorese right to
self-determination and has assisted in the humanitarian
efforts to bring relief after the devastation left behind
last autumn. Norway remains firmly committed to
continuing to assist in the reconstruction and
development of East Timor. We will continue to
provide humanitarian assistance and to deal with the
urgent needs. At the same time, Norway is increasingly
addressing the reconstruction and longer-term
development needs through contributions to the World
Bank Trust Fund and the UNTAET Trust Fund, and
through United Nations agencies and international
organizations.

An especially complex and important issue is
addressing East Timor's future security needs. This is a
legitimate concern of all sovereign States. We would
like to see these matters addressed as soon as possible
by the Security Council in order to prepare the ground
well for the establishment of appropriate security
mechanisms before independence.

