Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Since the beginning of this year, the Iran nuclear issue
has attracted increasing international attention. The
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has
conveyed to the Security Council a number of reports
and resolutions related to the Iran nuclear issue.

China has all along indicated that purpose of the
Security Council reviewing this issue is to safeguard
the international nuclear non-proliferation mechanism,
strengthen the authority and role of the IAEA, support
the endeavours of the IAEA Director General and his
team to clarify the outstanding issues relating to Iran's
nuclear programme, promote diplomatic efforts and
resolutely commit itself to finding an appropriate
solution to this issue through political and diplomatic
means.

In line with that purpose, the Security Council
issued a Presidential statement on 29 March 2006
(S/PRST/2006/ 15) and has just adopted a resolution.
Regrettably, the Iranian side has yet to respond
positively to the requests of the IAEA Board of
Governors and the calls of the Security Council. The
resolution adopted today explicitly demands that Iran
suspend all enrichment-related and reprocessing
activities. It has expressed the intention that, in the
event that Iran fails to comply with the resolution, the
Security Council will work to adopt appropriate
measures under Article 41 of the United Nations
Charter to persuade Iran to comply with the resolution
and the requirements of the IAEA. On the other hand,
in the event that Iran fulfils the aforementioned
obligation and returns to the negotiations table, it will
not be necessary for the Security Council to adopt
additional measures.

This resolution stresses in many of its paragraphs
the importance of finding a negotiated solution through
political and diplomatic efforts. It underlines the
irreplaceable key role of the IAEA in handling this
issue. It endorses the package of proposals put forward
by China, France, Germany, Russia, the United
Kingdom and the United States in early June. It also
emphasizes that these proposals constitute an important
effort for a comprehensive arrangement which would
allow for the development of bilateral relations and
cooperation based on mutual respect and the
establishment of international confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme.

The fact that an appropriate solution to the Iran
nuclear issue is late in coming is due to lack of trust
among the main parties involved. It needs to be
emphasized that, whether it is now or in the future, the
Security Council cannot handle this issue single-
handedly. Dialogue and negotiations are the only way
out. The IAEA should always be the main mechanism
for dealing with this issue. The solution requires all-
around diplomatic efforts; any measures adopted by the
Security Council should serve the purpose of
diplomatic efforts.

According to Article 25 of the United Nations
Charter, all United Nations Member States are obliged
to accept and carry out Security Council resolutions. In
the current circumstances, China urges Iran to practice
restraint, attach importance to the extensive appeals
and expectations of the international community,
earnestly implement the requirements of this resolution
and make early response to the package of proposals,
so as to create conditions for increasing trust and
promoting dialogue and negotiations.

We also wish to call upon all the other parties to
adopt a highly responsible attitude towards world
peace, security and stability and the international
nuclear non-proliferation mechanism, and to remain
confident and calm, practice restraint, explore new
ways of thinking and continue to creatively carry out
diplomatic efforts for the settlement of the Iran nuclear
issue. We welcome any ideas and efforts conducive to
conducting talks, breaking the stalemate and reaching
compromises.

During this sensitive period, it is essential for
Iran and all the other parties concerned not to take any
steps that will harm the aforementioned diplomatic
efforts and that may lead to complications or even loss
of control. We call upon all the parties to resume
dialogue and negotiations as soon as possible for the
proper solution of the Iran nuclear issue.
China will, as always, continue its efforts to help
to maintain world and regional peace and stability,
safeguard and strengthen the international
non-proliferation mechanism and enhance political and
diplomatic efforts for the solution of the Iran nuclear
issue.

