Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome and thank Judges
Carmel Agius and Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their comprehensive briefings on the
activities of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and ofthe Residual Mechanism. We
commend Uruguay on its steering of the work of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

The need to end impunity and to hold to account
the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity led the Security Council to establish the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) in 1993 and 1994, respectively, with mandates
to prosecute those persons responsible for crimes of
genocide, war crimes and violations of international
humanitarian law committed in the territory of the
former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and neighbouring States.

We acknowledge the establishment of these two
special international criminal Tribunals as one of the
most relevant initiatives of the United Nations for the
preservation of the rule of international law and the
safeguarding of the principles of peace and justice.

In the two decades of their existence, the ICTY
and the ICTR have played a crucial role in enhancing
the international criminal justice system and providing
tools to national and international justice mechanisms
by ensuring that those responsible for serious crimes
against humanity are brought to justice and held to
account.

The ICTR was established pursuant to resolution
955 (1994) and closed by the end of 2015, following
its verdict on the appeal of the Butare case. It received
outstanding support and international cooperation from
Member States and left an important legacy in manuals
on best practices and lessons learned on the tracking
and arresting of renegades from international justice,
on indictments for sexual and gender-based violence,
and on referrals of international criminal cases to
national jurisdictions.

The ICTR also made a substantial contribution
to national reconciliation, to the restoration of peace
and security, to the fight against impunity and to the
development of international criminal justice, especially
by seeking justice for the victims and survivors of the
1994 genocide in Rwanda.

In ending its work, it is expected from the Residual
Mechanism, according to resolution 1966 (2010), that it
track the renegades indicted by the ICTR and contribute
to the arrest of the remaining eight fugitives.

The successive delays in the completion of the
ICTY's activities have been a source of some tension
in the Security Council, since, in accordance with its
relevant resolutions, the ICTY should have closed its
cases in 2010 or at the latest by the end of 2014. We
took good note of the efforts by the Tribunal to quickly
complete its work and ofthejudges' efforts in identifying
means to speed up the pending cases. We note the
Tribunal's commitment in meeting the deadline for its
closure by the end of 2017. The recent convictions of
war criminals and its efforts in completing the transfer
of duties to the Residual Mechanism, in accordance
with the pertinent Security Council resolution, attests
to such a commitment.

Challenges facing the ICTY in staff-related matters,
which have been delaying trials, and other instances
of attrition are matters of concern. We hope that such
delays will not affect the ongoing trials and that the
Tribunal's judicial work will be effectively completed
by the end of 2017.

The establishment of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, in accordance
with resolution 1966 (2010), was essential in ensuring
that the closure of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) would not permit the remaining
fugitives to escape justice. However, the Mechanism
still faces fundamental challenges, namely, to ensure
that the remaining individuals indicted by the ICTR are
apprehended and that the humanitarian issue related
to the 14 individuals acquitted and released by the
ICTR but unable to return to their countries of origin
is resolved.

In order for the International Residual Mechanism to
continue fulfilling its mandate expeditiously, efficiently
and cost-effectively, States are called upon to cooperate
with the Mechanism and the Government of Rwanda
for the arrest and prosecution of the eight remaining
fugitives indicted by the ICTR. In that regard, we call
on States to investigate, arrest, prosecute or extradite,
in accordance with their applicable international
obligations, all fugitives accused of genocide who
are residing in their territories. The Mechanism's
ongoing practice of communicating and cooperating
with countries of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda
and keeping the authorities updated on its activities
and on the transition of responsibilities, as well as
assistance to national jurisdictions, is worth noting
and encouraging. We acknowledge that the Mechanism
continues to draw upon ICTY and ICTR best practices
and lessons learned in pursuing new ways to improve
its operations, procedures and working methods and
to maintain flexibility in its staff assignments. That is
aimed at maximizing its effectiveness and efficiency.

In conclusion, we would like to point out that the
tenets of international criminal justice, embodied in
the criminal tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, were crucial to the recovery process following
the appalling events that occurred in those territories.
The establishment of those Tribunals, pursuant to
Security Council decisions, was a response to the public
uproar against the atrocities committed in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. They were instrumental in
preserving trust in international law; to ensuring that
those responsible for serious violations of human rights
and international law faced trial and punishment; to
ensuring thatjudicial mechanisms were put in place as a
warning that such crimes would not be left unpunished;
and to ensuring thatjustice was delivered to the victims
when egregious crimes against humanity were still
being committed on a disturbing scale.

