The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the decisions
and recommendations contained in the
declaration on ensuring an effective role for the
Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security, particularly in
Africa, adopted at its meeting at the level of
Heads of State and Government in the course of
the Millennium Summit (resolution 1318 (2000)
of 7 September 2000, annex), and the open debate
held on 7 March 2001 to review its
implementation. The Council takes note with
interest of the important views expressed by non-
members at this debate.

"The Security Council notes the progress
achieved in translating the commitments made at
its Summit meeting into practical results and
expresses its determination to intensify efforts to
this end. The Council underlines the importance
of the Declaration as a contribution towards the
development of a well-targeted strategy and
shared vision in the maintenance of international
peace and security and of the deeper and broader
involvement of Member States and the wider
international community in that regard.

"The Security Council will consider and
take appropriate action on the Secretary-
General's forthcoming report on conflict
prevention, his recommendations on the
strengthening of the United Nations capacity to
the

develop peace-building strategies, the report
prepared by its Working Group on General Issues
of Sanctions, and the recommendations on
improving the three-way relationship between the
Council, the troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat to be prepared by its Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations, and reiterates its
intention to review periodically the
implementation of its resolution 1327 (2000) of
13 November 2000 on strengthening
peacekeeping operations.

"The Security Council underlines the need
for closer cooperation and interaction within the
United Nations system in addressing the
challenges to peace and security, including the
root causes of conflicts, and intends to continue
taking concrete steps in advancing this goal. The
Council also expresses its willingness to continue
to develop productive working relationships with
regional and subregional organizations in
addressing conflict.

"The Security Council decides to conduct
further reviews, with the active participation of
non-members, of the implementation of the
commitments made at its meeting at the level of
Heads of State and Government."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2001/10.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at10.35 am.
