Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would now like to brief colleagues on the meetings that
the Security Council mission held in Darfur. First, I
would like to thank Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Joint Special
Representative for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), and the staff
of UNAMID and the members of the United Nations
country team for welcoming the Council and
supporting our visit. I would also like to thank the
Secretariat for their excellent support throughout,
particularly given the fluid nature of the programme in
Darfur.

On arrival in El Fasher in Northern Darfur on
7 October, the Security Council mission met with Joint
Special Representative Gambari and UNAMID senior
staff, who provided a briefing on the current security
situation, including the lack of access to Jebel Marra
due to clashes between the Government and rebel
forces, and on the Mission's work in protecting
civilians and its engagement in support of the African
Union-United Nations-led peace process for Darfur.
Sadly, that evening we received the news that a
member of UNAMID's civilian staff had been
kidnapped by armed men in E1 Fasher. He has yet to be
released.

The next morning, following a tour of the
UNAMID supercamp, we met members of the United
Nations country team and representatives of
international non-governmental organizations. At that
meeting, those humanitarian representatives expressed
serious concerns about ongoing insecurity in Darfur,
restrictions on access to populations in need and
attacks on peacekeepers and humanitarian workers.

We then had a meeting with the Governor of
Northern Darfur. He argued that Darfur had seen
significant improvements in the security, political and
economic situation. He highlighted the commitment of
the Government of the Sudan to support development
in Darfur and the voluntary return of refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), including through
its new Darfur strategy. He called on the international
community to put greater pressure on rebel groups to
join the Darfur peace process and criticized the
indictment by the International Criminal Court of
President Al-Bashir. In reply, the Security Council
mission expressed its concern about the upsurge in
violence in Darfur, the number of civilian casualties
and the continued restrictions on humanitarian access.
We also reiterated the Security Council's support for
UNAMID and its personnel and underlined the
Security Council's call on the Government of the

Sudan and all relevant parties to cooperate fully with
UNAMID. We expressed the Security Council's
support for the African Union-United Nations-led
peace process and the work of the Joint Chief
Mediator, Mr. Djibril Yipene Bassole, and urged all
rebel groups to join the Doha peace process without
preconditions or further delay. Members of the Security
Council mission also underlined the need for action on
impunity.

Later that day, we visited Abu Shouk IDP camp
close to El Fasher and separately met a delegation of
IDPs from the Abu Shouk and Al Salaam camps. The
visit to Abu Shouk, where we were able to walk
through the marketplace and talk with individual IDPs
for a while, brought home to us the realities of
displacement. Many of those whom Council members
met had been living in the camps for six or seven
years. Our meeting with the IDP delegation, which
took place outside the UNAMID community policing
centre in Abu Shouk enabled us to get a better
understanding of the concerns of IDPs regarding food,
medical and educational support available in the
camps, as well as of their desire to return home.
Several IDPs told the mission that it was the absence of
security and the rule of law that prevented them from
returning to their homes. Before leaving for Khartoum,
we visited a health clinic in El Fasher which provides
medical services to women and newborn children, as
well as treating victims of sexual and gender-based
violence.

In conclusion, we returned with deep concerns
about the security situation in Darfur, its impact on
civilians and the continuing restrictions on access by
UNAMID and humanitarian workers. We also returned
with a renewed conviction of the need for all parties
immediately to cease hostilities and for all rebel groups
to join the peace process immediately and without
preconditions. That is the only way that progress will
be made towards a comprehensive peace agreement in
Darfur.

With your permission, Mr. President, as co-lead
with the United States of the Khartoum leg of the
Security Council mission, I will now turn to the
meetings the mission held there.

I would like to thank the Government of the
Sudan for facilitating our visit. In Khartoum, the
mission met Vice-President Taha, Foreign Minister
Karti, the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission,
the Governor of Blue Nile, the Deputy Governor of
Southern Kordofan, representatives of Southerners in
the North and international non-governmental
organizations. We were accompanied throughout by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios, and we are grateful for his leadership and
support.

In our meetings with Vice-President Taha and
Foreign Minister Karti, we heard - as we had from
Vice-President Kiir in Juba - a strong commitment to
fully implement the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA). In particular, we heard recognition of the need
for the referendum to be held on time, to be peaceful
and credible, and for outcomes to be fully respected.
The Security Council mission welcomed those
commitments and reiterated the Council's
determination to support the parties in their full and
timely implementation of the CPA, which remained
their responsibility.

During those meetings, we also heard
commitments to tackle the key outstanding CPA issues,
including Abyei and the post-referendum arrangements
on border demarcation, citizenship and wealth-sharing.
Vice-President Taha affirmed that the resolution of
such issues was urgent, but not a precondition for the
holding of the Southern Sudan referendum.

In our meeting with the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, we heard from the Chair,
Mr. Khalil Ibrahim, about the challenges that the
Commission faces in preparing to hold the referendum
on 9 January 2011. Mr. Ibrahim set out the timetable
for the various stages of the process, which was clearly
very tight, and informed us about the progress in
preparing the registration and ballot papers. We heard
that the registration process was due to start on
14 November. The Security Council mission
underlined the need for a timely and credible process.

In our meetings with representatives of
Southerners in the North, the Security Council mission
heard concerns about the integrity of the referendum
process and about security for Southerners in
Khartoum and elsewhere the North.

During our visit to Khartoum, we also had the
opportunity to examine in more detail the popular
consultations process. The Governor of Blue Nile and
the Deputy Governor of Southern Kordofan told us of
their hope that the popular consultations would
transform relationships with Khartoum into a true
partnership. At that meeting, we heard that it would be
important, but challenging, to conclude those processes
before the referendum.

Before closing, I would like to recall that during
our visit to Khartoum, the issue of Darfur was also
discussed. In our meetings with Vice-President Taha
and Foreign Minister Karti, the Security Council
mission heard of the commitment of the Government
of the Sudan to pursue peace and development in
Darfur. The importance of all rebel groups joining the
peace process immediately and without preconditions
was also underlined. As it had in El Fasher, the
Security Council mission reiterated our concern about
the security situation and restrictions on access for
UNAMID and humanitarian workers and the need for
urgent progress in the AU-United Nations-led peace
process, which all rebel groups should join without
delay or preconditions.

The Security Council mission returned to New
York convinced of the urgency of the challenges facing
the Sudan. As a result of the meetings we held
throughout our visit, we return with a better
understanding of those challenges and the political will
that will be required to meet them. We heard a strong
commitment by both parties to fully implement the
CPA, including by holding peaceful, timely and
credible referendums and by coming to agreement on
post-referendum arrangements. The Security Council
mission welcomed those commitments and underlined
the importance of translating them into concrete action.

The Security Council will continue to follow
these issues extremely closely over the coming months.

