Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): From
1 to 3 February, I had the privilege, together with my
Chadian colleague Mr. Bante Mangaral, to lead the
Security Council mission to Mali.

During the visit, the Council met with the Malian
authorities returned by the elections held in 2013. We
had discussions with President Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, Prime Minister Tatam Ly and several members
of the Government. We also met with the armed groups
that are signatories to the Ouagadougou Preliminary
Agreement, as well as those that have adhered to the
Agreement.

On 2 February, we travelled to Mopti, where we met
with local authorities and civil society representatives
from Mopti, Gao and Timbuktu. On that occasion, we
visited the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) camp
at Mopti and evaluated the level of deployment of
MINUSMA.

Among the numerous lessons we can draw
from the mission, I would like to underscore two
points in particular: first - with regard to political
dialogue - any lasting solution for northern Mali
must be found by the Malians themselves and receive
the ongoing support of the international community;
and, secondly - with regard to security - any lasting
improvement to security in northern Mali will require
a comprehensive political solution.

First, on the subject of political dialogue, there
is the fact that any sustainable solution for northern
Mali should be found by the Malians themselves, with
ongoing support by the international community. We
had an open and fruitful dialogue on that subject with
the Malian authorities. The President of Mali noted that
any new political agreement should be reached within
Mali itself, and the members of the Security Council,
for their part, said that they were working to support the
work of the democratically elected Malian authorities.

The members of the Council also recalled that the
armed groups should be disarmed within the framework
of a negotiated political process, in accordance with
the commitments under the Ouagadougou Preliminary
Agreement. The Prime Minister of Mali highlighted
that the two processes of disarmament and dialogue
were making parallel progress. He also stated that
the modalities for disarmament would have to be
laid out in detail in coordination with MINUSMA.
The armed groups, for their part, asked that the
Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement be fully and
quickly implemented. They stated that they would
like the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and MINUSMA to support that process. We
reminded them of their obligation to put their elements
under cantonment and engage in negotiations with the
ultimate aim of disarmament.

We perceived a lack of trust between the two
parties. We expressed our support for Algeria's efforts
to bring the two parties' positions in line with each
other. We welcome the fact that, before we left Mali, the
Government laid out the elements for a road map out of
the crisis. We welcome the adoption a few days ago by
the Government and the armed groups, with the support
of MINUSMA, of a method for cantonment, and we
now request the parties - both the Government and
the armed groups - to sincerely commit to that path
without hesitation. The Security Council will continue
to monitor the fulfilment of those commitments. We
once again commended the Special Representative and
MINUSMA for their support to that dialogue.

Secondly, in terms of security, bringing lasting
security to northern Mali will necessarily require a
comprehensive political solution. Operation Cerval,
the French operation, and MINUSMA have noted that
the terrorist groups still have the capacity to carry out
operations. We recalled the urgency ofMINUSMA being
rapidly and fully deployed in the north, in particular
in the context of Operation Serval's drawdown. The
European operation in Mali briefed us on its work in
training the Malian army, including practical education
on respect for human rights.

The representatives of civil society in Mali
stressed that there would be no lasting peace in Mali
without development. Only by offering employment
opportunities will Malian youth be prevented from
joining the ranks of terrorist groups or drug traffickers.
The Special Representative felt that the mutual
commitments undertaken by the Malian authorities and
the international financial partners in terms of Mali's
development should be fulfilled following the Brussels
conference of 15 May 2013.

To conclude, I would like, on behalf of the Security
Council, to express my sincere thanks to the authorities
of Mali for the welcome they extended to the Council
and for the constructive and frank exchanges that
we had. I would also like to thank the Secretariat
and MINUSMA, in particular Mr. Albert Koenders,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
their valuable assistance in organizing the trip.

