Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): Like previous
speakers, I also would like to thank Mr. Annabi for his
informative briefing on the latest developments in East
Timor. The briefing indicates that the security situation
gives rise to deep concern. We have also heard today
about the continued dangerous militia activities in a
number of districts in East Timor.

It was with deep regret that we learned about the
deaths of two peacekeepers in East Timor. We convey
our condolences to their families and to the
Governments of Bangladesh and Nepal.

We are dismayed at the recent attacks on the
personnel of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in West Timor.
My delegation condemns violent attacks against United
Nations peacekeepers and international relief workers
and believes that ensuring their safety and security
should be among the priority tasks of the Council. It is
now of critical importance to stop the cross-border
incidents along the border with West Timor.

We also note with regret that the situation in the
camps of West Timor also continues to be a matter of
serious concern, particularly in terms of the safety and
living conditions of the refugees.

As we heard from Mr. Annabi, the repatriation of
refugees to East Timor remains insignificant. We
deplore the ongoing acts of intimidation and violence
by militias against refugees, and we call upon the
Indonesian Government to make further efforts to
collaborate with UNHCR. The safe return of refugees
from West Timor to East Timor should be ensured.
That is one of the major tasks faced by the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET).

Tomorrow, the people of East Timor will
celebrate the first anniversary of the popular
consultation that took place in East Timor under United
Nations supervision. We congratulate the people of
East Timor on this occasion. We also take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the efforts of UNTAET
under the leadership of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
which has taken up a major challenge in undertaking
the administration of East Timor and preparing it for
independence.

