Ms. Del Ponte: I, too, am honoured to be given
the opportunity one last time in my capacity as
Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia to address the Council and to thank
members for the support they have given me over the
past eight years. I wish the new Prosecutor, Mr. Serge
Brammertz, success and trust that the Council will give
him the support he will need to accomplish his
mandate.

Members of the Council will have received my
written assessment on the completion strategy of
12 November 2007 (S/2007/663, annex II). Since the
situation remains unchanged in most areas covered in
the report, I will just focus on the most important topic:
cooperation provided by Serbia as it relates to the
search for remaining fugitives. Serbia's cooperation is
an issue that remains essential to the work of the Office
of the Prosecutor and its ability to fulfil its mandate in
accordance with Security Council resolutions and the
completion strategy that was endorsed by this Council.

What I am about to say may sound very familiar.
Two years ago (S/PV.5328), I told the Council that the
Serbian Government had raised expectations that Ratko
Mladic would be arrested soon. However, despite its
declared commitments, I reported that Serbia failed to
take action to arrest and transfer the fugitives and
described the shortcomings in the plans to search for
fugitives. Today, the situation remains exactly the
same.

Six months ago, I was here before the Council
(see S/PV.5697), cautiously optimistic that, after 12
years, we might finally see Ratko Mladic and Radovan
Karadzic in our custody. Unfortunately, Mladic,
Karadzic and two other accused are still at large, and,
following my last visit to Belgrade, I have to say my
optimism has waned considerably. It is true that we
have resolved some of the remaining issues in relation
to access to documents and archives, and I sincerely
hope that problems of that nature are now behind us. In
contrast, there has been too little progress and
commitment on the issue of fugitives, and too few
concrete steps have been taken to arrest them.

My Office has invested great efforts to secure the
transfer of persons indicted by the International
Tribunal. We have come a long way. Ninety-one
individuals were brought into our custody during my
mandate. Of the 161 persons initially indicted, only
four remain at large. However, as I must always repeat,
it is a stain on the International Tribunal's work that
two individuals indicted for genocide and responsible
for the worst crimes committed in Europe since the
Second World War are still fugitives. The fact that
Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic are still at large
undermines the very idea of international justice.

Earlier this year I had high hopes that there had
been a breakthrough in Serbia and that we would soon,
finally, see the arrest of the remaining four fugitives.
The newly established Government took a more
positive stance towards cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor. Shortly after being appointed, it stated
that cooperation with the Tribunal was one of its top
priorities and took a number of important steps towards
achieving that goal. The Government established the
National Security Council which now oversees

cooperation with the International Tribunal and the
search for remaining fugitives.

Serbia played a significant role in the arrest of
Zdravko Tolimir and Vlastimir Djordjevic, who were
transferred shortly before my address to the Security
Council. In particular, Zdravko Tolimir has even
repeatedly said in court that it was in fact Serbia and
not the entity of Republika Srpska that arrested him. I
assessed these as positive steps and said that these
arrests demonstrated Serbia's ability to cooperate with
the Tribunal. This is why I thought that Serbia might
actually achieve full cooperation by arresting and
transferring Ratko Mladic, even if the authorities were
unwilling to publicly acknowledge such an arrest.

July and August passed without any visible
results and I became concerned. In September, I
returned to Belgrade and, in order to assist the efforts
of the authorities in Serbia, I agreed to commit
Tribunal resources to assist in the search for fugitives.
Since then, a senior representative of my Office travels
to Belgrade every week, attends high-level inter-
agency meetings and closely observes the efforts in the
search for fugitives. We have also continued to
encourage and intensify cooperation between all those
services engaged in the search for the fugitives in the
region.

To demonstrate my own commitment to that
cooperation, since my appointment as Prosecutor, I
have been to Belgrade 20 times. Four visits have taken
place in the past six months. My team and I have done
everything in our power to assist Serbia in fulfilling its
international obligations. Serbia still has not done its
part.

Since June, while communications have
improved, leadership and coordination between the two
principal security services in charge of the search for
fugitives remain problematic. There are serious
deficiencies in the leadership that is supervising the
security services. Decisions taken at the higher level
are not always followed up by these services. Specific
information transmitted from my Office is not always
acted upon, properly checked or expeditiously
processed. Important operational decisions are not
implemented or are implemented too slowly or
postponed indefinitely, for reasons which are not
always clear.

Let me give the Council a very specific example.
The Serbian authorities have refused to conduct even

the most basic investigative procedures, such as
conducting a search of the residence of a relative of a
fugitive, out of concern for political repercussions. The
civilian intelligence service is unwilling to cooperate
more closely with its military intelligence counterpart
and continues to refuse to provide full and
comprehensive reports. There is no strategy or proper
analysis, which is why actions taken are unsystematic,
not well prepared and uncoordinated.

Despite the Serbian authorities' declared
commitment to fully cooperate with my Office and to
improve procedures, there is no clear road map, no
clear plan in the search for fugitives, no serious leads
and no sign that serious efforts have been taken to
arrest the fugitives. There are, of course, individuals
who work hard on these issues. However, this is not a
job for any one individual. This is a job that requires
the full commitment of the State and of all of its
relevant institutions. Unfortunately, we have seen that
level of commitment only in words, not in deeds. I
cannot deny that steps have been taken, but they have
been slow and inefficient. They definitely do not match
the urgency of the moment. In short, there is no full
cooperation with my Office.

For several years immediately after the war, the
responsibility for arresting the Tribunal's indictees was
with the international forces in Bosnia and
Herzegovina who, in the purported interest of a fragile
peace, failed to arrest them. It is no secret that both
Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic have been
repeatedly sighted in recent years in Serbia, but the
authorities failed to take action. I have reliable
information that Radovan Karadzic spent time in
Belgrade, using his own name, as late as 2004. I have
already spoken about negotiations with Ratko Mladic
last year and I have reported extensively that another
fugitive, Goran Hadzic, was assisted in his escape in
2004.

Although Serbia has the capacity and the know-
how, it has repeatedly failed to act. I believe that
serious structural deficiencies in the Serbian approach,
as well as wilful obstruction of cooperation with the
International Tribunal, lie behind this failure to arrest
those most responsible for the most heinous of crimes.
I urge the authorities in Serbia to take action because it
is now high time to take the necessary steps that would
lead to the arrest of the fugitives.
Certainly, Serbia's representatives will argue the
contrary. They will say that Serbia has done a great
deal and should therefore be given unconditional
support immediately. They will say that Serbia has
transferred many indictees to the International
Tribunal. What they fail to say is that most of them
have agreed to voluntarily surrender to the
International Tribunal. The Serbian authorities thought
they could persuade Ratko Mladic to do the same.
They were negotiating with him in the spring of 2006,
and they knew his exact whereabouts. And yet, they
chose not to arrest him.

I urge the international community to seriously
address this issue. I ask in particular the European
Union member States and the European Union's
Commission to maintain their principled position by
insisting on Serbia's full cooperation with the
International Tribunal as a condition in the European
Union pre-accession and accession process. Let me be
clear: full cooperation with the International Tribunal
signifies the arrest and transfer of Ratko Mladic.
European Union conditionality has in recent years been
the most effective tool to obtain the transfer of ICTY
fugitives. I am convinced that the arrest of the
remaining four fugitives will be achieved only if this
policy is upheld.

The International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia has achieved a great deal. It has
accomplished most of its goals and has paved a wide
and solid road for international justice. For this, we
have to thank the highly dedicated and committed staff
of the Office of the Prosecutor and the International
Tribunal as a whole. And yet, I will leave this
institution with a feeling of disappointment. I am
disappointed because of commitments that were not
honoured and the legacy that may be left behind for the
many victims who will not see justice. It is for them
that the International Tribunal was established by the
Security Council to try those who are still at large.

Let us not, by our failure to act, give them reason
to feel that any stone was left unturned in the pursuit of
justice for those most responsible for the terrible
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia. I therefore
hope that the Council and the international community
will continue to provide the critical support that the
International Tribunal will need during the crucial
coming years, and that international justice will
prevail.

I agreed to an extension of my mandate in order
to complete some unfinished business: arresting Ratko
Mladic and Radovan Karadzic. I now leave that
unfinished business to my successor. I hope that he will
not come before the Council again and again, repeating
the same words on the same topic: Serbia's cooperation
and the arrest of fugitives.

