Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Special Representative ofthe Secretary-General Jan
Kubis for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan
and Ambassador Tanin for his remarks.

Like others before me, I would like to extend my
delegation's condolences over the tragic loss of lives
of United Nations family members and all other victims of
the brutal attack on 17 January in Kabul. We pay tribute to
the dedication of all international staff facing continuous
security challenges and risking their lives for the sake of the
people of Afghanistan.

Lithuania is firmly committed to contributing to building
a peaceful and stable future of Afghanistan. Since
2005, we have been leading a provincial reconstruction
team in Chaghcharan, the provincial capital of Ghor.
Our goal of assisting the Afghan people in building
a secure, democratic, inclusive and self-sufficient
Afghanistan remains unchanged.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be made
later in this meeting by the observer of the European
Union (EU).

This year, Afghanistan stands at a critical
milestone. The presidential elections scheduled for
5 April will see power transferred from one elected
president to another for the first time in the history
of Afghanistan. We welcome the advancements in the
electoral process made through the timely adoption
of legal framework, the functioning of established
electoral bodies, the declared non-interference by the
Government, the vigorous political campaigning and
the enhanced public outreach throughout the country.

An important development of the campaign is
the progress in ensuring female participation in the
upcoming election, with 35 percent of new voter
registration cards being distributed to female voters. In
addition, 13,000 women searchers were trained to work
in polling centres on election day.

We also salute women candidates for the position of
Vice-President, as well as over 100 women provincial
council candidates. Ensuring the safety of women
candidates and voters is key to ensuring that the outcome
of the election represents the will of the entire nation
and engages the full potential of Afghanistan's women
in building its future. Security during campaigning and
on the day of voting remains a major concern and must
be addressed with all due seriousness.

The support of the United Nations Assistnace
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to Afghan-led
elections that live up to inclusiveness, transparency,
credibility and legitimacy standards is of critical
importance. We welcome the fact that Afghan authorities
are encouraging observation of the election, including
by international observers and the invitation extended
to European Union and Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe observer teams.

The limited progress towards the establishment of
a peace process with the armed opposition continues to
be an issue of concern. We stress the importance of an
inclusive Afghan-led process and we call on UNAMA
to continue to facilitate local dialogue on reconciliation.
UNAMA initiatives aimed at mitigating inter-ethnic
and inter-tribal tensions and linking Government
officials, community leaders, religious scholars and
civil society, including women, are welcomed and need
to continue.

Serious concerns remain about the security
situation in the country. The gradual withdrawal of
international troops has left Afghan Government forces
more vulnerable to attacks by insurgents. Due to the
rise in casualties, 2013 was the second most violent
year since the fall of the Taliban regime. The secure
functioning of UNAMA, especially that of its field
offices, is also directly impacted by the withdrawal of
international forces.

Armed clashes and improvised explosive devices
account for 75 per cent of deaths. It is particularly
troubling that casualties among children increased
by more than one third as compared to those in 2009.
About three fourths of the death toll is attributed to the
Taliban. Reduced civilian suffering and fewer civilian
casualties, together with improvements in human rights
protection, should be the core principles of improved
stability and security for Afghanistan in 2014. My
delegation would support tracking civilian casualties
disaggregated by gender.

The anti-Government elements targeting Government
institutions and the international community is totally
unacceptable. The efforts by Afghan forces to counter
such attacks are crucial. Having further international
assistance in support of the Afghan army and police
forces will remain essential. Lithuania has pledged
to contribute its support to the Afghan National
Security Forces with a new training mission after
2014, once the necessary legal framework is in place.
As an International Security Assistance Force country,
we encourage our Afghan partners to finalize the
conclusion of the NATO status-of-forces agreement as
soon as possible.

The progress made by Afghanistan in improving
the human rights situation remains fragile. We urge
the Afghan Government to take the necessary steps to
support the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission so that it can fulfil its critical role.

Violence against women in particular reached
record levels in 2013, according to the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission. A major
concern is the failure to enforce the law on the elimination
of violence against women, which leaves perpetrators
at large. Too many victims of violence keep silent for
fear ofreprisals. We commend the decision of President
Karzai not to sign the current draft criminal procedure
code into law, as it would limit women's rights to seek
justice. UNAMA must continue its work in identifying
the challenges as well as remedies regarding national
and international efforts to advance women's rights and
women's participation in the political, economic and
social life of the country.

Attacks on schools, teachers and students continued
unabated by the Taliban and other armed groups. Such
violence is interfering with access to education, and in
some areas actually rolled back progress already made.

A particular point of concern for my delegation is
the 36 per cent increase in opium cultivation in 2013.
Given the nexus between drug trafficking, arms,
violence and terrorism, we stress the importance of
more resolute measures and Afghan initiatives aimed at
accelerating counter-narcotics policies by including the
implementation of a National Drug Control Strategy,
as well as efforts aimed at addressing the flourishing
illicit economy and corruption. In all of that, UNAMA
has an important role to play.

Strengthening Afghanistan's regional ties is vital
for its long-term stability. Active Afghan leadership
within the Istanbul Process and bilateral steps to
engage with neighbouring countries, including
increased recognition of shared interests with Pakistan,
is welcomed by my delegation.

Lithuania is committed to the long-term development
of Afghanistan through the EU and bilateral development
projects focusing on good governance, capacity-
building and infrastructure. UNAMA has a vital role
in ensuring effective coordination of donor assistance,
especially implementing mutual commitments made at
the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan in 2012 through
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.

In conclusion, the UNAMA presence in Afghanistan
is perceived by the Afghan people as an overall stability
factor and an indication of long-term commitment by
the international community. The United Nations must
continue its presence in Afghanistan to ensure that
the gains of more than a decade are not lost and all
sacrifices were not in vain. We welcome the UNAMA
mandate extension and call for its implementation,
especially in its field presence, with determination.
Assisting Afghans in the challenging transformation
decade is our responsibility.

