Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's emergency meeting. I also thank
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his very
clear briefing.

We requested today's meeting, together with seven
other members of the Security Council - Bolivia,
Egypt, France, Italy, Senegal, the United Kingdom and
Uruguay. Sweden took that step in anticipation of the
repercussions that the statement made by United States
President Donald Trump with regard to Jerusalem on
6 December would have. We clearly disagree with the
recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and
with the plan for a move of the United States Embassy
to Jerusalem for number of reasons, which I will
now outline.

First, it contradicts international law and Security
Council resolutions. Jerusalem is a final-status issue,
and can therefore be resolved only through negotiations
agreed upon between the parties. In 1947, the United
Nations attributed to Jerusalem a special legal and
political status as corpus separatum. In 1980, when
Israel attempted to declare Jerusalem its capital, the
Council stated, in resolution 478 (1980), that it was a
violation of international law. Furthermore, the Council
declared that attempts to change the character and
status of Jerusalem were null and void, and called upon
all States to accept that decision, as well as to withdraw
their missions from Jerusalem. Until now, all States
have abided by the Council's call. It was only one year
ago that the Council again stated that

"it will not recognize any changes to the 4 June
1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other
than those agreed by the parties through negotiations"
(resolution 2334 (2016), para. 2).

The European Union (EU) has a clear position on
Jerusalem, which explains why all EU member States on
the Council were united in requesting today's meeting.
We consider Jerusalem to be the future capital of two
States. We have never recognized Israel's annexation of
East Jerusalem, and we therefore consider it to be part
of occupied territory. As I stated, we believe that the
future status of Jerusalem can be resolved only through
negotiations. The statement made by the President of
the United States is at variance with the plea of many
friends of the United States and Israel. However, it does
not affect the position of Sweden, the European Union
or the wider international community, which, up to
now, has been in line with international consensus on
the status of Jerusalem.

Secondly, it is fuelling tensions and increasing
instability in an already volatile and turbulent region.
The question of Jerusalem has an impact far beyond
the region - and there are already strong reactions to
that decision around the globe. Clashes yesterday and
today have already resulted in more than 100 people
injured. We call on all parties to maintain calm, show
restraint and refrain from violence. The conflict must
not be turned into a religious one. Jerusalem is a holy
city for the three Abrahamic religions. Now more
than ever, we need respect, tolerance and dialogue to
prevail over division and antagonism. We should not
forget the strong ties to Jerusalem of both Israelis and
Palestinians, and that approximately 40 per cent of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem are Palestinians.

Thirdly, despite its stated intention to the contrary,
it risks prejudging the outcome of negotiations on
final-status issues, such as Jerusalem, and therefore
threatens prospects for peace itself. As the Secretary-
General has stated repeatedly, there is no alternative to
the two-State solution and no plan B. Yet that vision is
threatened now more than ever before. Sweden has a
long-standing and firm commitment to the two-State
solution. Seventy years ago, Sweden was one of 33
States Members of the United Nations that voted in
favour of General Assembly resolution 181 (II), which
paved the way for the establishment of the State of
Israel. In 2014 Sweden decided to recognize the State
of Palestine as a logical consequence of our support for
the two-State solution.

For decades, the United States has played a key role
in the quest for peace in the Middle East. We note the
stated intention of the United States Administration
to bring an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
to facilitate a peace agreement between Israelis and
Palestinians. Words must now be followed by deeds and
ideas by proposals. We encourage the United States to
follow up its statement with action towards the two-
State solution. Now is the time to move forward with a
detailed peace plan that enables the State of Israel and
the State of Palestine to live side by side in peace and
security, with Jerusalem as the future capital of both
States. The Council also has a responsibility. and all
stakeholders must engage more than ever on the path to
peace in the Middle East.

