Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation thanks the
Polish presidency for organizing and convening this
debate. We also thank all the briefers for their insightful
briefings this morning.

Emerging from the ashes of the Second World War,
the United Nations was built on the lofty ideal of saving
our succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
As Members of the United Nations, we resolved that no
matter how great our strength, we must deny ourselves
the licence to do as we please. However, that sense of
idealism has been eroded over the years, and especially
by a series of recent developments. While it is true
that we have not seen any major conflagration during
the past 70 years, the world today is hardly at peace.
Conflicts abound, long-standing disputes fester and the
legitimate rights of the people continue to be denied to
them in many parts of the world.

While Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations makes the Security Council an embodiment
of the membership's collective aspirations for
international peace and security, action by the Council
has often faltered at the altar of political expediency.
Nothing diminishes the standing and credibility of the
Council more than when it watches in silence while
norms of international law and its own resolutions and
decisions are trampled by Member States or remain
unimplemented due to the narrow interests invoked
in big-Power politics. Every time the Council fails to
address those omissions and breaches, it compromises
the moral authority of its decisions, which are otherwise
legally binding.

The Charter of the United Nations represents the
single most important source of international law,
which all Member States have a responsibility and
an obligation to uphold 4 more so at this critical
point where fundamental tenets of multilateralism
are increasingly under threat and in retreat. Strict
adherence to the purposes and principles of the
Charter is therefore imperative, not only to ensure
the credibility and legitimacy of the United Nations
system, but also to preserve the centrality of a rules-
based international order.

Promoting peace has always been the principal
obligation and goal of the United Nations. It is time we
fully committed to the principle of seeking solutions to
today's challenges through the art of diplomacy, and not
on the front lines of battle. After all, coercive actions
are a blunt instrument and do not create incentives
for consensual solutions. My delegation wishes to
offer the following five key suggestions to move our
process forward.

First, the Council should assume its full
responsibilities under Chapter VI of the Charter to
promote political solutions, mediation and dialogue for
the peaceful resolution of conflict. It should actively
seek the engagement of all stakeholders, including
women and the young, throughout the life cycle of
a conflict. An enhanced role for the Peacebuilding
Commission is equally important.

Secondly, the Council should have greater recourse
to the International Court of Justice on legal matters.
The Council's recommendation of one solitary dispute
to the Court and its referral ofa single case for advisory
opinion to the Court are neither what the framers
envisaged nor what the broader membership wants
or desires.

Thirdly, the Council should be more consistent and
unbiased in its actions. Selectivity in the implementation

of its resolutions and decisions - especially on
long-standing disputes, notably those in Jammu and
Kashmir and Palestine 4 must end. After all, there

can be no peace without justice. As Martin Luther
King famously said, injustice anywhere is a threat to
justice everywhere.

Fourthly, the tension between demands for
accountability and the imperative of sovereignty must
be resolved according to the norms of international
law. The process of accountability needs to be viewed
as a continuum that goes beyond punishment alone.
Strategies such as truth and reconciliation commissions
have been used effectively in many situations, and we
should use them much more frequently.

Fifthly, the Council should further strengthen
its cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations to bring local insights and perspectives on
emerging threats. In addition, solutions are often more
effective when they are neither externally imposed nor
culturally alien.

The United Nations is of course a reflection of its
membership. It will be as strong or as weak as its Member
States wish it to be. Yet for the United Nations to become
fit for purpose, it must reflect the contemporary spirit
of our age and become an organization that is more
democratic, representative, accountable, transparent
and efficient. We wish no less for the Security Council
than that it be able to effectively address the imposing
and complex global challenges of our time.

