Mr. Inderfurth (United States): May I first express
my delegation's congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency during the month of July and
pledge our full cooperation, and also express my
delegation's appreciation to Ambassador Elaraby and the
Egyptian delegation for their excellent stewardship of the
Council during the month of June.

Finally, may I express our welcome to the Angolan
delegation that has joined us in the Council today led by
Minister Carneiro.

The United States is strongly committed to the
Angolan peace process, a process that we believe will give
Angolans the opportunity to build a strong, prosperous,
united, democratic and peaceful nation. The resolution we
have just adopted demonstrates that the Security Council
shares that commitment. We welcome the progress that
has been made to date, and we are encouraged that the
process is moving forward. Yet, sharing the view of other
Council members, we regret that implementation is still
behind schedule, leaving important steps still to be taken.
Rapid progress is essential, including in such vital areas
as demobilization, reintegration and demining.

There has been real movement since the renewal of
the mandate on 8 May. In these eight weeks, we have
seen passage of an Amnesty Law; an accord between the
Angolan Armed Forces and UNITA on military
integration; entry of the vanguard of UNITA officers into
the Angolan Armed Forces; the quartering of another
17,000 troops, bringing the numbers to over 50,000
registered; three ceremonies to destroy landmines;
quartering of the Government's rapid reaction police;
further withdrawals of the Angolan Armed Forces to
barracks; launching of a plan to disarm the civilian
population; good progress in bilateral Government-
UNITA discussions on constitutional reform; closing of
eight UNITA quartering sites; and lifting of some
checkpoints. Clearly, some of these actions have been
incomplete, but movement has been substantial and in the
right direction. These are important steps toward peace
for the people of Angola.

Let me focus for a moment on a key phase of the
peace process, namely demobilization. Quartering of
UNITA troops must conclude soon - this month - and
a rapid and orderly demobilization of those who will not
enter the integrated military must begin in order to sustain
confidence in the peace process. Some 67,000
Government and UNITA soldiers are scheduled to be
demobilized: soldiers who are understandably uncertain
and anxious about their future. These soldiers have much
to contribute to Angola's massive reconstruction process.

Angolan authorities and the international community
must ensure that the considerable energy and talent of
these demobilized soldiers are properly developed and
channelled. International support is essential to ensure that
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants is
rapid. We and our partners in the international donor
community are committed to assisting the successful
demobilization of Government and UNITA troops, but
only $10 million of the $42 million required for the first
year of the demobilization and reintegration process has
been received. We call on other Member States to give
this urgent requirement their fullest attention. Demobilized

 

combatants must have a real stake in peacetime Angola;
they must be convinced that there is indeed "life after
Lusaka".

Today's resolution rightly calls attention to the urgent
task of demining. Dernining is essential to enable the free
circulation of people and goods throughout Angola, and
thus crucial to demobilization and reconstruction efforts.
We encourage the parties to exert an even greater effort in
all phases of the demining process. We also commend the
three land-mine destruction ceremonies that have been held,
one by the Government and two by UNITA. We continue
to believe a joint land-mine destruction ceremony would
have a tremendous impact on the psychology of Angolans,
providing further assurances that after two decades of war
a new era of peace and national reconciliation is dawning.

The coming few months are of critical importance for
the peace process. As the peace process moves forward,
and with UNAVEM's expected completion date of February
1997 drawing closer, the tasks become harder, the stakes
get higher, and the political will required of both parties
must not waver. The Government and UNITA have, in the
Joint Commission, agreed upon a calendar of actions for
July. The Security Council will be following the actions of
the parties closely to see that each side is living up to its
obligations. The UNITA troops which will enter into the
unified armed forces must be selected, and they, along with
UNITA officers, must enter into the new, joint military. We
were distressed to learn this morning that there seems to be
some disruption in the selection process which had just
started in the past few days. We trust that both sides will
show the utmost commitment, political will and necessary
flexibility to get the process of incorporating UNITA troops
into the Angolan Armed Forces back on track without
further delay.

Creation of the joint military, and demobilization of
those troops not selected for its ranks, will be an important
cornerstone in building the trust and confidence that are key
to the future of Angola. Another pivotal step will be the
establishment of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation. We fully understand that these steps are not
easy ones to take, but they must be taken, not only to fulfil
formal obligations, but to cement the confidence and trust
the parties have been building over the past year and a half.
Differences of opinion may arise and actions may be
questioned, but any difficulties must be worked out through
peaceful means and dialogue. With the requisite political
will, in the current climate of growing cooperation, the
necessary steps can be taken within the time-frame agreed
to by the two parties. We fully expect to hail the formation
of a new Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, and the irreversibility of the peace
process, within the current mandate period covered by
today's Security Council resolution.
I conclude by commending the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Maitre Beye, the Force
Commander of UNAVEM, and all personnel of
UNAVEM. III for their dedication and courageous service
in the cause of peace. The peace process would not be
where it is today without them. We are also grateful for
the generosity of countries that have contributed troops to
the UNAVEM. force.

