Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this essential debate on
peacebuilding-related issues. We also wish join
previous speakers in thanking you, Sir, in your capacity
as former Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), for your active involvement in addressing this
important subject. We greatly value the presence of the
Foreign Minister of Japan and other Ministers here
today. We strongly support their statements.

Armenia aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of the European Union. However, we
would like to make some remarks in our national
capacity.

The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses post-conflict peacebuilding signifies the
importance that the international community attaches
to that issue as a preventive tool against the recurrence
of conflict through the establishment of sustained
security and stability, which are prerequisites for the
maintenance of peace and development. It is also an
acknowledgement of the Council's responsibility to
fulfil the commitments undertaken to support countries
that have emerged from conflict.

We share the views expressed by Council
members and other speakers calling for more
systematic attention to post-conflict peacebuilding,
which we believe should be frequently reflected in the
deliberations of the Security Council. We also believe
that increased cooperation and the distribution of roles
among the United Nations, the Bretton Woods
institutions and regional organizations are essential.

Armenia remains committed to post-conflict
peace initiatives and believes that the Security Council
should further strengthen the rule of law and advance
development initiatives by supporting peacebuilding
mechanisms, such as the PBC, that help countries
emerging from conflict in their recovery, reintegration
and reconstruction efforts aimed at creating the
foundations for sustainable peace and development. In
that respect, it is important that the programmes
adopted be country-specific, needs-based and target-
oriented to ensure continued support from the people
affected and to safeguard their success.

It is noteworthy that the PBC has shouldered for
United Nations peacekeeping the important task of
defining post-conflict strategies. We are encouraged
that previous reports indicate that it has achieved
certain satisfactory results in some countries.

Conflicts in the South Caucasus have defied
peaceful accommodation, let alone resolution, for more
than two decades. Wars have been fought, people
displaced, law and order disrupted and economies
shattered and paralysed. Yet, we have not fully
employed an essential resource that could bring us
closer to peace: sustainable economic development.
That could create regional opportunities for trade,
investment and jobs and lead to engagement and
solutions on the political front.

One might question the value of embarking on
such an effort in post-conflict situations where
negotiations among the parties are ongoing. However,
international experience shows that economic
cooperation and interaction can be a valuable
confidence-building measure that often leads to
political cohesion. Examples can be found in Western
and Eastern Europe and, increasingly, in Asia.

With a view to achieving greater coherence in the
region and expanding the geographical area for
cooperation, the South Caucasus needs various
regional initiatives and programmes sponsored by
donor countries and organizations to be implemented.
In addition, international financial institutions and
private-sector contributions should play a decisive role
in moving towards that end.

The region desperately awaits leadership from the
global investment community. The ultimate task here is
to translate that vision into working realities that
emphasize the future instead of focusing on the painful
past. The post-conflict period in the region provides a
window of opportunity for providing basic security,
delivering peace dividends, building confidence in the
political process and strengthening core national
ownership to lead peacebuilding efforts and lay the
foundations for sustainable development.

The successful implementation of that agenda
requires a basic level of political will and
determination on the part of national and regional
actors as preconditions for peacebuilding. With those
political conditions in place, the ability of the United
Nations or any other organization or intergovernmental
or regional actor will be enhanced and supported.
Armenia therefore welcomes the Japanese initiative to
hold this open debate. This is an opportunity to recap
and reflect on our past experiences in dealing with the
issue of post-conflict peacebuilding and to highlight
priority aspects for united practical actions.

