Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking our briefers, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central African Republic, Mr. Bedializoun Moussa
Nebie, Special Representative of the African Union
to the Central African Republic, Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director for Africa of the European External
Action Service, and our colleague Ambassador Kacou
Le'on Adom for their insightful presentations.

Poland welcomes the fact that some positive
progress has been made under the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation, which remains the main
framework for resolving the crisis in the Central
African Republic. However, further efforts are needed
to ensure that the achievements made so far are not lost.
We call on all parties to the crisis to fully engage in
dialogue and to fulfil their commitments.

While commending the support provided by
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and the African Union, as well as the
engagement of regional and subregional actors in
the mediation and reconciliation efforts, Poland
emphasizes that consistency is key. To bring about real
change, the political process must involve all political,
social and ethnic groups, as well as women, and must
be conducted at both the national and local levels. To
that end, it is essential to ensure transparency in all
actions undertaken by external actors. The country's
political, administrative and judicial structures must be
rebuilt and the sense of impunity in society reduced.
It is critical to create closer links between the peace
process and justice, and in that context we emphasize
the importance of the elections planned for 2020 and
2021, which should provide the necessary impetus
for implementing the processes of decentralization,
establishing transitional justice and extending
State authority.

At the same time, the efforts to overcome the
political impasse and ensure the delivery of urgent
humanitarian aid should be complemented by long-
term development programmes that address the root
causes of the conflict and that include all groups from
every side of the conflict.

Poland welcomes the redeployment in several
areas of the country of the armed forces trained by the
European Union Training Mission with MINUSCA's
operational support, which is essential in order to
reinforce national ownership and responsibility for the
country's security. Nevertheless, the issue of logistical
support to the national security forces must be urgently
addressed. Poland would like to point out that all
international partners providing assistance on the
ground should work in a coordinated and transparent
manner, which is the only way to achieve a unified
approach to operationalizing the Central African
Republic forces and ensuring their compliance with the
highest standards. Considering the fragile situation in
the Central African Republic, MINUSCA's priorities
and core tasks remain valid. We value its engagement
in supporting the political process, protecting civilians
and ensuring a secure environment for the delivery of
humanitarian aid.

In conclusion, while we appreciate the achievements
made so far, there is still a long road ahead for the
Central African Republic. In our View, the international
community and the country's people must stay the
course in order to preserve what has already been
accomplished. Poland supports the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/922). We commend the important work being
done by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), the European Union mission and other
international partners in the Central African Republic.
I would also like to assure Special Representative
Onanga-Anyanga and his team of our full support.

