Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank Mr. Feltman,
Mr. Ging and Mr. Simonovie for their excellent
briefings, which only serve to emphasize that, if the
Security Council is to perform its role of scrutinizing
the situation in Ukraine, it must continue to receive
regular and reliable information, such as that which we
have just heard. We also compliment Lithuania for its
initiative in requesting those briefings.

What we now know about the human rights situation
in Ukraine is truly distressing, in particular the reports
of severe violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law, including the indiscriminate shelling
of civilians, which New Zealand has previously
condemned, and does so again today. Vulnerable
populations are subject to grave abuses; they strive just
to maintain a precarious existence, all the while seeking
safety. We think, in particular, of the plight of the
disabled, who are often overlooked in these situations.
Moreover, today there are 1 million displaced persons
in Ukraine; 12 months ago, there were none. There are
5 million in need ofhumanitarian relief; 12 months ago,
there were none.

A sharp increase in casualties coincided with the
dramatic escalation of hostilities of recent months,
the only mitigating factor being that the worst reports
generally predate the ceasefire recently agreed in
Minsk. While there are indications that the situation
has started to improve since that ceasefire, we as
the Security Council must do everything possible
to maintain that momentum. We must in particular
address the gaps in information referred to by Under-
Secretary-General Feltman, and we must, to use his
words, make the process irreversible. We can only hope
that the events of late 2014 and the early part of this
year represent the lowest point of the humanitarian and
human rights situation in Ukraine.

In the February open debate on the topic (see S/PV.7389), my Minister of Foreign Affairs raised New
Zealand's concerns about the veto. We were not alone
in that, with some Member States also mentioning
paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Without repeating those comments, New
Zealand emphasizes that, where parties to a conflict
know that the Security Council is unable to act, there is
much less incentive for compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law. We see the sad
reality of that every day in Ukraine.

New Zealand urges those involved in this conflict
to deliver on their Minsk commitments, not least with
a genuine and comprehensive ceasefire. Until that has
been achieved, the humanitarian crisis and the violations
that have been described to us today will persist, more
people will suffer, more blood will be shed, and more
lives will be lost. Under international human rights law,
all parties have an obligation to ensure that civilians
are protected. Where civilians seek to escape conflict
areas so as to get to safety, they must be allowed to
do so, not be trapped as Assistant Secretary-General
Simonovie described to us, and certainly not threatened
by separatist artillery. Humanitarian aid must reach the
affected populations. All involved must do everything
within their power to ensure its delivery without let
or hindrance. International norms on the protection of
humanitarian actors must also be respected.

As we have just heard that the situation for
ordinary people in Ukraine remains very dangerous
indeed. The observation of the ceasefire remains
imperfect. Significant civilian populations remain at
very high risk. Much is needed to ensure their safety
and to protect them from human-rights violations.
New Zealand reiterates the Security Council's recent
unanimous call for the full implementation of the
Minsk package, including a comprehensive ceasefire
and the withdrawal of heavy weapons. All of this must
be monitored and verified by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We also call once
again on Russia, as a party to the Minsk agreements
on the ceasefire and with indisputable influence in
this matter, to ensure that the separatists honour that
which has been agreed. Those are the essential steps
on the path to a long-term political solution and to the
restoration ofpeace in Ukraine, and, as such, they must
be delivered.

