Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this debate and the
Secretary-General for his statement here today and for
the strong commitment he has always shown in the
interest of this very important subject.

I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General John Holmes for his briefing here today. I
would like to say how greatly Austria has appreciated
his action at the head of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) during these past
three and a half years. I remember quite a number of
situations when the Council had some difficulty
agreeing on the best political response to a crisis, and
when it was OCHA under the leadership of John
Holmes that was the first to make a difference on the
ground. We are grateful for that as well.

Let me also thank High Commissioner Pillay for
her statement. I think it is very important that she has
the chance to speak to us in this context and to make
the link to specific country situations where there is a
protection concern.

Austria associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the European Union delegation later in
this debate.

In response to last year's report of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians (S/2009/277), the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 1894
(2009). Eight months later, we are encouraged by the
progress made in its implementation. Let me
particularly thank OCHA and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for their consistent support of
this process. Resolution 1894 (2009), the in-depth
discussion within this year's Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the work of the Secretariat
and many missions on the ground, as well as the
independent study on the protection of civilians in the
context of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
have contributed to a better understanding of protection
of civilians amongst the various stakeholders.

We are convinced that the next report of the
Secretary-General will provide an important
opportunity to take stock of the progress made and of
remaining challenges in implementing resolution 1894
(2009). In order to reflect the recent developments, we
also believe that a revised version of the aide-memoire
(see S/PRST/2009/l, annex) should soon be adopted.

We are closely following how the provisions of
resolution 1894 (2009) on the role of peacekeeping
missions in the protection of civilians are being
translated into the everyday work of the Secretariat and
the Council and taken into account in the renewal of
peacekeeping mission mandates. The further
development and implementation of the operational
concept, mission-wide protection strategies and
training modules are well under way. Austria will
continue to promote the use of these tools and,
whenever necessary, call for the prioritization of
protection tasks, such as in the course of the recent
renewals of the mandates of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We welcome the fact that protection mandates
increasingly include all activities aimed at ensuring the
safety and physical integrity of civilian populations,
securing humanitarian access and ensuring full respect
for the rights of individuals by all parties to a conflict
in accordance with international humanitarian and
human rights law. We also welcome United Nations
efforts to promote and protect human rights in
situations of armed conflict, as well as the inclusion of
human rights components in peacekeeping and other
relevant missions. The High Commissioner has just
very clearly shown the link between human rights and
protection concerns.

The ultimate goal of any peacekeeping mission
with a protection mandate must be to help restore an
environment in which the host State is able to fully
exercise its primary responsibility to protect its own
population. The untimely drawdown or premature
downscaling of peacekeeping missions can seriously
endanger the stability and safety of the civilian
population. Mandate adjustments or the drawdown of
missions therefore also need to be conditioned upon
the fulfilment of benchmarks relating to the protection
of civilians.

It is no secret that my country would have
preferred a stronger protection of civilians component
in the latest renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad. At the same time, we welcome the establishment
of a joint working group comprising representatives of
the Secretariat and the Government of the host country,
who will jointly review implementation of the
protection benchmarks defined by the Council. This
model can also help, from our point of View, to
strengthen ownership by the host country. If successful,
it might be considered in the context of other missions
in the future.

The Secretary-General, in his most recent report
(S/2009/277), rightly listed the enhancement of
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law, as well as international criminal law, by
State and non-State actors alike as a major persistent
challenge. And he said so again here today.

Perpetrators of serious violations against the
civilian population still go largely unpunished.
Allegations need to be thoroughly investigated and
perpetrators brought to account, not only through
prosecution, but also through the vetting of armed and
security forces. We believe that the Council must
ensure respect for its resolutions and be prepared to
take vigorous measures against perpetrators, including
through the establishment of commissions of inquiry,
referrals to the International Criminal Court and the
imposition of targeted measures.

Let me also underline the important role of
national reparation programmes for victims and
institutional reforms. In addition, provisions pertaining
to violations against the civilian population should
consistently be included in the listing criteria of
relevant sanctions committees. The interaction between
the relevant United Nations bodies and the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, on the one hand, and sanctions committees
and their expert groups, on the other, needs to be
enhanced. The recent briefing by Special
Representative Coomaraswamy to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was an important development. This, from our
point of view, should become a standing practice.

The past two years have seen important
developments in strengthening the protection of
women and children in particular. We also hope that
the particular protection needs of persons with
disabilities and older persons, together with examples
of best practices, will be addressed in the upcoming
report of the Secretary-General. Concerning damages
caused to the civilian population, we also follow with
interest the emerging practice of making amends even
if those damages do not stem from unlawful conduct.

We finally note with satisfaction that the Security
Council expert group on the protection of civilians has
significantly contributed to a more consistent approach
of the Security Council when renewing the protection
mandates of peacekeeping operations. It is essential
that the group address all missions with a role in the
protection of civilians.
Let me end by saying that the improvements
achieved so far in the United Nations are also serving
as an example for efforts by the European Union in this
field. Together with its European Union partners,
Austria is working to improve implementation of the
protection of civilians in missions and operations run
by the European Union.

