Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Leona Marlin-Romeo, Prime Minister
of Sint Maarten. I wish her a pleasant stay in New York.

Through you, Mr. President, allow me to extend our
sincerest thanks to the delegation of the United States for
having included this item on the agenda for the month
of September. We thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
her detailed and informative briefing, as well as for her
important role and achievements in Haiti. My delegation
welcomes the appointment on 1 August of Ms. Helen
Meagher La Lime as the new Special Representative
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). We trust that
her academic background and experience will greatly
assist her in her duties.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is closely
following developments in Haiti and notes the ongoing
efforts of its Government, the United Nations and
partners to address the country's challenges and best
promote the sustainable development of Haitian society
as a whole. We are deeply concerned about the events
of early July - the street protests in Port-au-Prince and
other areas of the country as a result of an increase in
fuel prices. We deplore the fact that those protests led to
loss of life and caused considerable collateral damage.
The peaceful manifestation of dissent by citizens must
respect the laws of the country so that those involved do
not harm those who do not support them. In that regard,
we welcome President Jovenel Moise's praiseworthy
position and his initiative to eliminate subsidies on oil
products, as well as his subsequent appeal to citizens to
remain calm and return to their homes.

The delegation of Equatorial Guinea commends the
visit in May by members of the Economic and Social
Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti, who had
the opportunity to meet with President Moise, other
political actors and representatives of civil society and
development agencies operating in the country. They
discussed socioeconomic issues, development priorities
and the rule of law, inter alia. We are confident that
such meetings will serve to promote the sustainable
development that the Haitian people need.

We note the valuable work of the legislature, as
evidenced by its adoption of key bills, such as that of
access for persons with disabilities to buildings and
facilities; the establishment of a fund for persons with
disabilities; as well as the creation, organization and
functioning of the National Council on Legal Aid,
among others. We believe that the vision to better
integrate persons with disabilities demonstrates that the
political will exists to extend the development of Haiti
to all social strata. Similarly, we welcome the support
of UNICEF for the construction of a juvenile court,
which will open before the end of the year. We believe
that it is a good justice initiative that will strengthen
the rule of law.

We commend the United Nations for its enhanced
efforts to eradicate cholera in Haiti. There has been a
steady decline in the number of cholera cases since the
end of 2016, and that trend should continue for the rest
of the year.

I wish to conclude by expressing my support
for, and gratitude to, the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti for its efforts. I call on all State
institutions in Haiti - the Government, Parliament,
the courts, the national police and civil society - to
collaborate closely with President Jovenel Moise and
to support him in his reform agenda with a view to
promoting the sustainable development of Haiti, which
absolutely requires upholding the law, respect for human
rights, good governance, respect for State authority and
the strengthening of Haiti's legal institutions.

