Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
convey my best wishes to the delegation of Mali at this
first public meeting for the month of December - one
that promises to be busy, given the current international
situation. We have no doubt, Sir, that the Council will
be successful thanks to your wise guidance.

I should like also to commend Ambassador
Patricia Durrant and her entire team, who led our work
with outstanding success during the month of
November - also an especially busy month, due to
international events and to the presence in New York of
a large number of ministers and heads of State.

France associates itself with the position of the
European Union, which will be presented during our
discussion by the representative of Belgium. I shall
therefore make only a few brief comments in my
national capacity.

I should like to begin by expressing our
appreciation for the very comprehensive briefing by the
Secretariat on the activities of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH).

UNMIBH is an exemplary peace operation. It is
exemplary, first, because of what it is doing. It is
guided by clear-cut objectives that are set forth in a
plan for the implementation of its mandate. It is
benefiting from the effective work of a Special
Representative, of a Police Commissioner, and of an
entire team determined to achieve its goals. It is
reporting to the Security Council on its successes, on
the difficulties it is encountering, and on the
forthcoming stages of its work. The results -
significant ones - are there for all to see. The latest
report of the Secretary-General makes this clear. I am
thinking in particular of the statistics that attest to the
success that has been achieved thanks to the
strengthening of the State Border Service.

Secondly, UNMIBH is exemplary because of its
ability to provide its own exit strategy. In this respect,
it constitutes an excellent example of the
implementation of the recommendations of the Brahimi
report on peace operations. We understand that the
period from the end of December 2002 to the
beginning of 2003 is the most likely time frame for the
accomplishment of the major tasks of the United
Nations Mission.

Thirdly, the exemplary nature of UNMIBH is also
due to the prospect of the takeover of this United
Nations operation by regional organizations, in this
case the European Union or the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The
redefinition of the respective roles of the United
Nations and of the regional organizations, the
strengthening of their coordination and the quest for
greater complementarity between them are among the
things currently being considered within these walls.

In the context of the overall process of reflection
on the restructuring of the international community's
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, now being carried
out under the leadership of Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, the
European Union and the OSCE each are undertaking an
evaluation of the circumstances in which monitoring
and assistance efforts with respect to the Bosnian
police might be continued. When these evaluations are
made known, the member States of the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council will be able to
decide, depending on the results, on the relative merits
of each option. When the time comes, they will have to
choose the best solution. I should like emphasize the
need to make this choice only when the time comes.

For its part, France, which is looking forward to
the conclusion of these studies, notes the advantages of
continuing monitoring and assistance efforts with
respect to the Bosnian police within the framework of a
European Union mission. Indeed, the prospect of a
rapprochement with the European Union is open to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The European Union has a
high degree of political legitimacy there. Moreover,
with 620 individuals, it is the primary contributor to
UNMIBH's International Police Task Force. Through
its civilian crisis management activities, it should have
the operational capacity to conduct the mission that
will follow up on the United Nations Mission.
Furthermore, it will be in a position to involve in its
action States that are non-members of the European
Union, thanks in particular to the work of the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is meant to join itself
with Europe, and it is doing so as part of the process of
stabilization and association. We encourage the
Bosnian authorities to continue their efforts and to
persevere in this direction with all the necessary
resolve. This is what is in store for Bosnia and
Herzegovina and, more generally, for South-Eastern
Europe.

