Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this briefing on the progress of the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, Mr. Pierre Buyoya,
African Union High Representative for Mali and the
Sahel, and Mr. Pedro Serrano, Deputy Secretary-
General for Common Security and Defence Policy
and Crisis Response at the European External Action
Service, for their excellent presentations.

The briefings informed us about the progress that
has been made and the challenges to be tackled in order
to ensure the full operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force. The challenges are related in particular
to a lack of adequate, predictable resources, sufficient
personnel, and appropriate training and equipment
adequate to the scale of the security threats. Despite
those difficulties, the Council's unity of action and the
continued commitment of State and institutional actors
have enabled the concerted and generally satisfactory
implementation of the recommendations of resolution
2391 (2017), on the logistical and operational support
to the Joint Force provided by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire
would like to encourage all the relevant stakeholders,
particularly the G-5 Sahel States, to continue their
efforts to bring the Joint Force up to speed.

According to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/1006), while the progress in building up the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force is encouraging, it is still below
expectations. C6te d'Ivoire therefore urges the G-5 Sahel
States to continue their dialogue with international
partners with a view to strengthening and improving
the coordination of the multifaceted support for the
Joint Force's operationalization. We continue to believe
that its rapid deployment capabilities and familiarity
with the social and cultural environment constitute
the Joint Force's comparative advantages in the fight
against the spread of terrorism and cross-border crime
in the Sahel.

The complexity of the current security challenges
in the Sahel and the West African subregion demand
that States pool their resources to fight terrorist groups.
My country therefore welcomes MINUSMA's logistical
and operational support to the Joint Force, as mandated
by resolution 2391 (2017), which is a good example
of cooperation between United Nations and African
peace operations.

We emphasize how pleased we were with the signing
on 23 February of the technical agreement between the
United Nations, the European Union and the G-5 Sahel
countries. We therefore urge all partners to follow up on
their financing pledges in order to complete the process
of operationalizing the Joint Force. We welcome the
adoption by the G-5 Sahel States of the compliance
framework aimed at ensuring scrupulous respect for
human rights by the Joint Force. Its implementation will
require raising awareness of respect for fundamental
human rights among the military components of the
Joint Force, as well as effective punishment for those
who commit violations of human rights.

Even if the Joint Force reaches its full operational
capacity, it is undeniable that its effectiveness will
continue to depend on current efforts to stabilize the
political environment in the region. The Joint Force
must therefore be one piece ofa political effort that goes
beyond security policy to form part of a comprehensive
process for the lasting settlement of the current crises
in the Sahel region. In that regard, and in the context of
the quest for a political solution to the Malian crisis, my
delegation calls on all the signatories to the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali to implement it
immediately. The fact is that ensuring the Agreement's
success would be a first step towards restoring lasting
peace and stability in the Sahel. In addition, the Joint
Force's security responses must also be supported
by strategies aimed at eradicating the factors behind
regional vulnerabilities and improving the resilience of
States and local populations to crises. We believe that
to that end we must ensure that the ongoing security
and development policies are aligned so as to provide
sustainable responses to the multidimensional crises
facing the Sahel. In that regard, we appreciate the
recalibration of the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and the development of the United Nations
Support Plan in the wake of the review of the security
and development challenges in the region.

Cote d'Ivoire appreciates the financial support of
bilateral and multilateral partners to the Joint Force,
but we remain concerned about its long-term financial
viability, given the scale of its needs and the delays
in making the promised funds available. We believe
that considering the regional dimension and scale of
the current threats, it is the international community's
responsibility to come up with rapid responses to the
need for predictable and sustainable funding.

The consequences of insecurity and instability,
exacerbated by the actions of numerous jihadist groups
and cross-border criminal networks, extend well beyond
the Sahel region. Today they constitute an important
challenge to the maintenance of international peace and
security, demanding that we act urgently to formulate
coordinated and sustainable responses in order to bring
stability and development to the people of the Sahel.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country's
full appreciation to the States members of the G-5 Sahel
for the enormous sacrifices that they have undertaken
despite difficult regional circumstances. Their steadfast
commitment in a context where Africa aspires to take
ownership of its collective security is an example that
we should support. Cote d'Ivoire will continue to stand
by their side as part of the collective efforts undertaken
by the international community.

