Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to welcome and
thank you for your presence with us today in the
Security Council. We are grateful to the delegation of
Cote d'Ivoire for convening this important meeting. We
also thank Secretary-General Mr. Antonio Guterres and
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, for their valuable briefings.

The post-conflict period requires an integrated
strategy in the political, security and economic
spheres - which are considered fundamental pillars
for building and sustaining peace and vital factors
for promoting security and stability. Many important
elements are required to achieve that, first and foremost
political determination, security, stability, sustained
funding for early recovery, and lasting medium- and
long-term financial investment.

The presence of Cote d'Ivoire in the Council today
as a non-permanent member bears witness to the
importance of the post-conflict period. Cote d'Ivoire
was able to successfully emerge from a serious long-
standing crisis once the appropriate political and security
environment was established. That was achieved
after C6te d'Ivoire undertook serious and effective
economic reforms in a number of vital sectors 4 such
as agriculture, industry, mining and investment - that
helped avoid a relapse into conflict. The Peacebuilding
Commission also played a crucial role in building
peace and reconstruction efforts, alongside the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, whose mandate
ended in June 2017, as well as the peacekeeping troops
of the Economic Community of West African States.

Of the most important steps that should be taken
by a State in any post-conflict situation is to embrace
national ownership of the peacebuilding operation,
as well as sincere political will to achieve national
reconciliation while addressing the root causes of the
crisis. The vital role played by the Dialogue, Truth
and Reconciliation Commission of Cote d'Ivoire,
which was established in September 2011 and tasked
with investigating human rights violations during
the conflict, contributed immensely to creating an
environment of social harmony and political stability
by bringing to justice those responsible for violations
of human rights and perpetrators of crimes against
humanity and war crimes. That was a crucial component
of the successful transition process in Cote d'lvoire.

Experience has shown that, following the increase
in military conflicts and the difficulties and obstacles
faced by the Organization in certain cases, the efforts
of the United Nations need support from regional
organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter ofthe United Nations. It is also clear that regional
organizations are in many cases better-suited to deal
with conflicts owing to the fact that their operations are
less costly, both materially and in human resource terms.
They are also more capable of analysing information
pertaining to maintaining peace and security in their
respective regions. Close cooperation and effective
partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations are therefore the first
line of defence for the United Nations in helping to
resolve regional problems, prevent their expansion and
avoid threats to international peace and security.

States emerging from conflicts often face economic
deterioration, destroyed infrastructure and an inability
to provide basic services to their peoples. In order
for those States to recover and be able to withstand
hardships, the role of international financial institutions
is crucial, first and foremost that of the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund. Those institutions,
in cooperation and partnership with the United
Nations and its specialized agencies, including the
Peacebuilding Fund, can contribute to reconstruction,
development and job-creation. Those States would then
be able to discharge their functions in the best possible
way, with a view to achieving sustained economic
growth, which represents the best guarantee to avoid a
relapse into conflict.

In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for
the Secretary-General's reforms and his efforts to
restructure the peace and security pillars within the
Secretariat. Achieving Goal 16 of the Sustainable
Development goals is important in order to establish
peaceful societies and build effective institutions.

