Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
join in expressing our gratitude to you, Mr. Minister,
for chairing this important meeting, which seeks to
enhance the manner in which the Security Council
responds to humanitarian crises in the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security. This is
an area of particular interest to my country and to
Africa. We are therefore greatly indebted to the Greek
presidency for this focused initiative. A better
understanding of humanitarian crises is an important
element in preventing, responding to and resolving
such crises.

The major challenge we have before us in
preventing conflict and reducing the escalation of
humanitarian crises is dealing with threats to peace and
security. We need to acknowledge that such threats
include not only international war and conflict, but also
civil violence, organized crime, terrorism and weapons
of mass destruction, poverty, deadly infectious diseases
and environmental degradation. Although we
acknowledge that Member States have the primary
responsibility for maintaining peace and security -
including the obligation to address the root causes of
violent conflict - the support of the entire
international community and of the Security Council is
very important.

The role of the Security Council in humanitarian
crises should be based on the impact of such crises on
international peace and security. It should be seen in
three interrelated phases - the evolution of such
crises, the response to them and their resolution - as
part of the Council's moral and political responsibility.
However, humanitarian action alone should not be a
substitute for needed political action.

The Security Council should be knowledgeable
about and concerned by early signs of the multiple root
causes of humanitarian crises, both man-made and
caused by natural disasters. Such knowledge would
enable the Council to initiate early action to prevent or
contain the outbreak of full-scale conflict. Poverty and
hunger, combined with deteriorating environmental
factors, can cause or exacerbate conflict. Among the
range of options that should be available to the
Security Council and to the international community as
a whole are timely humanitarian action such as the
provision of food and HIV/AIDS assistance to help
concerned Governments help and protect their citizens.
Poverty and hunger can lead to desperate acts such as
violent crime and facilitate the recruitment of child
soldiers.

Systematic patterns of gross human rights
violations are indications of impending humanitarian
and political crisis, leading to crimes against humanity,
violations of international humanitarian law and
genocide. The Security Council, in collaboration with
the relevant United Nations bodies and civil society
organizations, ought to respond in a timely manner to
human rights violations and take appropriate collective
action in accordance with its mandate set out in
Chapters VI and VII of the Charter.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security is very relevant in that
regard. The role of civil society and national and
regional institutions in preventing and resolving
conflicts is critical. Those groups have information
obtained on the ground and can be good advisers with
regard to action, since they are familiar with the
territories and situations concerned. Their involvement
promotes ownership of the peace process for the
attainment of lasting peace and sustainable
development in the affected countries and regions.

It has now become standard practice, following
the onset of crises and the establishment of peace, to
set up integrated peacekeeping missions whose duties
include providing humanitarian assistance and
protecting civilians. It should be remembered that,
before the implementation of peace operations, victims
of displacement such as internally displaced persons
and refugees not only need humanitarian assistance,
but can also be victims and sources of destabilization
in countries experiencing such stressful situations.
Moreover, they can complicate peaceful negotiations
and relations between and among neighbouring States.
Providing international protection and assistance to
such groups should be a shared responsibility, and
solutions to such problems should be built into
subsequent peace agreements. The Security Council
should remain seized of such problems, as they have
direct relevance to regional and international peace and
security.

As a State in the Great Lakes region of Africa,
Tanzania knows only too well how humanitarian crises
triggered by conflicts in other countries can affect a
country's development. The refugee burden we bear is
one whose solution lies only in peace and security in
the region. That pursuit is at the heart of the Dar es
Salaam Declaration of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, which focuses on peace and
security, democracy and good governance, economic
development and regional integration, and social and
economic issues. Progress and success on all those
fronts will require not only the resolve of our own
countries, but also the support of the international
community and of the Security Council in the context
of its mandate in collaboration with regional
organizations. However, regional capacities will need
to be evaluated and, where necessary, bolstered.

The immediate post-conflict phase and the
transition from peacekeeping and relief to development
can have destabilizing tendencies if they are not
properly addressed and managed. The return and
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons, the disarmament and demobilization of
combatants and the issues of transitional justice,
governance, reconciliation and development should be
comprehensively integrated into the transition.

The peacebuilding commission will have to deal
precisely with those issues, which have not been
addressed holistically before. The Security Council has
a crucial role to play, in collaboration with other organs
of the United Nations, such as the Economic and Social
Council, funds and programmes, including the
humanitarian agencies of the United Nations and the
international community. During that period,
humanitarian needs may actually be larger while food
production and coping mechanisms are rebuilt and
social services restored as part of the recovery effort.

There has to be a seamless transfer of
responsibilities from the Security Council to other
actors and stakeholders in shoring up a country
emerging from conflict into sustainable peace and
development. We need to ensure that there is adequate
coordination within United Nations entities, as well as
with civil society, national Governments and regional
organizations, as well as bilateral and multilateral
agencies, in that partnership.

Last but not least, the protection of humanitarian
personnel is an enduring challenge. Those persons often
go into conflict situations way ahead of the peacekeepers.
Without adequate protection, humanitarian personnel
become victims of rebels and, in some cases, rebels
target them for food, funds and vehicles. Their security
should also be the concern of this Council.

