Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary General, Mr. Lounceny Fall, for his
briefing and, in particular, for his efforts at the helm of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA). France shares his overall analysis of the
situation in Central Africa and assures him of its full
support. Not only are the efforts of Mr. Fall very relevant
and reflect the value-added of a regional approach
to understanding the situations and the dynamics of
conflicts, which are often interlinked; they also allow
for a preventive approach. That is why France welcomes
the three-year extension of the UNOCA mandate, which
will enable the Regional Office to conduct its mission
of good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation,
as well as its support for regional initiatives towards
peace and security in Central Africa, in particular,
strengthening its partnership with the Economic
Community of Central African States.

In addition to the fight against Boko Haram, which,
regrettably, remains on the agenda, four situations
deserve special mention today. First, let us consider the
Central African Republic. We are concerned about the
security situation, which remains volatile, as seen by
the outbreak of violence in Alindao in mid-November.
That new wave of violence is a reminder that disarming
armed groups, restoring State authority throughout
the country and protecting civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, remain priority
issues in the Central African Republic. It is imperative
that the armed groups commit immediately without
preconditions to the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. We
also reiterate our full support for President Touadera
and recall our commitment to assisting the authorities
of the Central African Republic in finding a solution
to the crisis. To that end, it is necessary to continue to
promote the rapid and ambitious implementation of the
African Union (AU) road map.

The African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic is the only platform for
holding discussions with the armed groups that includes
the participation of neighbouring States from which
a comprehensive political agreement could result.
It therefore appears necessary that direct dialogue
between the Government of the Central African
Republic and the armed groups take place as soon as
possible. It will be incumbent on the African Union and
the future United Nations-AU Joint Special Envoy to
identify the modalities of the meeting that must take
place between the Government and the armed groups.

We would encourage the authorities of the Central
African Republic to take the necessary steps to achieve
a national consensus on the implementation of African
Initiative. The people of the Central African Republic
voiced their views on many issues during the Bangui
Forum on National Reconciliation. The fight against
impunity is a key component to the reconciliation
process. As Ms. Reena Ghelani just reminded us, the
humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic
must continue to galvanize us, as more than half of the
population is suffering from extreme poverty and in
need of humanitarian assistance.

Lastly, we are counting on the support of all
Security Council members for the renewal of the
mandate of United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
this afternoon.

The second situation involves Cameroon. We thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for his commitment to confronting the crisis in the
English-speaking areas and for the approach he has
taken vis-a-vis the Cameroonian authorities. France
is concerned about the deteriorating situation in the
North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon. The
toll in human lives is becoming increasingly high, and
the humanitarian situation is increasingly difficult
with - I believe 4 nearly 30,000 refugees in Nigeria
and more than 400,000 internally displaced persons.
In this regard, we are pursuing our own efforts aimed
at encouraging the Cameroonian Government to take
ambitious steps to achieve a lasting settlement to the
crisis through inclusive political dialogue, de-escalation
measures and broader decentralization measures with
respect for the unity and integrity of the country. It
is necessary that access to humanitarian assistance to
those in need be facilitated and that the perpetrators of
human rights violations be prosecuted.

The third situation involves the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. France is concerned about the
events that have punctuated the elections campaign
over the past several days. In particular, France
is dismayed by reports according to which live
ammunition was allegedly fired to disperse protesters,
and calls on the Congolese authorities to shed full light
on these incidents.

The general elections, scheduled to be held
23 December, represent a historic opportunity as the
first-ever democratic and peaceful transfer of power
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. France calls
on the Congolese authorities to create the necessary
conditions for the holding of credible elections in
a peaceful environment. We must stand ready to
support the electoral process in close cooperation with
all African partners in the event that the Congolese
authorities request us to do so.

Finally, turning to Burundi, we are concerned about
the recent developments in that country. In particular,
I note the temporary suspension of the activities of
foreign non-governmental organizations, the absence
of the Government at the fifth and last session of the
inter-Burundian dialogue in Arusha, and last week's
closure of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. In this regard, we
reiterate our support for the mediation led by the East
African Community. We hope that the forthcoming
summit of this organization, to be held on 27 December,
will lead to tangible solutions to facilitate the holding
of free, transparent and peaceful elections in 2020.

Preventing conflicts, avoiding the escalation of
existing crises and smoothing the way for a return
to lasting peace demand a cross-cutting and holistic
approach that considers all the dimensions and factors
of conflicts as well as their root causes, whether they be
inequality, the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
or climate and environmental conditions. They also
demand responses and commitments at the regional
level. In this regard, United Nations regional offices,
such as the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa, are a critical tool for strengthening the capacity
of the Organization to act in a more effective manner.
France will continue to support this constructive and
necessary evolution in the work of the Organization
in the service of international peace and security
in a spirit of coherence and greater partnership with
African stakeholders.

