Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting and to thank the briefers for
their presentations.

The current situation in the Sahel region has
been stable in general, but the spread of terrorism
and serious transnational organized crime has made
the security situation fragile. The region also faces
multiple challenges, including uneven development.
The international community should increase its
input and take an integrative approach to addressing
these challenges.

First, we should actively promote the settlement
of regional hotspot issues. Mitigating regional hotspot
issues and realizing peace and national reconciliation
constitute the basis for peace and stability in the
Sahel region. The international community should,
on the basis of the respect for the sovereignty of the
country concerned, support the Malian parties in the
comprehensive implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation with a view to improving the
security situation, advancing national reconciliation
and steadily promoting the peace process. The
international community should pay attention to the
spillover effect of external problems, such as the Libya
crisis, on the Sahel region and reduce the negative
impact of such factors.

Secondly, we should comprehensively advance
counter-terrorism cooperation in the region. The
international community should pay attention to the
damage caused by terrorist activities to the security and
stability of the region and increase counter-terrorism
efforts in the region. We should support the States of the
region in their counter-terrorism endeavour with a focus
on comprehensively strengthening capacity-building
in the security area in connection with their counter-
terrorism needs. The relevant United Nations counter-
terrorism organs should increase their coordination and
provide targeted training and technical assistance so as
to comprehensively increase the ability of the countries
of the region to counter terrorism and eliminate
terrorist threats.

Thirdly, we should focus on the problem of
underdevelopment in the region. The countries of
the region should take the opportunity offered by the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) to formulate development
strategies suited to their specific conditions. The
international community and international financial
institutions should increase their development
assistance and help the countries of the region enhance
their capacity for development. The relevant United
Nations organizations should fully leverage their
advantages and study in-depth the development needs
of the countries of the region. They should promote
the international community in providing targeted
assistance and speed up the economic and social
development of the countries of the region.

Fourthly, we should promote synergy in addressing
the questions facing the Sahel region. Regional
organizations, such as the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Group
of Five Sahel, are familiar with the conditions of the
countries of the region and enjoy a unique advantage in
efforts to address these problems. The United Nations
should strengthen coordination with these organizations
and organically integrate national strategies, regional
strategies and the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel to coordinate resources and form synergies
in coordinating with the relevant organs in the West
African region. The United Nations should listen to and
heed the views of regional States and ensure a rational
allocation of resources so that the Organization can
more effectively respond to the challenges.

China and Africa belong to a community of
common destiny and interest. Strengthening unity
and cooperation with African countries has always
been an important cornerstone of our foreign policy.
In September last year, the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation held a summit in Johannesburg and decided
to elevate its relationship to that of a partnership of
strategic cooperation. We are willing to work with
African countries to implement the outcome of the
Johannesburg Summit and take practical actions to
benefit African countries, including the Sahel countries,
with a View to realizing peace, stability and prosperity
on and the development of the African continent.

