Mr. Toure: I am Toure Mahamane,
Commissioner in charge of political affairs at the
Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS).

It is a singular honour, and indeed a privilege, for
the ECOWAS Commission to be recognized on behalf
of the region and given the floor to present the efforts
made by the region in addressing the crippling disease
of piracy, which is taking root in our region, as well as
its related maritime security risk within our shores and
beyond. His Excellency Mr. James Victor Gbeho,
President of the ECOWAS Commission, has therefore
asked me to convey his sense of gratitude for this
opportunity. He has also asked me to congratulate you,
Madame President, and Nigeria on your accession to
the presidency of the Security Council and on the
laudable agenda initiative you have put forward to
11-55462
bring to the forefront some of the key regional issues
and challenges we face.

Allow me to report on some key initiatives
undertaken by our Community to address the issue.
The key recommendation of the 29th meeting of the
ECOWAS Committee of Chiefs of Defence Staff, held
on 4 and 5 October at the headquarters of the
ECOWAS Commission in Abuja, had at its core the
issue of the threats of piracy and other maritime
security issues in our coastal areas and the way and
means to tackle them. The 15 Chiefs of Defence Staff
members and heads of navies gathered for the occasion
noted that, on the shores of the Gulf of Guinea, piracy
and other criminal acts were becoming prevalent,
threatening local and international movements of ships
and their cargo transiting Benin, Ghana, Togo, Nigeria
and, lately, Guinea. This constitutes a worrisome, new
and more complex development, compared to last
year's attacks from the sea in Benin, Togo and Ghana.
This developing insecurity impedes the efforts being
made by member States and the integration process of
our region.

Following the presentation made on West African
maritime security and safety by experts of the navy of
Nigeria, and inputs from all other members of the
region's armed forces and heads of navies, the
aforementioned meeting decided to expand its
sub-committee on maritime security to include Benin,
Cape Verde, Cote d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea-Bissau, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone and
Togo, as well as three experts on legal affairs related to
maritime security.

The expanded sub-committee was tasked with
studying the existing documents, including that which
was developed and presented to the Chiefs of Defence
Staff in Bamako in 2010, and all other documents
drafted by the ECOWAS Security Division, and with
looking further into other maritime security areas that
had not yet been considered in order to make informed
and pragmatic recommendations to the Chiefs of
Defence Staff Committee within the next two months.

They had decided to look into the matter at the
27th meeting held on 14 and 15 April 2010 in Cotonou,
Benin, where it was agreed that the delegations of
Nigeria, Cape Verde and Ghana would conduct a
survey of maritime security threats and present their
findings, with specific recommendations to its next
3
meeting in Bamako. Thus, the issue had already been
addressed in April 2010.

The aforementioned presentation was made at the
28th meeting of the Committee held in Bamako on 18
and 19 January. The Commission was tasked with
developing a regional maritime governance concept
that would be broken down into implementation
strategies, with a subsequent plan of action. The task
was immediately undertaken, and the ECOWAS
Commission went to work with one of its strategic
think-tank partners, which is also working on the
African Union continental maritime security
framework. In so doing, ECOWAS intended to be in
line with African Union strategic directives on the
matter.

A draft ECOWAS integrated maritime strategy,
with an ECOWAS integrated maritime strategic plan,
was subsequently produced. The two drafts are actually
being presented to the sub-committee to which I just
referred and will be examined by a meeting of
ECOWAS experts on maritime security before being
presented, in accordance with our rules of procedure,
to the ministers of the ECOWAS Mediation and
Security Council, composed of ministers of defence,
foreign affairs and internal security. Once they have
adopted the documents, they will present them to the
Heads of State for adoption.

As I stated earlier, within the framework of the
implementation of the African Union integrated
maritime security framework, with the support of the
Africa Center for Strategic Studies in Washington,
DC, the United States Government is facilitating a
process of formalizing the existing partnership between
the two regional economic communities - ECOWAS
and the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS). An initial brainstorming session was
organized in Stuttgart, Germany, from 11 to 16 June,
closely followed by a wider formal meeting in
Garmisch, Germany, from 19 to 22 July. Besides the
African Union, ECCAS, ECOWAS, the Maritime
Organization of West and Central Africa and the Gulf
of Guinea Commission, the Garmisch meeting was
attended by representatives of Benin, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea, Gabon, the Gambia,
Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Senegal and
Togo.

The Garmisch meeting established three working
groups that produced a draft memorandum of

understanding between ECCAS and ECOWAS on
cooperation to better control and safeguard the
maritime coasts of West and Central Africa, and a draft
multilateral agreement on cooperation to fight illicit
transnational activities within the maritime waters of
Central and West Africa. That agreement is intended to
formalize common approaches and share best practices
among security services and agencies in charge of the
daily fight against the concerned activities in the two
regions. The third document adopted was an
operational framework plan of action for joint
activities among States members of the two regions.

Copies of these drafts have been provided to all
participants to review, fine-tune and improve and to
make them widely discussed nationally among all
concerned stakeholders - including navies, civilian
maritime stakeholders, customs, immigration services,
police, gendarmerie, coastguards and so on - for their
input and ownership. A second plenary meeting is
slated for early January to finalize these drafts, which
will be submitted to the two decision-making organs of
ECCAS and ECOWAS as soon as possible, followed
by a joint summit of the Heads of State and
Government of the two organizations.

Our group of friends, including the United
Kingdom, the United States and other partners, are
contributing to build the internal capacity of the
ECOWAS Commission to enable it to coordinate and
add value to initiatives undertaken by member States.
We are trying to avoid duplication and to make sure
that we do not step on the toes of member States as we
add value to their processes. The group of friends, for
instance, is establishing a special maritime fund soon
to be launched in the Republic of Benin, and the
United States is ready to bring operational capacity in
the form of shared accord programmes and
information-sharing, while the United Kingdom is
financing a detachment of naval officers to the
ECOWAS standby force.

Meanwhile, the clock is still ticking and there is a
need for immediate action to deter the ongoing attacks.
Bilateral initiatives between Nigeria and Benin have
already been presented by the Secretary-General. These
have reduced the scourge of the attacks in our maritime
waters. However, this is not enough; it needs to be
extended to all countries concerned and all partners.
We need more; we need international attention,
recognition and support that take into account the fact
that we all - landlocked countries, partners and
regional coastal members - have interests at stake.

ECOWAS praises the initiative taken by the
Ambassadors of the Gulf of Guinea to draw
international attention and support to the pleas of our
region. Just as the Gulf of Aden has received
international support, we need a political umbrella
resolution of the United Nations to support our efforts.
ECOWAS is wholeheartedly supporting this call, and is
therefore actively engaged in this fight. We will do our
share. ECOWAS calls on the Security Council to
consider and adopt a resolution with regard to piracy
and other related maritime criminal acts. ECOWAS
suggests that, although the emphasis and focus should
be on the fight against piracy, the following concerns
be taken into account.

First, the littoral concerns should be extended
beyond those of the Gulf of Guinea and cover all
ECCAS and ECOWAS member States, including the
hinterland countries with no access to the sea, such as
Burkina Faso and Mali. The coasts of Cape Verde and
Senegal should be covered as well.

Secondly, all other criminal acts need to be
included: transnational organized criminality, all types
of trafficking - in drugs, in human beings - illegal
migration, terrorist acts, illegal fishing and bunkering,
and toxic waste dumping, to cite just a few.

I rest my case.

