Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): The challenge of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants into civilian life is one with which the
Government of the Republic of Namibia continues to
grapple nine years after independence. We can therefore
attest that a smooth and early transition to post-conflict
peace-building is imperative for any country emerging from
conflict. This is a truism, for the disarming and
demobilization of ex-combatants does not by itself
culminate in peace. For example, in our situation,
generations were born in exile and thus had no attachment
to the local lifestyle. For others, the long years of absence
had placed them out of tune with the Namibian mode of
life. Even more serious, most of the ex-combatants had no
skills and thus could not be easily absorb into any possible
employment. Many were too old to go to regular schools
and too young to be persuaded into retirement. Hence, the
Namibian Government decided to create a development
brigade. In a nutshell, this is a mechanism to resettle,
rehabilitate and reintegrate ex-combatants and their families.
With the assistance of our private sector, the Government
is in the process of addressing the problem, although many
constraints remain.

Let me stress that ex-combatants are former enemies
who still want to avenge past activities. In addition, while
fighting for their cause, former fighters had high hopes that
were never wholly realized, resulting in frustrations and
sensitivities. Furthermore, due to the nature of the
decentralized logistics of irregular forces, weapon caches
will be littered all over the country and ex-combatants will
have recourse to these weapons if disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes are not
properly implemented, coordinated and pursued with
determination.

It is in this context that my delegation underscores
your initiative, Sir, to hold a much-needed debate on one of
the most salient issues of post-conflict peace-building.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are all but
stages in the process of post-conflict peace-building. If and
when one stage is ignored, the process is left incomplete
and the threat of recurrence of armed conflict is a reality.
While conflict is exacerbated by the proliferation of arms,
the causes are mostly economic and social in nature.
Therefore, to many, armament and mobilization become a
source of income, if not survival. It is no coincidence that
it is most often the hungry, the illiterate and the destitute
who become the easy prays of warlords in various conflicts
situations.

Many parts of Africa today are plagued by hunger
and malnutrition, yet the proliferation of arms presents a
stark contrast. In the draft presidential statement which
we shall adopt later today, it is rightly stated that

"Disarmament and demobilization must take place in
a secure and safe environment, which will give ex-
combatants the confidence to lay down their arms".

Indeed, we have to ask ourselves what a secure and
safe environment entails, because, more often than not, it
is the absence of such an environment which creates
conflict in the first place. Furthermore, and equally
important, a combatant's confidence evolves around his
or her weapons. When he or she is disarmed and
demobilized, a state of fear, panic and insecurity creeps
in. It is this uncertainty that makes disarmament and
demobilization painful, albeit necessary.

In fact, the Secretary-General, in his report on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, specifically in post-
conflict peace-building, summed it up very well when he
said:

"Societies that have emerged from conflict have
special needs. To avoid a return to conflict while
laying a solid foundation for development, emphasis
must be placed on critical priorities such as
encouraging reconciliation and demonstrating respect
for human rights; fostering political inclusiveness
and promoting national unity; ensuring the safe,
smooth and early repatriation and resettlement of
refugees and displaced persons; reintegrating ex-
combatants and others into productive society;
curtailing the availability of small arms; and
mobilizing the domestic and international resources
for reconstruction and economic recovery. Every
priority is linked to every other, and success will
require a concerted and coordinated effort on all
fronts."[A/52/87l, para. 66]

This is very important because, when all members of
a society belong, they can all contribute to peace, stability
and sustainable development to the benefit of all. The
employment of ex-combatants should therefore be
addressed in isolation from general employment, as this
state of unemployment is fraught with devastating
consequences for any country.

Reintegration of ex-combatants cannot be left to the
countries involved alone. Not only is it financially

 

challenging; it has other dimensions which also present
constraints. Thus, the international community must
seriously assist countries involved in post-conflict peace-
building. Indeed, today we are managing the reintegration
of our ex-combatants. This would not have been possible
without the generous support and assistance of many
countries, especially Malaysia. We are thus pleased, Mr.
President, that you have taken the initiative to convene this
important meeting addressing an area in which your
Government has been seriously involved, especially in my
country.

Giving employment to ex-combatants is a priority if
post-conflict stability is to be achieved. The United Nations
office for post-conflict peace-building needs to help
fledgling democracies by means of a thorough reintegration
of ex-combatants. Furthermore, efforts must be made to
address problems, which may result in the re-emergence of
conflicts. Premature withdrawal of a peace-keeping force is
dangerous because belligerents rearm if presented with a
vacuum. An inadequate response by the Security Council
and the international community in general can also prolong
a conflict, which in turn can render post-conflict peace-
building very difficult. Sierra Leone and Angola are strong
cases in point. My delegation hails the signing of the peace
agreement for Sierra Leone. It is our sincere hope that this
agreement will usher in lasting peace for Sierra Leone.
However, the difficult task lies ahead. Indeed, the process
of national reconciliation may prove hard, but we all hope
that the people of Sierra Leone, who have endured the most
abhorrent human rights abuses, will rise to the challenge in
order to make peace in Sierra Leone a reality.

My delegation concurs with the proposed practical
measures to promote the success of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in a
peacekeeping environment as outlined in the draft
presidential statement. We also support the proposal for a
report by the Secretary-General to the Security Council on
this very important issue. It is our strong view that such a
report must pay special attention to women and children,
among others. Finally, we wish to reiterate that post-
conflict peace-building is a multi-dimensional problem
which the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, has to address in a comprehensive and impartial
manner if we are to build peace in any post-conflict
situation.

