Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin for his
briefing. I would also like to welcome Deputy Prime
Minister Dacic' and Ambassador Citaku to the Security
Council and thank both of them for their constructive
statements this morning.

It has been three months since the Council last met
to discuss the situation in Kosovo. As the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/911) makes clear, it is been
a comparatively quiet period, one that does not warrant
the Council's attention so soon after our last meeting on
the subject (see S/PV.8025).

Since we last met, we have seen the welcome
formation of a new Government and a National
Assembly. As the United Kingdom's Minister of State
for Europe, Sir Alan Duncan, made clear on his visit
to Pristina the last week, the United Kingdom remains
fully committed to working with Kosovo on a broad
range of issues, including strengthening the rule of
law, addressing weaknesses in the justice system
and fighting organized crime. We also welcome the
Government's commitments to addressing profoundly
complicated legacy issues, including missing persons
and sexual violence. Kosovo will have the United
Kingdom's support in these efforts. We recognize that
for Kosovo to look to the future, it must first come to
terms with the past.

Over the past quarter, we have also seen broadly
free and fair municipal elections across the vast
majority of Kosovo, which is a welcome step following
the free and fair elections in June. We were, however,
concerned that the coordinated passive intimidation
within Kosovo Serb majority areas directed against
candidates competing against the Srpska list. This
behaviour has no place in Kosovo or indeed any other
country striving to join the European Union (EU).

This goal of membership in the EU is shared by
both Serbia and Kosovo, and I would like to emphasize
the need for normalization of relations between
these two countries to help reach this goal. The EU-
sponsored dialogue is an essential part of these efforts.
Both parties have an equally important role to play in
making the dialogue work, and I urge both parties in
the Chamber today to redouble our efforts to implement
dialogue agreements so as to reach their shared goal.
Because it is Brussels and not the Security Council
that is the forum of the future for Kosovo and Serbia,
constructive exchanges in Brussels, such as those
between Presidents Vucie and Thaci, should echo
louder than exchanges in this Chamber.

We of course welcome the years of service that
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) has provided in Kosovo, and we are
grateful to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for all of his efforts. But just as Kosovo must
come to terms with the past, so must UNMIK. The
United Nations needs to recognize that Kosovo today
is not the same country as it was when UNMIK first
arrived. Put simply, UNMIK's operating environment
has changed and on current trend, will continue to
keep changing for the better. We therefore need to see
a full and effective transition from UNMIK to Kosovar
institutions or other international organizations that
have taken over historical UNMIK roles, including on
missing persons. This is a time for UNMIK to be doing
less, not more.

To aid this effort, we want to see a leaner, more
efficient UNMIK, one with a stronger focus on
established and agreed priorities. This is a call we
have made numerous times alongside others in this
Chamber, and we are disappointed not to see options
for reconfiguring UNMIK presented in the latest report
of the Secretary General.

I would like to close by reiterating the United
Kingdom's long-standing position that is past time
for the Security Council to meet less frequently on
this issue. The number of issues on our agenda only
continues to grow. We must focus our time and attention
on genuine threats to international peace and security.
All of us in this Chamber should be thankful that the
situation in Kosovo no longer falls into this category.
