The President: The Security Council will now

begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to

document 8/2013/354, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Sahel.

Following consultations among Council members,

I have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council reaffirms its concern
about the alarming situation in the Sahel region,
and its commitment to address the complex
security and political challenges in this region
that are interrelated with humanitarian and
developmental issues as well as adverse effects
of climate and ecological changes. The Security
Council welcomes, in this context, the deployment
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
following the transfer of authority from the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali
to MINUSMA on 1 July 2013.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of countries of the
Sahel region.

"The Security Council continues to be gravely
concerned about the activities in the Sahel region
of terrorist organizations, including Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb and the Movement for
Unity and Jihad in West Africa, and reiterates
its strong condemnation of the recent terrorist
attacks perpetrated in the region. The Security
Council considers sanctions an important tool
in countering terrorism, and underlines the
importance of prompt and effective implementation
of its relevant resolutions, in particular Security
Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
as key instruments in the fight against terrorism.
The Security Council also expresses its continued

concern over the serious threats to peace and
security posed by armed conflict, proliferation of
arms, transnational organized crime, including
illicit activities such as drug trafficking, in the
Sahel region and its increasing links, in some
cases, with terrorism. In this regard, the Security
Council reiterates its call for a full implementation
of its resolution 2017 (2011).

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the abuses of human rights and violence against
civilians, notably women and children, committed
in the region by terrorist and other extremist groups.

"The Security Council recognizes that the
strengthening of State institutions, inclusive
economic and social development, respect for
human rights and the rule of law are necessary
to ensure long-term security, development and
stability in the Sahel region.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of a coherent, comprehensive and
coordinated approach encompassing governance,
security, humanitarian, human rights and
developmental aspects to resolve the threats to
peace and security across the Sahel region, as well
as to address the root causes of these challenges,
and welcomes in this regard the development of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
as requested by its resolution 2056 (2012), and the
three strategic goals defining the strategy.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for the
Sahel in the development of the United Nations
strategy and in drawing attention to the situation in
the Sahel region, as well as in mobilizing resources
and support for the Sahel region's immediate
and long-term needs. The Security Council also
welcomes the Special Envoy's proposal to partner
with relevant international and regional financial
institutions to promote innovative approaches and
initiatives for the Sahel region, and in this regard
encourages the Special Envoy to foster more
coherent and coordinated United Nations support
for the Sahel region. The Security Council also
encourages the Special Envoy to pursue his efforts
and good offices in order to enhance transregional
and interregional cooperation and international
assistance toward the Sahel region.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
efforts undertaken by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa and the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA)
in support of States of the Sahel region.
"The Security Council stresses the importance
of a coordinated approach by all concerned United
Nations entities involved in the implementation
of the United Nations strategy for enhanced
cooperation with a view to maximizing synergies.
The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to ensure effective implementation of the
United Nations strategy through close collaboration
between the Office of the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy for the Sahel region, UNOWA and
relevant United Nations entities working in the
Sahel region, including the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime. The Security Council further
requests UNOWA to establish an effective and
detailed coordination mechanism to prioritize
activities and to ensure coordinated implementation
by the United Nations system of the United Nations
strategy.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
of national and regional ownership of the United
Nations strategy and recognizes the importance
for the United Nations strategy to be implemented
in close consultation with States of the Sahel,
West Africa and the Maghreb, as well as with the
African Union (AU), the Economic Connnunity of
West African States, the West African Economic
and Monetary Union, the Arab Maghreb Union,
the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States, the
European Union, regional financial institutions,
including the African Development Bank and the
Islamic Development Bank, and other bilateral
donors and partners. The Security Council stresses
further the importance of avoiding duplication of
efforts and the need for strengthening collective
engagement across the Sahel region.

"The Security Council calls on Sahel, West
African andMaghreb States to enhance interregional
cooperation and coordination in order to develop
inclusive and effective strategies to combat in a
comprehensive and integrated manner the activities
of terrorist groups, to prevent the proliferation of
all arms and to curb transnational organized crime,
including illicit activities such as drug trafficking.
The Security Council encourages, in this regard,
the holding of follow-up activities building on
the conclusions of the United Nations Conference
on border-control cooperation in the Sahel and
the Maghreb organized in Rabat. The Security
Council emphasizes the importance of regional
and international coordination in addressing the
threat of terrorism in the Sahel region, including
information sharing and close cooperation between
the United Nations, the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum, the AU and other relevant organizations
and initiatives.

"The Security Council commends the efforts
undertaken by Sahel States and relevant regional
organizations in addressing the humanitarian
challenges in the region, as well as in strengthening
resilience. The Security Council also commends the
support provided by countries in the region and by
other donors and calls for their continued assistance
to Sahel States to this end. The Security Council
applauds the efforts of the Regional Humanitarian
Coordinator for the Sahel, with the support of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, other humanitarian actors and agencies,
to draw attention to the scale of the challenges
facing the Sahel region, provide humanitarian
assistance to the affected populations, and build
and strengthen resilience at the local, national, and
regional levels with the aim of reducing the impact
of disasters.

"The Security Council welcomes the intention
of the Secretary-General to hold a high-level
meeting on the Sahel on the margins of the sixty-
eighth session of the General Assembly of the
United Nations. The Security Council welcomes
the intention of the Secretary-General to visit the
Sahel region later this year with the President of the
World Bank Group, and looks forward to a briefing
to the Security Council following this visit.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to keep it informed of the progress towards
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel no later than 31 December
2013, and to present a written report no later than
30 June 2014."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l3/10.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.15 pm.
