First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on the organization of this debate on a noble theme - peace operations and human rights. Your statement also demonstrates your country's unwavering commitment to the protection of human rights in peace operations. I also take this opportunity to thank Ms. Bachelet for her comprehensive briefing and her leadership as the head of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. In that regard, I would like to pay special tribute to the work carried out by her Office, particularly in the field. I would also like to thank Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and Mr. Dismas Kitenge Senga, President of the non-governmental organization Groupe LOTUS, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for their particularly relevant interventions. Peace operations play a crucial role in promoting international peace and security. In that context, allow me to share with the following five points. Peace operations play an important role in building the capacities of host States, because in the end, just like the protection of civilians, respect for human rights is primarily the responsibility of national authorities. Strengthening national mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human rights is therefore an important investment in ensuring long-term respect for those rights beyond the presence of peace operations, whose mandate will come to an end. Civil society engagement remains crucial for the respect of human rights, particularly for the most vulnerable segments of the population, especially women and children, as confirmed by the testimony of Mr. Kitenge. Capacity-building is key to enabling missions to better fulfil their mandate and contribute to the promotion and protection of human rights. Morocco welcomes the efforts made by the United Nations to strengthen support for vulnerable populations - for example, through the use of mixed units and the creation of specific mission posts, such as gender advisers and child protection advisers. It is indeed important that peace operations be able to deploy adequate means to ensure specific protection for women and children, who are often the first victims of serious human rights violations. Morocco, a fervent defender of human rights, spares no effort to ensure that the troops it deploys in peacekeeping operations are trained to carry out their mandate in the best possible conditions, including in the area of human rights. To that end, Moroccan soldiers receive specific training in international humanitarian law and international human rights law, in particular the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of 1976 and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment of 1987, as part of their in-service training. The Royal Moroccan Armed Forces also conduct strict profile checks on all soldiers before they are selected for deployment. Finally, predeployment training based on United Nations manuals is provided to all personnel. Morocco was one of the first troop-contributing countries to systematically integrate national investigators into its contingents. That integration was part of the country's measures to effectively combat sexual exploitation and abuse and has since been considered a good practice, recommended by the Secretariat to all troop- contributing countries. In conclusion, I would like to stress the imperative of promoting and strengthening national human rights mechanisms, in particular national human rights institutions. The latter, when they are credible and independent and comply with the Paris Principles, are the most appropriate means to promote and protect human rights. They are in a position to contribute to national efforts to ensure and defend those rights. In addition, the United Nations should make use of the human rights mechanisms at its disposal, such as the Universal Periodic Review and the special procedures of the Human Rights Council, as well as the human rights treaty- monitoring bodies, which play a significant role in strengthening national human rights efforts.
