Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia
welcomes this debate on preventive diplomacy with a
focus on Africa. It seems particularly appropriate,
Madam President, that you have gathered us here today
in a week in which we gathered, just two floors above,
to commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of the
Srebrenica genocide, which was an historic and
conspicuous failure of preventive diplomacy.

There is always the risk that, with the daily work
of this Council necessarily focused on reacting to
unfolding events and conflicts and on mandating
peacekeeping missions to respond to such conflicts, we
may lose sight of the key founding principle of this
Organization, namely, to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war.

Today's debate is a useful reminder of the
importance of preventive action. It is perhaps a little
cliche'd, but prevention is better than cure, and we
should do all the more collectively to take measures to
prevent conflict, rather than wait for the need to
mobilize a collective response to a conflict. The
Council has an important role to play in this endeavour.

The Council has wide powers of investigation
and recommendation in regard to the pacific settlement
of disputes at its direct disposal under Chapter VI,
including the ability to engage itself in the process of
dispute resolution and to investigate situations and
make appropriate recommendations. Arguably, these
tools are not used often enough.

The Council has an important role to play in
providing political support to the good offices role of
the Secretary-General. The Council's statements are
not just words, but rather a powerful signal of the will
of the international community.

We have been pleased to be able to support the
efforts to strengthen the Secretariat's ability to service
the Secretary-General's good offices role through the
provision of financial support to the Department of
Political Affairs (DPA). We have also been pleased to
support the crisis prevention work of the United
Nations Development Programme, recognizing that the
challenge of conflict prevention requires a collective
effort of multiple agencies. It remains a concern,
however, that this work falls to be funded under
voluntary contributions, when it is central to the
mandate of the United Nations. We should redouble
our efforts to ensure that the DPA's strength and ability
to respond rapidly in conflict prevention situations is
adequate.

The Council has a further role to play in
supporting the preventive diplomacy efforts of regional
organizations, as outlined by the representative of the
Gambia just a few moments ago. Regional
organizations have an important role in the prevention
of conflicts, just as much as in responding to them.
Systems for early conflict resolution and better early
warning mechanisms on emerging crises can often be
more alert and more robust at the regional level. A
strong organic relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations, at both the regional level
and here in New York, must be an essential part of our
regional and global approach to conflict prevention.

The African Union (AU) is to be commended for
its tireless efforts to establish its own peace and
security framework, with preventive diplomacy at its
core. Subregional organizations in Africa have similar,
mutually supportive structures. Australia supports, in
its own modest way, the ongoing efforts of the United
Nations and the AU to develop the AU conflict
prevention and peacekeeping capacity at both the
strategic and operational levels, and we welcome the
recent decision to create a United Nations Office to the
AU in Addis Ababa. We have been pleased to
contribute to United Nations initiatives aimed at
strengthening the relationship between the AU and the
United Nations and at developing more effective
conflict-prevention mechanisms in Africa at both the
regional and the subregional levels. The establishment
of the United Nations Office in Addis Ababa should
create greater synergies and efficiencies in the United
Nations-AU relationship, including in relation to
conflict prevention activities.

We witnessed the effective interplay of the
subregional, regional and global systems in response to
the events that unfolded in Guinea last September. The
Economic Community of West African States, the AU,
the Council and the United Nations more broadly
responded in unison to the unfolding events in Guinea
in a manner that effectively diffused tensions and
restored that country back to the path of democracy.
This was a telling illustration of how the system can
work to effectively prevent the escalation of tensions.

Central to an effective system of conflict
prevention is awareness of the situation, the ability to
analyse that information and the political will to take
action when needed. DPA plays an important role in
collating and analysing the necessary information. In
extreme situations, the proposed joint office of the
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and for
the Responsibility to Protect, the creation of which we
support, should serve to alert the United Nations
system to emerging mass atrocity situations. It then
becomes a question of political will.

The Council needs to open itself up more to
receiving briefings from DPA and other parts of the
Secretariat on unfolding situations, and the broader
membership needs to support such Council
engagement. Despite some improvements and the use
of some innovative meeting formats, too often the
Council still appears deaf to calls to be briefed on
unfolding situations. If the Council is overly
conservative in its approach to what is or is not a threat
to international peace and security, it will inevitably
relegate itself to the role of responding to conflict,
rather than seeking to prevent it. This will mean that
the Council will have failed the test set for it and for all
of us in the opening paragraph of the United Nations
Charter.

