Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union and would
like to make a few remarks in its national capacity.

First of all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2012/462), Mr. Ladsous and Mr. Fedotov
for their briefings, and Special Representative Jan
Kubis and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) team for their professional and
dedicated work. The efforts of the United Nations in
coordinating and ensuring international support for
Afghanistan in the years to come will be of particular
importance.

Latvia reaffirms its long-term commitment to
supporting Afghanistan in its efforts to undertake the
remaining transition challenges entailing the assumption
of leadership responsibility by the Afghan Government.
Those challenges will continue to require a coordinated
approach between the international community and the
Afghan Government. Moreover, there should also be a
coordinated approach among the various international
players, whose efforts should be complementary. In that
regard, the conferences in Bonn and Kabul, the Chicago
Summit and the upcoming conference in Tokyo, as
well as regional meetings at different levels, are of
particular importance. In order to ensure greater United
Nations coherence in Afghanistan, Latvia welcomes
the first meeting, held in May, between the Afghan
Government and all 27 United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, and expresses its hope that this forum
for ongoing dialogue will be maintained.

Latvia believes that efficient regional cooperation
is an important factor in achieving the long-term
political and economic stability of Afghanistan.
Confidence-building between Afghanistan and all of
its direct and more distant neighbours is necessary for
the overall stability and development of the region and
should be supported by the international community. In
particular, we consider that the Central Asian countries
have an important role in contributing to the stability
and security of Afghanistan and the whole region, and
that they should be closely involved in the efforts of the
international community in that respect.

Transnational threats such as terrorism and drug
trafficking endanger Afghanistan's security and the
growth of a legitimate economy, as well as regional
and international peace and security. Border security
and drug-trafficking issues require the development
of cooperation between neighbouring countries,
and Latvia encourages the countries of the region to
enhance cooperation in that regard. For its part, Latvia
is providing a continuous financial contribution to the
NATO-Russia project, implemented in cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), to train counter-narcotics personnel in
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Central Asia. We also
welcome the launch of the UNODC Afghanistan
country programme for 2012-2014 in May of this year.

Latvia believes that it is important to look at the
long-term economic perspective for Afghanistan,
including enhancing its development as a transportation
and transit hub in the region. In order to contribute
to common efforts in that regard, Latvia hosted an
international workshop this May, in Riga, on the
possible transformation of the northern distribution
network into a commercial transit route. The workshop
was attended by more than 150 high-level Government
officials, foreign-policy experts and representatives of
transport and logistics companies from 30 countries,
including from Central Asia. During the workshop,
Latvia also pledged its support for training Afghan
rail and civil aviation experts, an incentive that was
welcomed by the delegation of Afghanistan.

That incentive supplements Latvia's continuous
involvement in civil projects in Afghanistan, including
those related to the promotion of the rights, participation
and economic empowerment of women. Women play
a vital role in the peace process, as recognized in
resolution 1325 (2000), and they should also be involved
in the development and implementation of post-conflict
strategies, in order to ensure that their interests are
taken into account.

Let me once again reiterate Latvia's commitment to
remaining an active and reliable partner in the efforts
of the international community towards a stable, secure
and prosperous Afghanistan in a stable and prosperous
region.

