Mr. Qin Huasun (China)(spoke in Chinese):
According to the stipulations of the United Nations Charter,
the Security Council shoulders the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security. It is the
major institution that the international community relies on
for settling conflicts and crises and realizing peace. Now
with the prevention of armed conflict becoming an
important means of settling disputes peacefully, it is only
natural that the Council should bear major responsibilities
in this area. Besides, there seems to be a tendency in the
work of the Council nowadays to put much emphasis on
intervention, while neglecting effective prevention.

All too often there is heated debate on intervention,
indeed, even invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter,
while neither the issue of prevention nor serious study into
the root cause of conflicts is given adequate attention. The
Chinese delegation has always believed that timely and
effective preventive measures would get twice the result
with half the effort, in that these measures not only help
avoid loss of life or property but also save resources. We
therefore appreciate that the President has chosen to have
this open debate, which is both very timely and necessary.

There are various kinds of measures that can be taken
to prevent armed conflicts, but there is one general
principle by which all of them must abide - that is,
actions must be taken in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter. If we look back
at the history of United Nations involvement in settling
regional conflicts, we can very easily see that success has
always been the natural result of adherence to the Charter,
while contravention of Charter principles has only led to
failure and setback.

Such is the case in settling regional conflicts, and it
is also true in respect to prevention of armed conflict.
From the perspective of the ultimate goal of preventive
diplomacy, all Council actions should be aimed at
resolving conflict peacefully, instead of exacerbating a
conflict or touching off new ones.

In this connection, we are pleased to see that the
Council has taken a series of positive measures, including
sending fact-finding missions to conflict regions, holding
more open debates on specific issues and continuing to
put Article 99 of the Charter into practice by encouraging
the Secretary-General to play his due role. All these
commendable practices have, in one way or another,
enriched the Council's experience in handling issues
bearing on international peace and security and should be
affirmed. Therefore, we thank the Secretary-General for
coming here to join in our discussion.

The Chinese delegation maintains that all preventive
measures should be taken only under the prerequisite of
respect for the political independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all countries and the will of the
Government and people of the country concerned. The
principle of non-interference in internal affairs is the
primary principle guiding United Nations actions in
conflict prevention. Preventive measures can be taken
only upon the request or with the consent and cooperation
of the country concerned. It is essential to obtain prior
consent of the country or parties concerned on issues
involving that country's sovereignty, such as setting up
early warning systems or sending fact-finding missions
and other special missions. Before any major decisions
are to be made, the Security Council must listen to the
views of all sides in a neutral and fair manner.

Secretary-General Annan pointed out in his report on
the work of the Organization submitted to the current
session of the General Assembly that if the primacy of
the Security Council with respect to the maintenance of
international peace and security is rejected, then the very
foundations of international law as represented by the
Charter will be brought into question. No other
universally accepted legal basis for constraining wanton
acts of violence exists. It is also emphasized in the report
that conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacemaking
must not become an area of competition between the
United Nations and regional organizations. The Chinese
delegation fully agrees with the Secretary-General on
these points. We believe that any attempt to replace the
Council in its leading role in conflict prevention is
tantamount to replacing the Council in its primary role in

 

maintaining peace and security. Such an attempt would not
only weaken the authority of the Council but also would
end up severely damaging the effectiveness of conflict
prevention measures, or might even lead to the outbreak or
escalation of conflicts.

Of course, the Council also has its limits; it is not a
panacea. As is known to all, the root cause of conflicts is
the unreasonable old international political and economic
order. Changes to this situation could only be realized by
concerted efforts by the Council, the whole United Nations
system and the entire international community. The
international community should be soberly aware that,
although conflict prevention does not look as glorious as
conflict resolution, the input needed in prevention is much
lower than the losses caused by conflict, and the impact of
successful conflict prevention is even more immeasurable.

The United Nations should demonstrate strong political
commitment and allocate adequate resources to ensure
successful implementation of preventive measures. At the
same time, the Security Council should recognize the
important roles that can be played by the various regional
organizations and cooperate more closely with them. Such
cooperation, however, must be based on the adherence by
regional organizations to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter and the stipulations of its Chapter
VIII. Under the guidance and monitoring of the United
Nations, regional organizations will be able to win the
cooperation of the world body and even broader support
from the international community, thus playing a
constructive role in preventive diplomacy.

In the 10 years between 1989 and 1999 alone, there
have been more than 100 armed conflicts in the world, the
majority of which have occurred in developing countries.
This is no coincidence. For too long, the unreasonable old
international political and economic order has seriously
hindered the economic development and social progress of
developing countries, putting them in a disadvantageous
position in the new globalization wave. This is undoubtedly
the major cause of the turbulence and frequent conflicts in
some developing countries. Therefore, to prevent armed
conflicts from occurring in the first place, we must take a
long-term view and take meaningful steps to help
developing countries in their economic development.
Otherwise, preventive measures would only treat the
symptom rather than eradicate the root cause, and there
would merely be one passive reaction after another. Thus,
the promotion of economic growth of developing countries
is of important practical relevance in preventing armed
conflicts.

Last but not least, I wish to emphasize that peace in
various regions of the world is an indivisible and
interrelated whole. In deliberating the issue of prevention
of armed conflict, the Council should treat all regions of
the world equally, especially in the case of Africa. There
should be no preferential treatment for one or neglect of
another. The tendency in the United Nations of paying
only lip service to Africa should be rectified. The United
Nations must apply more human and financial resources
to preventive diplomacy in Africa.

