Ms. Dye (South Africa): I would like to convey
my sincere appreciation to you, Sir, for providing my
delegation with the opportunity to participate in this
important debate on the Secretary-General's report on
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). As a member of the core group on Timor-
Leste, South Africa remains very interested in
developments in that country. We thank the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste for her statement and
join other speakers in honouring the memory of the
Deputy Special Representative Kawakami. We convey
South Africa's support to his successor, Mr. Mochida.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
activities of UNMIT contained in document
S/2010/522.

South Africa also welcomes the Secretary-
General's Special Representative to Timor-Leste,
Ms. Ameerah Haq, and thanks her for her briefing in
the Council this morning. We are particularly pleased
with the Special Representative's continued interaction
with a broad range of stakeholders aimed at
encouraging a sustained consultative and democratic
decision-making process in Timor-Leste. It is our view
that political dialogue among all the parties is the only
way by which Timor-Leste can continue to strengthen
its political institutions and processes aimed at making
its statehood strong and sustainable.

Our delegation has noted all of the areas
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report, but it
also wishes to emphasize two priority areas, namely,
good governance and the transition from UNMIT's
mandate. South Africa is pleased to see that the overall
situation in the reporting period was calm and that it
provided an "enabling environment" for the Timorese
Government to give renewed attention to the
challenges facing that country. The Government of
Timor-Leste should redouble its efforts to strengthen
State institutions. We also encourage the Timorese
Government to strengthen its relationship with the
Timorese people, in order to respond effectively to the
needs of its population.

South Africa believes that there is a direct link
between development and security and that these are
mutually reinforcing. In that regard we welcome the
finalization of the Prime Minister's draft strategic
development plan for 2011-2030, which identifies
strategic areas of growth in the Timorese economy with
the goal of transforming the economy from low income
to upper middle income by 2030. Especially
encouraging are the intensive direct consultations the
Prime Minister undertook with the population of
Timor-Leste to ensure support for the project and that
the plan addresses the needs of the people of Timor-
Leste. For peace, security and development to be
sustainable, it is essential that local communities
participate in the country's development and benefit
directly. We encourage the Prime Minister to work
towards the earliest possible implementation of this
plan.

My delegation also welcomes the President's
continued dialogue initiative on the theme "Road to
peace and national unity" as an important step towards
the strengthening of peace and reconciliation efforts
throughout the country. This effort to promote dialogue
and mutual respect is effective and should be sustained.
As a result of that initiative, we have noted, for
example, that the main opposition party, the Frente
Revolucionaria do Timor-Leste Independente (Fretilin),
respects the current political institutions and processes
in spite of having denied the legitimacy of the current
Government. Stable political societies allow for the
existence of opposition groups and provide channels
for those groups to freely express their concerns. This
is an encouraging development, and we reiterate our
support for the further development of political
institutions in Timor-Leste. We call on all political
parties to continue to actively demonstrate their
commitment to the democratic processes in Timor-
Leste, especially during the forthcoming election
period. It is essential that the elections take place in an
atmosphere of mutual respect.

With regard to UNMIT's mandate, South Africa
welcomes the progress made in the resumption of
primary policing responsibilities by the National Police
Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL). It is encouraging that
only a small number policing districts remain to be
handed over. However, we have noted that almost all of
them are located in the Dili area and that significant
challenges remain with regard to certifying police
officers in those districts. We are also concerned about
the significant logistical challenges that face police
stations. It is essential for UNMIT to hand over
primary policing responsibilities, but it can only do so
if the process is credible and sustainable.
In addition, policing authorities in any country
must be viewed as legitimate in the eyes of their
communities. It is therefore essential to further
enhance effective disciplinary mechanisms, command
and control structures and weapons control
mechanisms. We reiterate our call for increased gender
sensitivity in the execution of police duties, as a high
percentage of crimes result from gender-based
violence.

We welcome the promulgation by President
Ramos-Horta of the national security legislative
package, which is specifically aimed at strengthening
the security and justice sectors. We have noted the
Secretary-General's call for this development to be
operationalized through subsidiary legislation that will,
among others, provide greater clarity on the delineation
between the responsibilities of the military and civilian
police.

With regard to UNMIT specifically, our
delegation supports the view that the reconfiguration of
UNMIT should be approached in a sensitive manner,
with specific focus on the need to provide sufficient
support to the PNTL in terms of training, capacity-
building, advising, mentoring and institutional
development. Moreover, every effort should be made to
complete the drawdown and handover by the deadlines
determined by Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1912 (2010) adopted in February. We
encourage UNMIT to continue its consultations with
the Government on the transition planning. In this
regard, we welcome the establishment of an oversight
mechanism between the Government and UNMIT.

In conclusion, South Africa welcomes the
positive developments in Timor-Leste during the
reporting period and stands ready to support the
processes ahead as a member of the core group. We
remain committed to the vision of a stable and strong
Timor-Leste that can use its peace dividend for the
prosperity of all of its people.

