Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The second anniversary of the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol was commemorated on 20 November
1996. This Protocol became the basis of the peace process
in Angola, opening up real prospects to the people of
Angola for the restoration of long-awaited peace, stability
and national reconciliation.

The Russian Federation, one of the troika of observers
to the Angolan settlement, is sincerely interested in the
successful development and speedy conclusion of the peace
process and is sparing no effort to achieve that goal. Ending
the conflict in Angola, which has lasted for many years,
would be not only the greatest boon to the people of that
friendly country, but also a major success for the
peacekeeping activities of the United Nations and of the
international community as a whole.

Unfortunately, the peace process in Angola, despite
considerable achievements, is developing very unevenly and
often requires pressure on the sides; in particular, on
UNITA, to overcome the obstacles that arise. Nevertheless,
the Angolan settlement is moving forward step by step,
bringing us closer to the desired threshold where the peace
process will become irreversible.

Today a major success was achieved in this regard.
The leadership of UNITA has finally made an official
statement that it has concluded the quartering of all its
military personnel and police, with the exception of 453
persons to be quartered in the next few days. It has also
handed over all of its weapons to the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). In turn, the
Government of Angola has announced its decision to
incorporate nine UNITA generals into the Angolan Armed
Forces.

These important steps open up the opportunity to
finalize the settlement of the core military issues and to
focus on the outstanding political questions. Of high
priority here are the return to Luanda of the UNITA
deputies of the National Assembly, the formation of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation, and an
agreement on the status of the President of UNITA. These
tasks must be resolved by the end of the year and should
allow for the establishment of effective structures of State
administration throughout the territory of the country,
which could ensure the political and social stability
without which the restoration of peace and normal life for
Angolans is impossible.

Procrastination in the implementation of these
aspects of the settlement is unacceptable and could have
a very negative impact on the peace process as a whole.
It is important to strengthen the political base in every
possible way in order to hasten the peace process, which,
in our view, would be promoted by the speedy convening
of a fifth meeting in Angola between President Dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi.

Of exceptional importance, too, are the issues of
establishing unified armed forces and the Angolan
National Police and accelerated demobilization of
ex-combatants. Although quite a few complex and large-
scale tasks lie ahead, the peace process in Angola is
moving unswervingly into its final phase: the expiry of
UNAVEM. III's mandate in little more than a month and
a half.

It is obvious that what is now the largest United
Nations peacekeeping operation cannot be shut down
overnight. We are in favour of this process being thought
through carefully, implemented gradually and sufficiently
flexibly, without unjustified delays, but also on the basis
of the real status of the peace process. In that context, we
believe it would be useful for the Security Council, before
the end of February 1997, to send its mission to Angola,
which would allow us to draft an adjusted strategy and
tactics for UNAVEM. III in its final phase and to define
a position on the basic parameters for a continued United
Nations presence in that country.

In the view of the Russian delegation, the draft
resolution on Angola submitted for consideration today by
the Security Council is up to the key tasks of the current
stage of the peace settlement. We believe that this draft
resolution will send a serious signal to the Angolan
parties on the need to speed up implementation of the

 

commitments they have undertaken and to take the peace
process to the finish line.

