I would like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, and Ambassador Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for their briefings. I would also like to commend the efforts of Ms. Williams and reiterate our full support for the work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). I am pleased to welcome Permanent Representative of Libya, Ambassador Taher Elsonni, to this meeting. Viet Nam is following the situation in Libya with great concern. Despite the truces agreed between the Libyan parties in January and March this year, violence in Libya has continued to escalate. We are deeply troubled at the ongoing attacks on civilians and civilian objects during the month of Ramadan, especially the targeted attacks on schools, airports and health-care facilities mentioned in the Secretary- General's report (S/2020/360). Continued violence also obstructs collective efforts aimed at addressing the global threat of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We also remain concerned about the growing presence of terrorist groups in Libya, particularly the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We reaffirm our consistent position that a peaceful political solution is the only option for resolving the conflict in Libya, which has lasted for nearly 10 years. In this regard, it is vital for the international community to continue to support an inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned peace process, on the basis of respect for Libya's independence and sovereignty and in line with the three tracks - political, military and economic - set out in resolution 2510 (2020). It is also important to ensure the timely appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya. Accordingly, Viet Nam wishes to highlight the following issues. First, we once again urge the relevant parties in Libya to immediately stop the ongoing hostilities, uphold their commitment to the truce, fully respect international humanitarian law, stop targeting civilians and civilian objects, and allow unhindered humanitarian access in order to effectively address the COVID-19 pandemic. Secondly, Viet Nam urges the relevant parties in Libya to return to peace talks under the three tracks as soon as possible, so as to respond to the draft ceasefire agreement proposed by UNSMIL in February 2020. At the same time, we call on relevant Member States to use all their influence to bring the Libyan parties back to peace negotiations. We must not let the momentum of the Berlin Conference on Libya be squandered. Thirdly, the role of the United Nations, UNSMIL, regional organizations and Libya's neighbours will continue to be crucial in promoting peace in the country. Further cooperation and synergy among these actors will create an environment conducive to the success of the peace process in Libya. We are pleased that the second meeting of the international follow-up committee on Libya took place remotely in April. We welcome the intention of the African Union (AU) to hold an intra-Libyan reconciliation conference. We would also like to commend UNSMIL and the AU for promoting the role of women in the peace process in Libya. Fourthly, on the issue of sanctions, we reiterate the importance of upholding the relevant resolutions of the Security Council on Libya, especially those related to the arms embargo. We urge all parties inside and outside of the country to strengthen their commitment to and actions towards implementing the arms embargo in accordancewith relevant resolutions of the Council. At the same time, we reiterate our position that sanctions measures must be correctly and properly targeted at individuals and entities that threaten peace and security in Libya and that they should not negatively affect the livelihood of the common people of the country. In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to reaffirm our strong support for the pursuit of peace, stability, development and national unity in Libya.
