Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): India supports
resolution 1977 (2011) extending the mandate of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for a period of 10 years until 25 April 2021.
That extended timeline has been included with a view
to help plan assistance and cooperation programmes
for States requesting such assistance from the 1540
Committee on a long-term and predictable basis.

India has expressed its unwavering commitment
to global efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) and their means of
delivery. India recognizes that the proliferation of
WMDs and their means of delivery is a major
challenge facing the international community. As a
victim of terrorism for over three decades, we are fully
cognizant of the catastrophic dangers that the transfer
of WMDs to non-State actors and terrorists could
entail. Clandestine proliferation networks have led to
insecurity for all and must not be allowed to reappear.
The international community must join hands in
eliminating the risks related to sensitive materials and
technologies falling into the hands of terrorists and
non-State actors. The focus on non-State actors should
in no way diminish State accountability in combating
terrorism and dismantling its support infrastructure and
its linkages with WMDs.

India therefore supported the general objectives
of resolution 1540 (2004). That resolution is in line
with our own General Assembly resolution "Measures
to prevent terrorists from gaining access to weapons of
mass destruction", adopted by consensus every year
since it was first introduced in 2002.

India has enacted a number of effective laws and
regulations and has put in place institutionalized
administrative mechanisms to prohibit access to
WMDs by terrorists and non-State actors. After the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), India took
11-30512

additional steps to further strengthen its existing
legislative and regulatory mechanism for exercising
control over WMDs and their means of delivery.

The WMD Act was enacted in June 2005. The Act
provides for integrated and overarching legislation on
prohibiting unlawful activities in relation to WMDs,
their delivery systems and related materials, equipment
and technologies. The amendments to the 1992 Foreign
Trade (Development and Regulation) Act passed in
2010 further strengthened our national export control
system. India is committed to maintaining effective
national export controls consistent with the highest
international standards, and is prepared to make its
contribution as a full member of the respective
multilateral export control regimes.

India has fulfilled its obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention, including the
destruction of its chemical weapons stockpiles in
advance of the timeline agreed under the Convention.
India is also a State party to the 1972 Biological
Weapons Convention and participates in the activities
under the Convention.

India filed its report on resolution 1540 (2004) in
November 2004, and has submitted periodic updates.
An Indian expert participated in the work of the 1540
Committee between 2007 and 2009. India has also
expressed its readiness to offer assistance to other
countries in capacity-building and in fulfilling their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). India has
also participated in activities related to the resolution
such as a workshop on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), held jointly by the United
States of America and Sri Lanka in Colombo in June
2009.

We welcomed President Obama's initiative in
convening the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington,
D.C., in April 2010. India welcomed the adoption of
the Summit communique and the workplan, which
establishes a common platform for all participating
States. We see the Nuclear Security Summit process as
building pragmatic and purposeful frameworks, setting
benchmarks and standards, and fostering confidence
for international cooperation to supplement and not
replace existing multilateral institutions such as the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). India
believes that the primary responsibility for ensuring
nuclear security rests at the national level, but national
responsibility must be accompanied by responsible
3
behaviour by States. All States should scrupulously
abide by their international obligations.

Measures for the implementation of the resolution
should be undertaken by States based on their national
practices and processes. Resolution 1540 (2004) has
contributed to greater awareness among States on the
need for effective measures at the national level to
prevent terrorists and non-State actors from gaining
access to sensitive materials and technologies.
Reporting by States of their implementation measures
facilitates the overview of the implementation by the
1540 Committee.

Assistance and cooperation for States requesting
such assistance is a key element of the implementation
process. Such assistance programmes should be suited
to specific national or regional requirements. The 1540
Committee has also established cooperative relations
with several international organizations. Consistent
with their respective mandates, the IAEA and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
can contribute to the objectives of resolution 1540
(2004). We also feel that the full implementation of the
communique and workplan of the Nuclear Security
Summit can also contribute to our common goals.

India remains committed to achieving the
objectives of resolution 1540 (2004). India is also
prepared to render the necessary assistance to States
requesting such assistance in fulfilling their obligations
under the resolution. We hope that the extended
deadline will also encourage the Committee to take its
work forward in a spirit of transparency and
cooperation, so that all Member States feel that they
have a common stake in the successful implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).

