Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
all of the briefers for their contributions this morning,
particularly the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, and I
assure him of the full support of Uruguay in carrying
out his work.

Uruguay welcomes the presentation of the second
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
We regret that there is no accompanying written report,
as it contains a great deal of information that requires
a careful reading. As such, we must now wait two or
three days for the oral version to be transcribed into
the Security Council meetings records. We do not
understand why no written report was submitted and
why we must wait for the records to be published.

Fifty years of war. Fifty years marred by violence,
serious military clashes, terrorist attacks, abductions,
killings and the death of tens of thousands of innocent
civilians, as well as the suffering of millions. The roots
of this conflict stretch far back into the pages of history.
The people's hopes of living in peace and security were
dashed by inequality, lack of opportunities, intolerance
and mutual accusations in which one side is always
right and acts properly and the other side is wrong and
acts perversely.
Thus, tensions mounted every few years and clashes
resulted in maximum destruction and death. Until one
day, perhaps exhausted by the pointless shedding of
so much blood and having understood that they could
continue for years without either party emerging
victorious, they had the courage to cease hostilities, sit
down for talks and opt for peace.

It is clear that I am talking about the peace process
in Colombia. Members will ask why I am referring
today to Colombia. The answer is simple. Colombia
best exemplifies that peace can be achieved after a long
conflict if the parties involved show a real and firm
commitment to negotiate and reach an agreement and
have the courage to risk everything so as to abide by
the agreement.

The Peace Agreement in Colombia sent a powerful
message of hope throughout the world at a time when
numerous armed conflicts continued to take place,
including one of the most prolonged and complex of
them, which has confronted Israel and Palestine for the
past 70 years.

The United Nations and the Security Council
have stood witness to the conflict between Israel
and Palestine since its inception. For seven decades,
unilateral, regional and multilateral efforts have been
made to advance peace in the Middle East. There
have been moments of real hope and milestones, such
as the Oslo Accords, the Quartet's road map and the
Arab Peace Initiative, among others, whereby it seems
that the progress achieved is rapidly dissolved by the
decisions and actions of one or both parties, thereby
heightening tensions and only encouraging the most
extremist positions.

Regrettably, for years, we have witnessed an
unsustainable situation that risks voiding efforts made
thus far to achieve peace. In that context, six months ago,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016),
aimed at stabilizing and reversing negative trends on
the ground that jeopardize the prospects of peace and
the two-State solution. It was a clear demonstration
of the importance that the international community
places on the peaceful and successful conclusion ofthis
process. Despite that, to date, Israel has stepped up its
announcements to continue its settlement policy in the
occupied territories, which flouts that resolution and
resolution 242 (1967), which affirms that the acquisition
of territory by force is inadmissible.

Similarly, the continuation of violent incidents and
terrorist attacks, the silence of complicity, the lack
of censure and punishment in connection with their
incitement and glorification and the incomprehensible
policy of financially compensating the families of
prisoners or those who die in the commission of such
acts does not in any way advance peace by seriously
placing in jeopardy the possibility of achieving the
two-State solution. Uruguay has condemned and will
continue to condemn such acts vigorously.

Together with the overwhelming majority of the
international community, Uruguay strongly supports
the solution of two independent States and is convinced
that that is the only option that will lead to the peaceful
coexistence of Israel and Palestine. For that to happen,
the parties will have to facilitate conditions for finding
a negotiated settlement that is mutually acceptable and
resolves pending issues related to the conflict.

As we have done unequivocally since 1947, we
once again reaffirm our unconditional support for the
right of Israel and Palestine to live in peace, within
secure and recognized borders and in an atmosphere of
renewed cooperation, free of any threats or actions that
would jeopardize peace.

It is essential to reverse current trends on the
ground that will make establishing a Palestinian State
extremely difficult. It is also necessary that the Israeli
and Palestinian authorities fulfil their obligations
under international law and pursuant to the Council's
resolutions and send a clear political message so as to
break free from the vicious cycle of mutual mistrust.

After the 70 years during which Israel established
itself as an integrated and modern State and a full
Member of the Organization, Palestine continues to face
serious difficulties in connection with its development,
international integration and consolidation of its
territory, which entail serious repercussions for its
people and increased tensions in the entire region.

Furthermore, the Israeli occupation of territories,
which constitutes a clear violation of international law
and the relevant resolutions of the Council, has also
contributed to causing a serious humanitarian situation
for the Palestinians remaining in those territories and
for those seeking refuge in other countries of the region.
That is a historical injustice that must be righted by the
parties with the support of international community
and the Council.

Uruguay welcomes all international, regional and
unilateral initiatives that will allow for progress in the
quest for solutions in the peace process in the Middle
East so as to achieve a peaceful, fair, negotiated and
lasting solution in line with international law, thereby
enshrining the legitimate aspirations of both parties.
We continue to call on both parties to resume direct
bilateral negotiations as soon as possible without
preconditions as an essential step towards achieving
peace and the two-State solution - a goal shared by
the vast majority of Israelis and Palestinians and denied
to them thus far by their leaders.

