Mr. Buffa (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset, on behalf of the delegation of
Paraguay, to thank Ambassador Andrey Denisov,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
for his briefing and to congratulate him on the work he
has been doing under the mandate entrusted to him by
the Council on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations. I should like also to congratulate
Ambassador Javier Ruperez for his work as Executive
Director of the CTC.

The Government of Paraguay has consistently
condemned energetically terrorism in all its aspects,
which it considers to be a scourge affecting all
humanity. We therefore believe that, in order to fight
terrorism, it is imperative that the international

community act in a coordinated and committed
manner.

My Government reiterates once again its resolute
support for the work that the Security Council is
carrying out, in cooperation with Member States, in the
context of the global combat against terrorism. My
country, in keeping with resolution 1373 (2001), has
ratified and acceded to the 12 international conventions
in the field of terrorism. Those instruments have now
been incorporated into our national legislation, in
keeping with constitutional provisions.

Ambassador Denisov also mentioned the high-
level seminar to follow up on the recommendations of
the resolution, whose goal was to analyse national
legislation and regulations on terrorism and bring them
into conformity with the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001). The seminar was held last December at the
request of the Government of the Republic of Paraguay
in Asuncion, Paraguay, in cooperation with the CTC;
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
Vienna; the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights; and the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism of the Organization of American
States (OAS). It was a pivotal event in helping to bring
domestic legislation into conformity with international
agreements, leading to an agreed body of legislation
that complements and updates, in keeping with
international standards, the available tools for
combating terrorism. Meetings were also held with
representatives of the three branches of the State -
Executive, Legislative and Judicial.

The National Congress went into recess on 20
December and will resume its meetings on 1 March,
and we expect the Executive branch to submit the draft
law to the Congress at that time.

We must stress that the presence at that seminar
of an expert from the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights was very important in terms of
clarifying that all relevant legislation must be
consistent with humanitarian law, thus dispelling any
doubts that might arise in that connection. We wish
also to highlight the presence of an expert from the
OAS Inter-American Committee against Terrorism,
thereby fulfilling the role assigned to regional
organizations under the resolution.

Allow me, on behalf of the Government of
Paraguay, to voice our gratitude to the Chairman of the
CTC, Ambassador Denisov; to the CTC Executive
Directorate; to the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in Vienna; and to the OAS Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism for their outstanding
cooperation in the holding of the seminar. I wish also
to say before this important body that the Republic of
Paraguay is fully compliant in terms of bringing its
legislation into conformity with existing norms in the
area of the combat against terrorism; that it responds to
CTC reports in a timely fashion and in the proper
format; and that in our country there is a national
commitment on the part of the three branches of
Government to continue to fight this battle.

I should like also to point out that, at the
subregional level, Paraguay, along with Argentina,
Brazil and the United States of America, belongs to the
Three Plus One group, whose principal goal is
cooperation and the elaboration of mechanisms to
combat terrorism.

The Government of Paraguay will continue to
stress this issue in the Sixth Committee, so that, as
requested in the report of the High-level Panel, we can
reach a definition of terrorism, which has been
discussed for almost a decade now, and so that we can
finalize the draft conprehensive convention on
international terrorism, thereby finally providing the
international community with a unified legal
framework to combat terrorism.

We hope that the first visit of the CTC to a
member State in March 2005 will represent a practical
step towards making progress in the task of
cooperation with, and lending technical assistance to,
Member States in their efforts to prevent and combat
terrorism.

Finally, we wish every success to the CTC's
fourth meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations, to be held in Almaty
Kazakhstan at the end of the month.

