Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to express its appreciation to
your presidency, Sir, for the initiative of convening this
public debate on questions of peace and security in the
context of West Africa. We believe that you, Mr.
President, have represented that part of the world in a
very worthy manner throughout your country's term of
office in the Security Council. As a consequence, today
we feel closer to your region, to your country and to its
people.

We are also pleased that you, Sir, have decided to
focus attention on the report submitted by the United
Nations inter-agency mission, which visited 11
countries in the region at the beginning of this year,
under the diligent coordination of the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Ibrahima
Fall.

Our delegation always believed that the Council
had paid insufficient attention to the recommendations
contained in that report. Only consultations were held
on the issue, without any reflection on the scope and
significance of the concept of a regional approach to
the conflicts. Consequently, during our presidency in
August, we promoted a comprehensive academic
debate of the subject. The summary of that discussion
has been distributed as an official document, under the
symbol S/2001/1174. There was broad acceptance of
the idea that a regional approach should be used to
complement national approaches in conflict
management, and that the situation in West Africa
lends itself particularly well to such an approach.

Today's exercise is therefore very useful. We are
particularly grateful for the very valuable and
informative briefing given by Mr. Fall. Following his
introduction on progress made and prospects for the
future, we are even more convinced of the validity of a
regional approach to conflict in West Africa.

It is also for those reasons that we support the
Secretary-General's decision of 26 November to
establish a United Nations Office for West Africa
whose task would be to coordinate the efforts of the
Organization in consultation with regional
organizations, including those in the area of conflict
prevention and peace-building. We have noted that its
headquarters will be in Dakar and that it will begin to
function in January for an initial three-year period.
West Africa is a region whose countries share
many values and aspirations, as well as many
problems. The objectives of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) to maintain regional
peace and stability are particularly similar to those of
the mission of the Security Council, giving rise to
various areas of convergence. The inter-agency mission
made at least 20 recommendations aimed at
strengthening the role of that important regional
organization.

Allow me to draw the Council's attention to some
of the tasks associated with peace and security in West
Africa to which a regional approach would be
advantageous. I shall first speak about responses to
emergency situations.

The recent decade of conflict in the Mano River
Union region left 200,000 dead in the Liberian war,
resulted in the displacement of 70 per cent of the
population of Sierra Leone and caused 500,000
refugees from those to countries to go to neighbouring
Guinea. The humanitarian agencies of the United
Nations are making a consolidated appeal on behalf of
the 3 million people who will require assistance next
year. Those agencies know that the magnitude of the
emergency requires a regional approach that includes
political initiatives, respect for human rights and
programmes to combat poverty.

Secondly, I would like to speak about children in
armed conflict. Thousands of children have been
forcibly recruited for wars by rebel groups. In those
wars they have been both victims and perpetrators of
atrocities. The inter-agency mission made eight
recommendations of a regional scope. Sierra Leone,
where the United Nations has played an important role,
is about to close a particularly sad chapter of child
participation in armed conflict. But it is disturbing that
a lack of job opportunities and of reintegration
programmes for young people encourages their use by
mercenary groups in the region. We wish to point out
the presentation made on this subject by you, Mr.
President, on behalf of the Security Council during last
week's meeting of the Executive Board of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF).

Thirdly, I wish to speak about the proliferation of
small arms. The inter-agency mission estimates that
more than half of the 5 million small arms circulating
in West Africa are used in internal uprisings, armed
robberies, drug trafficking and the smuggling of
diamonds. The Council has recognized on a number of
occasions, most recently in its presidential statement of
31 August, the important role of regional agreements in
preventing and controlling the illicit trade in these
weapons. It is therefore encouraging that the members
of ECOWAS have extended for an additional three
years the Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation
and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons in
West Africa. In addition to international action against
arms traffickers, that effort requires a special
commitment on the part of the world's major producers
and exporters of weapons.

The adoption of an integrated strategy for West
Africa by the United Nations is needed in order to meet
some of the greatest challenges to the peace, security
and stability of that region. It will make it possible for
the agencies of the United Nations to make a
simultaneous and flexible effort that eliminates risks
and is cost-effective. We believe that a regional
approach requires a higher level of commitment on the
part of the organs, funds and programmes of the United
Nations, including the Security Council. It also
requires more frequent consultation among these
parties in order to maintain regional peace and security.
It is therefore necessary for there to be a flexible
consultation mechanism between the Council and other
United Nations bodies for the above-mentioned
purposes, such as the one that has already been
proposed in relation to UNICEF.

It is up to the Council to lend its support to the
Secretary-General's initiative to establish a United
Nations Office for West Africa and to incorporate a
regional approach in initiatives relating to peace and
international security in that region.

