Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to express our thanks to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of France,
for his efforts during the month of January. Our great
appreciation goes to Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and
to the teams of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) in Iraq and New York for their
tireless work in assisting the Government and the
people of Iraq.

After reviewing the report of the Secretary-
General on the work of UNAMI, contained in
document S/2009/102, my delegation would like to
make the following comments.

In the political and security areas, today the
people and the Government of Iraq are proud of their
achievement in having held provincial elections, which
took place in a democratic and stable security situation.
The elections provided a great opportunity for
competition among electoral blocs and political forces
and gave Iraqi citizens the freedom to select those they
considered most suitable to manage their provinces and
to provide the services they expect from the provincial
councils. The provincial councils will be given greater
powers and budgets than the outgoing councils,
including the responsibility of playing a bigger role in
the advancement of the provinces' building and
reconstruction and provision of services as defined by
the law of provincial assemblies.

The provincial elections witnessed the
competition of 14,431 candidates, 3,912 of whom were
women, belonging to 401 lists and competing for 440
seats throughout 14 provinces. Participating in the
elections were more than 400 observers from the
United Nations and more than 800 independent
international observers, as well as observers
representing the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
European Union. The turnout of the elections, 51 per
cent, was very good compared to participation rates in
local elections in other countries.

The provincial elections that took place at the end
of January are considered to be a turning point in Iraq's
progress in the pursuit of building a new democracy
because of the active participation of many Iraqis who
boycotted the provincial elections in 2005. For
example, the turnout in Ninawa was 60 per cent
compared with 14 per cent during the previous
elections, and Salah Ad Din province, which recorded
the highest participation rate at 65 per cent, had only
15 per cent participation in the 2005 elections. The
province of Anbar, where participation amounted to
less than 1 per cent in 2005, reported a turnout of
40 per cent.

The participation of Iraqis who boycotted the
elections in the past reflected a firm belief in elections
as key mechanisms of democracy, as opposed to the
use of violence to impose the will of one party on
others. The Government considers the success of the
elections to be an important development and a strong
push towards the promotion of reconciliation and
coexistence between the various components of the
Iraqi people.

In accordance with the provisions of article 23 of
the provincial elections law, the elections in Kirkuk
have been postponed and a parliamentary committee
formed to study options for power-sharing between the
components of Kirkuk and to research the issues of
conflict of ownership and demographic change. This
committee hopes its report, when submitted to the
Council of Representatives, will facilitate the process
for provincial elections in Kirkuk. The Iraqi political
forces agree on the substance of article 23 of the
provincial elections law, which confirms the process to
resolve the Kirkuk issue through constitutional and
political means in order to preserve the full rights of all
components of the province.

The success of the provincial elections as an
important juncture in the political development of the
new Iraq has caused many to express their admiration
for the ability and potential the Iraqi people have
shown in the preparation, organization, management
and protection of their electoral process. The
Secretary-General paid tribute to the circumstances
surrounding the elections, saying they were
impressively free of violence. Similarly, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, said that the election process was well
organized by staff who all followed the same
procedures and that the Electoral Commission had
shown independence. He expressed his admiration for
the role of Iraqi security forces by saying that the
elections had proven that the Iraqi Government is
capable of generating security to ensure the electoral
process.

The main message that the Iraqi people want
conveyed to the world through the success of these
elections is the emphasis they place on building a
responsible democracy through the exercise of their
rights within the context of public administration, as
set forth in their Constitution, in order to strengthen the
democratic experience in the new Iraq.

The completion of the provincial elections in an
atmosphere almost completely free of any
manifestation of violence, as opposed to the more than
80 security incidents during the elections of 2005,
confirmed two basic facts. First, it demonstrated the
great development in the capabilities of Iraqi Security
Forces, which performed in a professional and
qualified manner, and the effective presence of which
was felt on the ground, making the elections the first
witness of their efficiency, but not the last. This
conclusion was also reached by the Secretary-General,
who states in his report that "[the] almost complete
absence of violence during the elections can to a large
extent be attributed to the growing effectiveness of the
Iraqi Security Forces" (S/2009/102, para. 20).

Secondly, the elections demonstrated the solid
gains made in Iraq's security situation thanks to the
Government's efforts to strengthen the political,
security and law enforcement fields - the pillars of

stability in the country. Anti-terrorism authorities in
Iraq oversaw the destruction of 51 terrorist networks in
2008, enhancing security gains achieved by the
ongoing commitment of the Government of my country
to support efforts towards national reconciliation and
political dialogue with the various parties involved in
the country's political process.

The Governments of Iraq and the United States
have reached a new security agreement to organize the
future bilateral partnership between our independent
and sovereign nations which share the common goals
of protecting and promoting the interests of our two
countries and reinforcing Iraqi sovereignty and
independence.

The termination of the mandate of the
multinational force in Iraq is an important turning point
for Iraq and the end of an era for the United Nations
and for, above all, the countries contributing to the
force. The multinational force has contributed vital
support to the progress of building security and
stability in Iraq and towards our transition to a
sovereign, federal and united democracy.

On behalf of the Government and the people of
Iraq, I wish to convey a very important message of
thanks to the men and women of the multinational
force in Iraq, who have courageously fought together
with us on the frontline, as well as to their
Governments.

The acceleration of improvement in the security
situation in Baghdad and other provinces has helped to
return life to normality in most areas. Displaced
families returning to their places of origin numbered
about 40,000 by the end of 2008, and one of the largest
camps for internally displaced persons, in the province
ofNajaf, has been closed after the return to their places
of origin of 300 families that were living there. My
Government has been working tirelessly on the
restitution of property, pursuant to order 101, and on
assistance to returning displaced families, pursuant to
order 102, by providing the appropriate conditions for
their return to their livelihoods and their areas of
origin.

Continued efforts by the Iraqi Government, in
cooperation with international organizations and aid
agencies, to secure the full return of the Christian
families displaced by violence in some parts of Ninawa
province late last year have led to the return of 2,400
out of 2,500 displaced families, and the Iraqi
Government is still providing the remaining families
with necessary assistance.

As part of the Iraqi Government's continuing
efforts to ensure the return of displaced Iraqis in
neighbouring countries, the Minister of Displacement
and Migration, Mr. Abdul Samad Rahman Sultan,
recently headed a ministerial delegation to Syria on the
first leg of a trip that included stops in Egypt and
Lebanon. The goal of the trip was to coordinate with
these countries in organizing the return of Iraqis
displaced onto their territory, and to explore with the
immigration ministers of Syria, Lebanon, and Egypt
the problems and constraints involved in the return of
Iraqi citizens in order to develop effective mechanisms
to overcome such problems and to contribute to the
return of all Iraqis to their places of origin. It is
important here to refer to the recent report issued by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
which referred to the return of 220,000 Iraqis in 2008
and to the expected return of 500,000 Iraqis in 2009
due to the steady improvement of security in the
country.

The Government of Iraq, convinced of the need
to consolidate and strengthen the rights of the Iraqi
people through the establishment of independent
institutions dealing with the follow-up and monitoring
of human rights, ratified on 14 January 2009 a law
establishing a High Commission for Human Rights
under the provisions of article 61 of the Iraqi
Constitution. The Commission will strive to ensure the
protection and promotion of human rights in Iraq and
to protect the rights and freedoms set forth in the
Constitution, laws, treaties, and international
agreements ratified by Iraq.

My Government attaches particular importance to
the issue of human rights for Iraqi detainees in custody
pending criminal cases, as demonstrated by the
creation of places of detention appropriately equipped
to provide full legal immunities and procedures to
ensure a fair trial. On 22 February 2009, the central
Baghdad prison was opened to the press as part of the
Iraqi Government's policy of ensuring the highest
degree of transparency in following up on the
conditions for detainees in Iraqi jails.
On the social and economic front, the tangible
improvement in Iraq's political and security situation
has had a positive effect on the national development
strategy. A clear improvement has been recorded in
Iraqi economic indicators during the past few months.
The rate of economic growth at the end of 2008 was
44.2 per cent. Inflation decreased from 16 per cent in
2007 to 12 per cent in the last quarter of 2008 as a
result of financial policies aimed at decreasing
inflation and improving the purchasing power of the
Iraqi dinar. Unemployment has also decreased, falling
from 17 per cent in 2008 to 15 per cent at the
beginning of 2009. These economic indicators reflect a
comprehensive improvement in the Iraqi economy.

Investment is a priority for the Iraqi
Government's national financial and economic
policies. The Government has allocated $12 billion of
the national budget for investment activities for all
Iraqi ministries and has established a national
monitoring mechanism to encourage Iraqi ministries to
spend the allocated investment funds on their projects.

My Government, in the light of obligations under
the International Compact with Iraq, has signed a
number of bilateral agreements with Paris Club
countries by which those countries are to cancel nearly
$45 billion of our total national debt, which totals more
than $52 billion. A bilateral agreement and
memorandum of understanding have also recently been
signed with Greece and China, under which our debt to
those countries is reduced by 80 per cent.

The Iraqi Government has established a social
security network to support different social sectors,
including orphans, widows and the unemployed. The
Government has allocated 800 million dinar for this
purpose and increased the number of small loans to
120,000 for 2009 from 75,000 in 2008.

Within the framework of economic policies
aimed at reconstructing the Iraqi industrial sector, the
Government has allocated an investment budget of up
to $697 million to the Ministry of Industry for the
rebuilding many of its ministerial institutions in an
effort to diversify sources of national income.

With regard to the oil industry, the Iraqi
Government has adopted new policies to reconstruct
and develop this field. According to the latest reports
issued by the Iraqi Oil Ministry, oil production
increased by 11 per cent in 2008 and daily production
increased from 1.85 million barrels to 2.28 million
barrels. The Iraqi Government has also joined the
international Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative to establish a monitoring mechanism for its
oil revenues and ways of spending them.

In the area of basic services, the Iraqi
Government has reduced the proportion of the
population deprived of water and sewage systems to
10 per cent in urban areas and 30 per cent in rural
areas. The production of electricity has risen
significantly during the last three months, and the Iraqi
Government has allocated more than $3 billion to the
Ministry of Electricity to build new power stations.

In the framework of the Iraqi Government's
efforts to support the educational process in the
country, the Ministry of Education has signed bilateral
cooperation protocols with support organizations such
as UNICEF and the Iraqi Ministry of Housing and
Reconstruction. This initiative supports the
Government's national plan for the building of schools,
under which, so far, 291 schools have been constructed
and 374 restored to receive students in the current
school year.

At the regional and international levels, the Iraqi
Government continues its efforts to monitor and
coordinate the work of the committees on refugees,
energy and security within the framework adopted at
the meetings of the Foreign Ministers of the Expanded
Neighbouring Countries of Iraq held in Sharm
el-Sheikh and Istanbul. The Refugees Committee held
its meeting in Amman on 15 November 2008. The
Security Coordination Committee meeting was held in
Damascus on 22 and 23 November 2008. I would like
to stress my Government's commitment to cooperating
fully with our neighbouring countries to reach
solutions to all issues of mutual interest.

The past few months have seen mutual visits
between a number of Iraqi and international officials.
This month, French President Nicolas Sarkozy and
German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier paid
visits to Iraq. The President of Iraq, Jalal Talabani,
visited Kuwait to participate in the Arab Economic
Summit, and Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki visited
Iran and Turkey to develop mechanisms for bilateral
cooperation with both countries. It should also be noted
that the Iraqi-Kuwaiti joint committee is to hold a
meeting in Kuwait this month to sign an accord to
ensure a common vision for resolving the outstanding
issues between the two countries and, in mid-March of
next year, will hold a meeting at the ministerial level.

Following the first annual review of the
International Compact with Iraq held in Stockholm, the
Iraqi Government has taken many steps to enhance and

support policies to accomplish all requirements
through the Joint Monitoring Matrix of 2008, in which
the necessary steps to launch the administrative and
financial reform process were determined. In this
regard, my delegation would like to encourage all Arab
countries to help their brothers in Iraq by forgiving
Iraq's debt and reducing its compensation obligations
imposed after the invasion of Kuwait in 1990, a crime
committed by the former dictatorial regime. My
Government welcomes the Kuwaiti Government's
agreement to address the issue of compensation
through bilateral negotiations under the auspices of the
United Nations Compensation Commission.

In the framework of positive cooperation with the
United Nations and our brothers in Kuwait, during
meetings of the technical subcommittee early next
month and in the presence of United Nations High-
Level Coordinator, Mr. Gennady Tarasov, my
Government will hand over a large number of audio
and video tapes to Kuwait as a gesture of goodwill and
in order to gather impetus for nations to terminate the
international mandate relating to this file.

In reference to the recommendation contained in
paragraph 72 of the report of the Secretary-General,
my Government strongly supports the process of
reviewing those Security Council resolutions
pertaining to Iraq subsequent to resolution 661 (1990)
and in accordance with the fifth operative paragraph of
resolution 1859 (2008). These reviews represent a key
step in support of the international community's efforts
to normalize relations between Iraq and its neighbours
and contribute to security and stability in the region.

In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government's gratitude for UNAMI's role in Iraq and
for Mr. De Mistura's support, offered at the
Government's request and based on mutually agreed
mechanisms.

