Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela reiterates its support for the work of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and
acknowledges the valuable contribution of its staff to
protect civilians, especially vulnerable groups such as
women and children, as well as their role in facilitating
access to humanitarian assistance in the country. We
categorically condemn attacks against the Mission, its
personnel and its facilities, whose inviolability must be
respected in line with international law.

On the various occasions that we have discussed
in the Council the overall issue of the conflict in South
Sudan and the specific role of UNMISS, my country
has unequivocally expressed its support for the Mission,
especially given the support that the UNMISS is now
to provide in the framework of the complex process
of implementing the agreement on a resolution to the
conflict in South Sudan. which was promoted by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union.

Nevertheless, my country abstained in the voting
on resolution 2252 (2015), on extending the UNMISS
mandate. We did so because the negotiating process
did not take into account some concerns of particular
importance to Venezuela when it comes to the need to
come up with a balanced text that reflects the Views
of the country concerned. In that connection, I should
point out that the resolution includes elements that
unnecessarily divert from the crucial goal of extending
the UNMISS mandate as part of its role as one of the
tools for contributing, from the perspective of its very
specific remit, to the implementation of the peace
agreement signed by the parties to the conflict. Such
elements pertain, first of all, to the inclusion of aspects
that could be counterproductive to achieving peace,
such as references in the text to sanctions, which we do
not believe relevant in this type of resolution.

Moreover, concerns expressed by several countries
with regard to unmanned aerial vehicles and systems,
including Venezuela, were also ignored. On more than
one occasion, that issue has given rise to opposition on
the part of South Sudan owing to the implications for
its sovereignty. Once more, the Council is going against
the current on an issue that is controversial in and of
itself. We reiterate that in no area of its work can a
peacekeeping operation act without the consent of the
host country - here the Government of South Sudan.
For Venezuela this is a principle that cannot be violated.
Continuing to press the issue, in an apparent effort to
impose rather than to convince, does not seem to us to
be the most suitable way of ensuring the goodwill and
cooperation of the South Sudanese Government.

Likewise, we regret that no clarification has been
included when it comes to the UNMISS mandate and
the protection of civilians. That important, priority role
should never be limited; rather, further focus should be
placed on it, and it should be highlighted throughout
the activities of the Mission, in accordance with the
directives of the United Nations on peacekeeping
operations.

Also, references to the hybrid tribunal for South
Sudan could lead to confusion when it comes to
the agreement promoted by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union.

As on previous occasions, we participated actively
in the discussions and negotiations on this resolution
and expressed a constructive spirit and willingness to
follow consensus. But the rejection we encountered on
issues of principle, such as those to which I referred,
led us to not support the adoption of this resolution
as it was proposed. That in no way reflects a position
against the Mission, or a deviation from our position on
the need for African solutions for African countries, or
a contradiction when it comes to the needs and interests
of the men, women and children in need in South Sudan,
who so greatly value the protection of UNMISS and its
support in addressing the humanitarian crisis affecting
so many parts of the country as a result of the conflict.

In conclusion, we are convinced that our African
brothers and sisters, in particular in South Sudan,
understand our position. While we regret that once
again the spirit of unity that should mark the work of
the Security Council has not been within reach due to
the preference for a text that is vulnerable to potential
controversy, we also hope that future discussions will
bear in mind these concerns so as to arrive at a balanced
text that serves as an effective tool in the work being
done by UNMISS.

