Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): France will support the draft resolution before
us. We would like to pay tribute to the efforts made by
several African countries to help the Government of the
Central African Republic peacefully to resolve a crisis
situation. We would like to thank the African sponsors of
this draft resolution, and my delegation would also like to
thank, if you will allow me, Sir, the successive Presidents
of the Security Council - the Swedish President and
yourself - who saw to it that this draft resolution could
promptly be put to the vote, as desired by those African
countries that are members of the Inter-African Mission
to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB).

France, as is widely known, supports politically and
in humanitarian and material terms the regional endeavour
conducted by the member countries of MISAB. France is
in favour of regional efforts for the settlement of
conflicts, but it also encourages any initiative that, in
strict conformity with the Charter, aims at affirming the
important role of the Security Council, especially under
Chapter VII. That is why my country has from the outset
supported the action taken by the President of the Central
African Republic, Mr. Ange-Felix Patasse, and that taken
by the President of Gabon, Mr. El Hadj Omar Bongo, in
an attempt to obtain approval for the mandate of MISAB
and authorization from the Council under Chapter VII so
as to ensure security and freedom of movement for the
staff of MISAB and for those supporting them.

We believe that this initiative is in keeping with a
constructive evolution with regard to the United Nations,

 

as reflected in three principles: scrupulous respect for the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations; the
affirmation of the role of the Security Council; and support
for the Security Council's backing of regional efforts.

The vote we are about to take will bear witness to this
concern that we all must have that our actions be
transparent and that there be strict respect for the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations.

