Mr. Ndabarasa (Rwanda): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
address the Council. We greatly appreciate your
delegation's laudable efforts in organizing this debate
on children and armed conflict and congratulate it on
its assumption of the Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. We also congratulate the
French delegation on the successful conclusion of their
mandate as Chair of the Working Group.

Allow me to commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
for her tireless efforts in highlighting the issue of
children and armed conflict. My thanks go also to the
Secretary-General, to Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary General for Peacekeeping Operations, and to
Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive Director of UNICEF, for
their briefings and for the commendable work they have
done in addressing the impact of armed conflict on
children. By the same token, allow me to pay particular
tribute to Ms. Grace Akallo for her testimony and her
resilience, and for putting a face on the issue before us.

The issue of children and armed conflict is a
symptom of the failure to comprehensively address the
causes of conflict and to utilize existing mechanisms
for the prevention of conflict. If we are to adequately
address this scourge it is imperative that we utilize the
mechanisms we have in place to address the causes of
conflict and to prevent conflicts from arising in the
first place.

Allow me to address a few specific issues in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/ 158). The report
acknowledges the significance of the recently
concluded "Umoja Wetu" joint operations between the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda. These operations have greatly undermined
the capabilities of the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) and its sub-groups and
have led to the reintegration of the Congres national
pour la defense du peuple (CNDP) into the Congolese
Armed Forces. But, most important, they have resulted
in the repatriation of refugees held hostage by the
FDLR and its sub-groups, many of whom were child
combatants. However, the FDLR and its sub-groups,
which are listed in the report as persistent offenders,
continue to forcibly recruit children into their ranks and
commit serious crimes, including sexual violence. My
delegation calls upon the international community,
through the Security Council and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC), to support and build upon the
progress made by the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda and to utilize the
targeted measures, including sanctions, at its disposal to
eliminate the threat posed by the FDLR and its
sub-groups.

The genocide in Rwanda in 1994 included some
of the most inhumane acts of violence targeted at
women and girls and the use of sexual violence as an
element of genocide. My delegation therefore
welcomes the Secretary-General's recommendation to
expand the protection framework by adding rape and
other grave acts of sexual violence against children as
a criterion for inclusion on the annexed lists, as well as
to strengthen the monitoring and reporting of those
crimes.
We welcome the progress made in mainstreaming
children and armed conflict issues into peacekeeping
and political missions. We have taken particular note of
the efforts outlined by Mr. Le Roy with regard to
MONUC-UNICEF collaboration to address the issue of
children and armed conflict in the Kivus. We also
welcome the efforts undertaken by the Department of
Political Affairs in that respect. However,
mainstreaming alone will not address the issue of
children and armed conflict. The Security Council
needs to empower peacekeeping missions to implement
policies on the ground through clearer and more robust
mandates.

In his recommendations, the Secretary-General
correctly points out the regional dimensions of this
issue and the need to establish mechanisms and
strategies for coordination and cooperation. My
Government and that of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have shown the way forward. We urge the
international community to follow our lead in taking
practical and pragmatic steps to address the issue of
children and armed conflict.

