Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the Republic of Italy
on its presidency of the Security Council for this month
and thank it for its efforts in organizing the Council's
work. We would also like to thank France for its efforts
during its presidency of the Council last month. We
welcome the briefing by Mr. Jan Kubis, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), and we thank him and his team for
the efforts and dedication that they have shown in
Baghdad, New York and wherever they are needed. I
would also like to welcome the briefing by Major Anna
Patrono of Italy's Arma dei Carabinieri on her very
positive experience with female police in Baghdad. My
delegation also commends the constructive efforts of
the Government of Italy to strengthen Iraqi capabilities
in various fields, in particular with regard to the Iraqi
security forces, the preservation of artefacts and the
repair of the Mosul dam.

Iraq's heroic armed forces have achieved a historic
victory that has put an end to the so-called State ofterror
and extremism throughout Iraq following the liberation
of Kirkuk, Hawijah and other cities. With enormous
sacrifices, our brave forces have also succeeded in
regaining the city of Al-Qa'im after the liberation of
the nearby city of Rawa. Today I want to congratulate
our armed forces and our proud people, who made
sacrifices for this great victory, and to pay tribute to
all of the honourable men and women of the civilized
world who have supported Iraq and its heroic forces in
the fight against the terrorist gangs ofDa'esh. This truly
glorious victory was achieved while taking great care
to ensure the safety of the civilians whom the terrorists
had used as human shields, and with full respect for
the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
Our forces are still eliminating terrorist pockets in
the desert of Anbar governorate, securing the border
between Iraq and Syria and opening joint border points
that will enable commercial activity between both
States to begin again.

The Government and the people of Iraq are deeply
grateful to all the States that have participated in the
international coalition for fighting terrorism in Iraq, in
particular the United States of America and the States
members of the European Union, as well as to others
that are not part of the international coalition. We thank
them all for their help in confronting terrorism and for
the military and logistical support they have provided
to Iraq's security forces, in the context of respect
for our sovereignty and territorial integrity, and in
coordination with our security forces, in order to defeat
the terrorist gangs of Da'esh.

The Iraqi Government will continue to be one
of unity, working to enhance constructive dialogue
in order to settle the issues outstanding between the
federal Government and the Iraqi Kurdistan Regional
Government. In any case, we cannot accept the
unconstitutional decisions of the Regional Government
and thereby surrender the unity of Iraq, which is
guaranteed under our Constitution. In that regard,
with a view to preserving the unity of Iraq's territory
and people, our Council of Representatives voted to
totally reject the referendum in the Iraqi Kurdistan
region and to commit the federal Government to taking
measures to secure Iraq's unity under article 109 of the
Iraqi Constitution. In addition, it decided to launch a
serious dialogue aimed at dealing with any outstanding
issues on the basis of article 1 of the Constitution,
which stipulates that Iraq is a single State with a single
sovereignty and cannot be partitioned.

In accordance with its responsibilities, the Iraqi
Government requested the federal Supreme Court
to issue a ruling rejecting the illegal referendum
conducted by the Iraqi Kurdistan Regional Government
on 25 September. The referendum represents a grave
violation of the Iraqi Constitution, in particular with
regard to the status of areas with peoples of various
nationalities, ethnicities, sects and religions. The federal
Supreme Court studied article 1 of the Constitution and
explained that it and other articles affirm the unity of Iraq
and that article 109 of the Constitution binds all federal
Iraqi authorities to preserve and uphold that unity. The
Supreme Court also stated that the Constitution does
not include any text that would permit the secession of
any parts of the country, as stipulated in article 116.
On 20 November, the federal Supreme Court ruled that
the referendum conducted in the Iraqi Kurdistan region
on 25 September was unconstitutional, rendering its
results null and void. That will require issuing a request
to the Iraqi Kurdistan Government to respect and abide
by that decision in accordance with the articles and
provisions of the Iraqi Constitution, which governs the
rights and responsibilities of all its components.

We would like to express our gratitude to all of the
countries around the world that have supported a unified
Iraq of civilization, history and sacrifice in the face of
international terrorism. We appreciate their support
for Iraq's unity, sovereignty and federal Constitution.
We also appreciate the support for our efforts to secure
federal authority throughout Iraq's territory in order to
preserve the lives of all Iraqi civilians and to ensure that
the security of citizens is not delivered into the hands
of the military wings of certain political parties that
do not support Iraqi unity but rather seek to achieve
their own illegal goals and conceal their corruption,
smuggling and interference in the use of the State's
resources. In that regard, we affirm that our oil and gas
reserves are the property of the whole Iraqi people, not
of individuals or political parties claiming ownership
and funnelling their revenue to private accounts. It is
important to ensure federal financial oversight of all
funds collected from oil resources, airports and border
crossings, which must be controlled by the federal
Government, in line with the Iraqi Constitution.

Despite the incitement to killing and the military
mobilization by the leadership of certain parties in
northern Iraq, the Iraqi Government has exercised
wisdom and self-restraint, ensuring the rule of law
and the orderly deployment of federal forces so as to
protect the security of all citizens regardless of their
race, gender, religion or sect.

Iraq looks forward to holding parliamentary and
legislative elections in mid-May 2018. Preparations by
the political forces that represent all Iraqis have begun.
The successful holding of the coming elections on the
basis of a peaceful transfer of power will strengthen the
political stability of Iraq's democratic and pluralistic
political system within a lasting democracy that
will help Iraq resist any crises. It will strengthen the
country's stability and economic development in its
efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals of
the 2030 Agenda. The Council of Ministers has decided
to ban any political party or entity with a military
component from participating in the elections, based
on the Iraqi Constitution, which prohibits the military
from participating in elections.

The post-conflict phase poses a great challenge
for us that surpasses even that of the war itself.
We must therefore strive to re-establish stability,
ensure reconstruction and rekindle hope following
the liberation of our cities, achieved with enormous
costs to human life and property and damage to the
environment, which has been seriously degraded
over the past three decades. That is in addition to the
environmental terrorism perpetrated by the gangs of
Da'esh, which have set fire to oil wells, ruined small
dams, flooded agricultural land and destroyed artefacts
and Iraq's ancient cultural heritage.

We are working for community-based reconciliation
among the civilian population so that our citizens can
feel reassured and the displaced can return home. The
next stage will require genuine, serious cooperation
if we are to prevent any relapses into terrorism and
extremism. We have signed a partnership agreement
with the United Nations Development Programme to
promote civic and community-based reconciliation
in Iraq and to enhance and promote the work of local
peace committees to achieve sustainable, social peace
in the cities that have been liberated from the terrorist
gangs of Da'esh.

Iraq also greatly appreciates the Council's
unanimous adoption of resolution 2379 (2017), on the
collection and preservation of evidence of the crimes
committed by Da'esh terrorist gans in Iraq. Efforts
in this area should be directed at enhancing Iraq's
sovereignty, maintaining its jurisdiction and reinforce
the capabilities of its judiciary in investigating serious
international crimes. That will help to strengthen the
rule of law, put an end to impunity for terrorists and
ensure that they are punished for their terrible crimes in
Iraq. This historic resolution is the result of constructive
cooperation between Iraq and the Security Council.
The decision to criminalize Da'esh is a victory for
human justice and the organization's victims. It is also
an expression ofa practical rejection of the savagery of
Da'esh and an effective condemnation ofits uncivilized
behaviour. The prosecution of these criminals, and
denying them impunity, will act as send strong messages
of deterrence. It will also reassure countries all over the
world through the strong warning it sends to those who
support Da'esh financially, ideologically or through the
media. We call on Member States and international and
regional organizations to help the investigative team in
its work and offer it all the assistance it will need to
strengthen the Iraqi legal and judicial system so as to
promote the rule of law and put an end to impunity.

There is a growing need for the support that the
international community has to offer, including by
participating in the reconstruction of the liberated
areas and the restoration of ordinary livelihoods for
Iraqis as soon as possible. Moreover, as a result of the
war on terrorism and the efforts that have been directed
to liberation operations, other construction projects
as result of the war on terror and the participation of
the population in the liberation campaigns. They have
also seen limited opportunities for development and
an increase in the number of orphans and widows, and
they must be included in any reconstruction projects.
We look forward to the international community's
effective participation in the donor conference to be
held in Kuwait early next year, and we appreciate the
genuine efforts that are being made to help Iraq and
alleviate the suffering of the displaced.

We would also like to renew our call on companies
in friendly States to invest in our economy, including
the energy, housing, transportation and health-care
sectors, as well as in the construction of schools and
communications infrastructure. We want to point out that
we have established laws and a legislative environment
that are friendly to companies and investors.

The Government of Iraq is hoping to deepen
its relationship with its regional partners for its
own development and in order to enhance bilateral
cooperation on issues that are important to the peoples
of the region, by arriving at a joint plan to enhance
general stability in the region and lower the level of
conflict and the flow of terrorists, in accordance with
the common interests and a vision that will positively
affect the lives and security ofthe citizens of the region.
Our Prime Minister, Mr. Haider Al Abadi, has made
many constructive visits to friendly countries, including
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Iran and
Turkey, in order to lay clearly defined foundations for
cooperation in various areas so as to promote security
in the region, which is indivisible.

Where Syria is concerned, Iraq welcomes the
efforts by Russia, Iran and Turkey and by those who
are working to arrive at a comprehensive, intra-Syrian
solution acceptable to all Syrian parties. It should be
eliminate terrorist gangs and cut off all international and
regional support. It must also reduce the recruitment of
more terrorists, which only funnels more such fighters
to the battlefield. It must be a solution that respects the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian State
and helps rid it of the scourge of terrorism, destruction,
displacement and murder, while ultimately achieving
stability and security in the region. We greatly
appreciate Kazakhstan's efforts to ensure success in
the Astana talks, and congratulate its leadership on the
steps that it has taken to consolidate peace and help
bring together the views of Syrians under the umbrella
of the United Nations.

Our relationship with our sister State of Kuwait,
which has stood by Iraq during difficult times, is a
close one, based on firm foundations of constructive
cooperation and fraternity. Iraq is working hard to
locate the missing Kuwaiti persons and prisoners and
Kuwaiti archives. The most recent meeting of the
relevant technical subcommittee was held in Kuwait on
8 August. The competent Iraqi authorities continue to
take into consideration the legal and human aspects of
the issue and to work diligently to locate the remains
of Kuwaiti victims. They have been documenting
and verifying information provided by witnesses and
have also conducted field visits and several excavation
operations in various locations in attempts to locate the
remains of missing Kuwaiti persons and prisoners. The
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Iraq has continued to
place advertisements across various media platforms,
including newspapers and official television channels,
aimed at encouraging anyone with information
regarding the fate of missing Kuwaiti persons and
prisoners to contact the competent authorities.

With regard to the report on UNAMI submitted by
the independent external assessment team, the relevant
Iraqi authorities have taken note of the report and will
study it, especially the recommendations pertaining to
UNAMI's mandate and the priorities suggested by the
team, at which point we will offer our official opinion
about what the Government sees as necessary in the
upcoming stage, which will be one of reconstruction,
aimed at strengthening and increasing Iraqi society's
immunity to terrorist ideology. We hope that this
reconstruction will enable us to achieve economic
prosperity, the voluntary return of the displaced to their
cities and secure basic services. In that regard, I would
like to express my delegation's appreciation for the
efforts of the independent external assessment team in
compiling its report. We look forward to working with
all stakeholders to identify the next steps. There will be

a process of evaluating the report's recommendations

in order to implement measures that will help UNAMI

move forward and provide the services that the Iraqi
people expect from its presence in Iraq, hand in hand

with the United Nations country team.

In conclusion, we would like to once again express
our thanks for the work being carried out by Special
Representative Kubis and his team in advising the
Iraqi Government. We thank UNAMI for its activities
aimed at preserving the unity of Iraq and its territorial
integrity and stability so that it may at last be free of
terrorism. I would also like to take this opportunity
to express my country's deep gratitude to the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Gyorgy Busztin, for his efforts and diligence, as
well as for the legacy that he has left in Iraq. We wish
him every success in his future endeavours.

