Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
resolution just adopted by the Security Council is of

 

singular importance for various reasons. First, it marks the
end of a humanitarian tragedy in which the main victims
were thousands of innocent civilians whose fundamental
human rights were being systematically and persistently
violated.

Secondly, it lays the foundation for a definitive
political solution to the Kosovo crisis that will respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. The rights of minorities and of all the
inhabitants of Kosovo, without exception, to live in a
climate of peace and tolerance must also be unequivocally
recognized.

Thirdly, this resolution confirms the central and
irreplaceable role of the United Nations, and in particular
that of the Security Council and the Secretary-General at
times when there is a need to join efforts in order to
maintain international peace and security.

Lastly, it represents an interpretation of the Charter
that reflects the current recognition of human rights
throughout the international community.

We would not like to let this opportunity go by
without highlighting the valuable contributions made by the
Secretary-General - warnings, efforts and initiatives -
throughout this critical and dramatic process, which date
back to long before the beginning of military action.

We are aware of the task that lies ahead in order for
thousands of refugees and displaced persons to be able to
return to their homes in conditions of safety and security.
We must do our utmost to that end. We urge an early
convening of the donors' conference provided for in
paragraph 13 of the resolution.

Furthermore, we believe that it is essential to express
deep gratitude to those who tirelessly negotiated with the
parties to achieve this peace and the beginning of
reconstruction. The roles of the President of Finland, Martti
Ahtisaari, of the Special Representative of the Russian
Federation, Viktor Chernomyrdin, and of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations must all be acknowledged.
They were all supported by the sense and the content of the
debates and decisions of the Security Council of 26 March
and 14 May, as well as the conviction that once diplomatic
efforts have been exhausted, humanitarian tragedies of the
magnitude that we have witnessed cannot, at the close of
the century, be tolerated in the context of the letter and the
spirit of the Charter.

In closing, at a time like this, when peace and
respect for human rights and democratic values seem to
be accepted, we should not forget that in other regions -
particularly in Africa - thousands of human beings also
wish to lead decent lives in peace and harmony. The
international community should also extend its generosity
to them and not fail them.

We hope that this will have been the last great
tragedy of this century. In this vein, and as we said at the
outset, this resolution takes on far-reaching historical
importance.

