Mr. Sareer (Maldives): On behalf of the Republic
of Maldives, I wish to express our deep appreciation
to the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, in its capacity
as President of the Security Council for the month of
April, for convening this timely debate in connection
with the agenda item on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. We would also like
to express our gratitude to the Secretary-General for
his briefing and his dedicated efforts to find a lasting
solution to the various conflicts that still plague this
region.

The Maldives takes this opportunity to express
once again its unyielding support for the people and
cause of Palestine and its support for bringing to an end
the violence in the region. It is with great sadness that
we bear witness to the continuing atrocities by those
who choose to promote violence, hatred and fear. Time
and again, the progress made has given way to conflict,
making it seemingly impossible to see lasting peace.
The report of the Secretary-General in particular notes
that the access of Palestinians to agricultural lands in
the West Bank has been denied. Agriculture is the main
source of employment and resources for Palestinians,
and this restriction severely limits the economic
security of the Palestinian people and the ability of the
Palestinian Government to provide basic services to its
people.

The Maldives reiterates its call for the full
realization of the right to self-determination of the
Palestinian people and the right of Palestinian people to
establish their own State, alongside Israel, on the basis
of the two-State solution, on the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

Violence and oppression breed hatred. Children
currently living under occupation, oppressed, with
their basic rights denied, are growing up with hatred in
their hearts and revenge on their minds. Today we are
seeing this hatred manifest among young people from
every nation, race and creed, with immense security
implications for the Middle East and the entire world.

It is that hatred, along with misguided views

and information, that fuel recruitment into terrorist
organizations, including the so-called Islamic State.
The so-called Islamic State poses one of the greatest
challenges facing the Islamic Ummah and the greatest
emerging threat to the global community. The atrocities
they commit in the name of Islam are inhumane and
un-Islamic. The Maldives stands with the international
community in strongly condemning their activities and
in strong support of the initiatives of the Council and
other Member States in this regard.

The situation in Syria is of great concern, too.
The fighting continues to escalate across the country.
Yesterday, Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), Pierre Krahenbiihl, informed us
about the perilous situation in Yarmouk. We are deeply
concerned about this degrading humanitarian situation
and the fact that UNRWA did not have access to the
camp and needed secure conditions to deliver aid and
enable the evacuation of civilians. The protection of
civilians, especially those already trapped in vulnerable
situations, such as the refugees of Yarmouk, must take
priority.

We must be resolute in our efforts, as an
international community, to face the challenges of our
time head-on. We see encouragement in the nuclear
deal agreed between Iran and the P5+1. We see hope
in the many pledges of humanitarian assistance and the
many calls against violence and for action. We must
continue in our efforts to provide lasting solutions, to
stop the senseless cycle of violence and hatred, and to
bring lasting change for the security and peace of our
entire global community.

