Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I will try to be brief, given the time
constraints.

We are pleased to again welcome here the Force
Commanders of the United Nations peacekeeping
missions. It is heartening to see this kind of dialogue,
which was initially proposed by the Russian Federation
last year during its presidency of the Council, put into
practice. I would like to here support my British
colleague, who has enriched the practice. The Council
now has the opportunity for more frequent such
meetings using videoconferencing and other modern
technology. Members of the Council should check our
watches with those of our military colleagues to
examine the current problems in the field that are truly
being faced by peacekeepers, and the military
challenges. This practice will ultimately ensure that the
Council is provided with effective military expertise.

I will not go over the importance we attach to
peacekeeping. Like many colleagues, we believe it is a
truly crucial tool of the United Nations for the
maintenance of peace and security. Our peacekeepers
participate in many peacekeeping operations in the
Middle East and various regions of Africa and in Haiti.
We are aware that United Nations peacekeeping is not
fixed in place. It continues to be actively needed. As
has been noted, there are two new peacekeeping
operations in the Abyei region and in South Sudan.

In our view, people in military uniforms, who
make up two thirds of the peacekeepers, play a leading
role in terms of addressing three crucial tasks:
supporting efforts of national Governments to stabilize
the situation and restore peace, protecting civilians,
and monitoring compliance with ceasefire agreements.
But United Nations peacekeeping activities continue to
evolve, including from both conceptual and operational
perspectives. Therefore it is important to adapt in order
to deal with current problems and respond to new
political realities.

Many of the speakers here today have talked
about the fact that there are new challenges and what
kind of challenges there are - challenges that require
joint decisions between military actors and the
diplomats of the Security Council.

We therefore believe that there are several
general points - for example, the unconventional
situations faced by the Blue Helmets. But there are
unwavering principles regarding peacekeeping.
Peacekeepers must strictly abide by their mandates and
avoid involvement in any political conflict or silent
support to a party to a conflict. Such action could lead
to extremely negative consequences and undermine the
reputation of the United Nations.

Clearly, we support comments made by other
colleagues that the mandates of peacekeeping
operations must be clear, feasible and in keeping with
the situations. Therefore, there is still a need to address
the issue of ensuring the necessary level of military
advice for the steps undertaken within United Nations
peacekeeping.

Again we recall our proposal to revitalize the
activities of the Military Staff Committee, which could
elaborate recommendations on operational aspects of
peacekeeping and take part in missions to assess the
preparedness of contingents and infrastructure for
peacekeeping operations. In turn, this would make it
possible to provide the Council with up-to-date
information.

Obviously, the issue of enhancing United Nations
peacekeeping requires more effectively tapping into the
resources of regional organizations and engaging them,
since we agree that peacekeeping is an ancillary
function to the primary functions of the Governments
of countries, for example, engaging the forces of that
State or Government.

The shortfall of financial, logistical and technical
resources means that there is a need to leverage
existing capacities. Therefore we believe it is important
to clearly distinguish between functions in
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding. Under
current peacekeeping mandates those are clearly
linked, but United Nations peacekeepers should only
be given the initial tasks of peacebuilding. The process
of socio-economic reconstruction and related tasks
must be assigned to more specialized structures of the
United Nations system in areas of development, and
also regional organizations with the relevant capacities.
Our hope is that this meeting will make it
possible to work together on further enhancing United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

