Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Malaysia for presiding over the
Security Council this month and for having convened
this open debate on an issue of such great importance
to the international community as children and armed
conflict.

It is of great concern to see the increase in armed
conflicts and humanitarian crises throughout the
world, conflicts in which boys and girls continue to
be used as soldiers. While some have been able to
escape the Violence with their families, many of them,
unfortunately, remain under threat, putting their entire
future in jeopardy. Both girls and boys are used as
tools of war, and they are exposed to sexual Violence,
psychological trauma, abduction, recruitment, and
other violations of their human rights. For those boys
and girls, their hopes for a dignified life by 2030 will
not be achieved.

We welcome the initiatives taken by UNICEF,
the United Nations Population Fund, UN-Women and
other United Nations agencies in addressing this issue.
In particular, we commend the work of Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, as well as all
the other actors involved in implementing the Security
Council mandate for the protection of children in armed
conflict and in ensuring an effective and comprehensive
follow-up to the reporting mechanism.

We must stand firm if we wish to permanently
eliminate the recruitment of children in armed conflict.
While children have no voice in political conflicts, they
have the most to lose. This past week saw the publication
of a report by the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, which bears a close connection
with the subject at hand. It recommended prohibiting
the sending of peacekeeping troops from countries
currently on the lists in the Secretary-General's annual
reports on children and armed conflict and conflict-
related sexual violence, as long as they remain on the
list. We believe that the establishment of accountability,
the elimination of impunity, and the imposition of
prosecution and penalties are important in efforts
to proceed against all those who commit violations
against children. National justice systems, regional
and subregional cooperation and the international
community should ensure that such proceedings take
place. Political will, the implementation of initiatives
to protect children affected by armed conflict and the
establishment of protection mechanisms are essential
to the prevention of Violations against children and the
recovery of children affected by armed conflicts, and it
is our responsibility as States to play that role.

I am pleased to announce that Panama has taken
the decision to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration,
presented on 29 May at the Oslo Conference on Safe
Schools: Protecting Education from Attack, since there
are 28 million children in conflict areas today who
cannot go to school, and, according to the Conference's
2014 report, "Education under Attack", schools have
been attacked in 70 countries. We call on those Member
States that have not yet done so tojoin this initiative. We
wish to reiterate our commitment to the global effort to
protect students, teachers, schools and universities by
supporting the Declaration.

Lastly, we support resolution 2225 (2015) on
children and armed conflict, introduced today by the
representative of Malaysia under the agenda item, a
resolution of which we were a sponsor and which seeks
to strengthen efforts to address the abduction of children
in armed conflict. We would reiterate the primary role
of States in protecting and assisting all the children
concerned. We hope through such tangible efforts to
reverse the tragic upward trend in the recruitment of
children in armed conflicts and at the same time to
focus on ensuring that those children can participate
in the reconstruction of their communities and States.

