Mr. Muiioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the comprehensive introduction to the
report on Bosnia and Herzegovina made by Lord
Ashdown, High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
pursuant to resolution 1031 (1995). I also thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for the information he has
furnished. We are particularly pleased to welcome
Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As this is the first meeting at which you are
presiding, Sir, we cannot fail to congratulate you and
our Chinese colleague on his conduct of the Council's
work last month.

We fully agree with the High Representative to
the effect that only through the full rule of law, the
implementation of economic reform and institution-
building will Bosnia and Herzegovina be able to
continue to distance itself from the hardships of the
1990s, when the world witnessed one of the bloodiest
chapters of recent history. The priorities set by Lord
Ashdown are thus sound and deserve our full support.

The current period has been marked by progress
that deserves our recognition. First, it is particularly
heartening to note that the Refugee and Return Task
Force has completed its work. According to the current
report, its efforts led to the return to their homes of
almost 1 million people and to the implementation of
property laws to the satisfaction of most claimants. It is
commendable that the conclusions reached by the
commissions of experts on indirect tax policy, defence
and intelligence have had tangible results, including the
establishment of the Indirect Taxation Authority and
the promulgation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina law
on defence. We also hope that the pending legislative
procedures will be completed, giving Bosnia and
Herzegovina a modern and professionally-run
intelligence service capable of addressing the issues of
international terrorism and organized crime. As to the
certification of local police, we call on the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to respect the prevailing
international legislation.

It is worth noting the imminent establishment in
April of a State-level, multi-ethnic high judicial and
prosecutorial council that will serve as the foundation
for a new system ofjustice in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also hope that, in the first quarter of this year, the
50 new economic reforms proposed by the Bulldozer
Committee will be adopted.

Despite the progress achieved, political conflict
persists between the Government and the opposition
and within the governing coalition. There is also the
problem of the reunification and subsequent economic
development of the ethnically divided city of Mostar.
In that regard, Lord Ashdown's remarks on economic
growth identified one of the key issues for the long
term. There is also a need to improve the
administration of the three public telecommunications
companies.

We must continue to thwart those who seek to
undermine the International Tribunal, to prevent it from
completing its mandate and to provide material support
to persons accused of war criminals have yet to be
arrested. For all these pending tasks it is essential that
there be fuller cooperation of all States and
international and regional organizations, particularly
with respect to arresting all those indicted who are still
at large.

The recognized progress in implementation of the
Dayton Agreements distances us from the atrocities in
Srebrenica, Sepa and Banja Luka, to name some towns
and localities that stick in our minds.

Lastly, Chile will continue to lend its assistance.
It has provided police officers to UNMIBH and is now
providing officers and troops from the Chilean army so
that Bosnia and Herzegovina can become a country of
peace and progress.

