Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like first to thank
Special Representative Mohammed Ibn Chambas for
his comprehensive briefing on the latest situation in
West Africa and the Sahel, as well as the activities of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS).

Indonesia fully supports the work of UNOWAS in
West Africa and the Sahel. There has been commendable
progress in areas such as political governance and
women's participation. Yet, there remain challenges to
overcome in ensuring peace, stability and development
in the region.

The security situation in a number of countries of
West Africa and the Sahel remains a cause for concern.
As stated in the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2019/549), there has been an upsurge in terrorist
attacks and intercommunal violence fuelled by the
activities of violent extremist groups. It also suggests
that maritime crime, transnational organized crime and
illicit trafficking have increased in the region. This has
not only resulted in civilian casualties, but has also
exacerbated the humanitarian situation.

In this vein, I would like to reiterate three main
points which I deem important in order to address the
security challenge in the region.

First, Indonesia commends the initiative of
countries of West Africa and the Sahel to combat
terrorism through collective security efforts such as the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the Joint Force of
the Group of Five (G-5) for the Sahel. Such initiatives
should receive all the necessary support. Indonesia
welcomes the expansion of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali's support to all contingents of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force under resolution 2480 (2019). We hope that it will
contribute to the achievement of tangible results in the
operations of the Joint Force. We must note, however,
that the collective endeavours should be complemented
by national efforts to tackle terrorism. In this regard,
we believe that it is of utmost importance to strengthen
State presence and institutions, including police and
judicial institutions.

Secondly, it is crucial to address the root causes
of insecurity. A security approach is not a panacea
for insecurity in the region. There are many advances
necessary to ensure the alleviation of the humanitarian
situation, reconstruction and economic and social
development. Local grievances must also be addressed
to prevent the expansion of violent extremism.
International partners should continue to support
the implementation of the stabilization strategy for
countries affected by Boko Haram; the G-5 Sahel
priority investment plan, the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations Support
Plan for the Sahel. These are important in order to
build a resilient society through inclusive social and
economic development.

Thirdly, it is necessary to adopt region-wide
approaches to conflict resolution and management.
The proximity of countries, the cross-border activity of
extremist groups and other factors raise the possibility
of a spillover of insecurity in the region. That must be
countered with greater cooperation among countries
in West Africa and the Sahel. Various United Nations
agencies should enhance their synergies and support
to regional and subregional organizations. In that
regard, Indonesia welcomes the upcoming Economic
Community of West African States special summit on
terrorism, which will take place in September. Such
joint efforts could be more focused on preventing the
resurgence of violence and conflict in the region. That
is vital to ensuring that many hard-won gains translate
to lasting peace and prosperity in West Africa and
the Sahel.

