Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
thank Mr. Tom Koenigs, Special Representative of the
Secretary- General, for having presented the report on
the situation in Afghanistan. Let me at the outset take
this opportunity to pay tribute to and thank the staff of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF), Afghanistan's neighbours, and donor countries
for their collective efforts in accompanying
Afghanistan on its path to becoming a vibrant and
stable member of the international community. The
Afghan Compact is a welcome new framework for
partnership between Afghanistan and the international
community.

In the last four years, Afghanistan has made
significant progress towards building a democratic
State with accountable institutions. Progress has also
been registered in the rehabilitation of the basic
infrastructure required to support economic and social
development.

The most urgent needs, which require ongoing
attention, include the strengthening of Government
structures; enforcing the basics of good governance,
justice and the rule of law; upholding human rights;
disarming and disbanding illegal armed groups;
continuing with efforts to reduce the production and
trafficking of narcotics; and laying the foundation for
sustainable economic and social development. Similar
attention also needs to be directed at strengthening the
justice system, which lacks qualified personnel and the
infrastructure to administer justice fairly and
effectively. It is equally important that the leadership
should also address social issues such as housing, the
continuing empowerment of women, and the
reintegration of returnees from neighbouring countries.

It is clear that a persistent challenge remains in
the area of security, as suicide bombings continue,
using increasingly sophisticated methods. The situation
demands enhanced training and a well-equipped
National Police with the capacity to project itself
beyond Kabul and effectively cover the whole country.
That should go hand in hand with the building of a
fully operational Afghan National Army whose
immediate assignment would be to disband illegal
armed groups and terrorist structures.

We urge all those involved in violence to stop
their illegal and criminal activities and instead to join
in the task of restoring security and development to the
Afghan people.

We believe that the Government and the people
must lead and own the process. However, they need
support from the international community, as was
demonstrated by the recent launching of the
Afghanistan Compact in London, which promises
progress and stability for the still-fragile institutions
built on the foundations of the Bonn process. We
commend all those involved in the preparation and
launching of the Compact. That creative and timely
initiative was aimed at sustaining international
attention and support so as to ensure that Afghanistan
post-conflict institutions are sustained and that the
country does not slide back into a crisis.

With international support, Afghanistan can now
embark on the next stage of State consolidation.
UNAMA has successfully completed its task with
respect to the Bonn Agreement, but it continues to
have an important role to play in Afghanistan. We
support the extension of its adjusted mandate to enable
it to continue to play a supportive role with respect to
the Afghan people and Government in the
implementation of the new Afghanistan Compact.

