Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian): I am
speaking in Russian in order to be properly understood.
I support what Ambassador Churkin said with regard to
the need to speak openly and be extremely honest. I just
want to clarify a few issues he raised in his statement. I
will be clear.

First, as to the occupation or threat of occupation
of the Pechersk Lavra monastery in Kyiv, which is in
canonical relationship with the Moscow Patriarchate,
when the unrest began we received information that
there might be some kind of provocation against the
monastery. The monastery issued a statement that same
day and repeated it the next day to the effect that the
exterior of the monastery was being guarded by ordinary
people from the Maidan to prevent any provocation. That
is the entire answer. The demonstrators were defending
the monastery from possible provocations.

As to the Black Sea fleet, I have something to add.
Our Agreement provides for a numerical strength for
the Black Sea fleet of 11,000 people, including about
2,000 marines and 5,300 other military from the Russian
armed forces. Let us pay close attention - in December
2013, our Ministry was notified by the Russian side that
the Black Sea fleet would be maintained at a numerical
strength of 11,000.

I would now like to go back to statement made by
the representative of Jordan. He quoted the annex of
General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX), in which the
concept of aggression is defined. Article 3 of the annex
contains a non-exhaustive list of what would qualify as
an act of aggression. The list provides for the eventuality
that if within the territory of a State f for example,
Ukraine - the armed forces of another State - for
example, Russia, and in this case the Black Sea fleet - are
present with the agreement of the receiving State, and the
permitted number and location of the troops are specified,
and there is a violation of the specified number and
location of troops without the agreement of the receiving
country, that is an act of aggression. In that regard, I am
not even referring to the number of military forces that
infringed the airspace of Ukraine, namely, M-14 combat
helicopters that were not part of the Black Sea fleet, or
the many other transport aircraft that have infringed our
airspace. There has thus been an increase in the number
of Russian military within our territory, in violation of
all of our agreements. That is aggression.

There has been much speculation about language.
I and my Administration have explained to the press
and to many of my colleagues that the first law upon
Ukraine's independence, promulgated in 1992, was the
law on national minorities, which guaranteed equal
rights and protection of the national interests of all ethnic
groups, including linguistic minorities. In principle, the
substantive law that was adopted in 2012 under pressure
by the former Ukrainian Government did not take into
account more than 2,000 amendments, and the opposition
did not participate in the vote.

We did not need that legislation because it was
enough to have the 1992 law and the Constitution. I
would recall that when Ukraine went to the Council
of Europe, it took on an obligation to sign and to
ratify the European Charter for Regional or Minority
Languages, not languages of minorities but minority
languages. The former Governments redid the Charter,
saying that it should apply not only to languages such
as Crimean Tartar, Karaim and others that need to be
protected, but to all languages of national minorities
that are protected by law. We have therefore now got rid
of that law. The Government said that the Parliament
would once again consider the ratification of the
Charter, which we undertook to ratify. We signed and
ratified it. Incidentally, to date, the Russian Federation
has not ratified the Charter. But we are ratifying it.
For languages that do not have a territory and have no
official definition, we will defend those languages that
would disappear because there are not many people
who speak them.

With regard to the Party of Regions, unfortunately
an untruth was said. The Party of Regions, the
former ruling party, was a large faction of the current
Parliament. Moreover, one of the leaders of that faction,
Mr. Tygipko, said that he would run for President. No
one heard that. The ruling party called Mr. Yanukovych
what he is, that is, a coward and a traitor. It was not
a comment about the Parliament. The Parliament was
elected legally for a long time, not in a revolutionary
way. It has all the power that it needs to appoint the
Government. It has the full range of powers to conduct
elections. Today, it was announced there would be
presidential elections on 25 May. Let us therefore give
that an opportunity to work and for us to learn how to
live together and how to govern.

I agree that we need assistance so that we can get
past this crisis, which has been going on for years, and
help the country to build its future in such a way that
people will not be ashamed to live there. We need that
assistance in order to form a civil society and, of course,
we invite all to come and help and to see how we are
doing that but not to bother us when we do not ask for it.

