Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/125) presented
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Central African Republic, Mr. Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga, and we take this opportunity to reiterate our
full support for its recommendations. We also take this
opportunity to thank all of today's briefers.

The ongoing violence promoted by the armed
groups, the asymmetrical attacks and the constant
inter-ethnic and intercommunal confrontations driven
by the competition to exert control over the territory
and its natural resources show that work still needs
to be done in the area of security and are factors that
aggravate the critical humanitarian situation on a daily
basis. According to the latest report of the Secretary-
General, approximately 50 per cent of the population in
that country depends on outside assistance to survive,
and 2.5 million Central Africans require urgent
humanitarian assistance, 100,000 more than in the
previous period. The number of internally displaced
persons increased by 70 per cent in 2017, reaching a
total of 1.2 million people, the highest rate in the history
of the Central African Republic. Food insecurity has
increased and currently affects one out of every two
people. Approximately 500 schools closed at the end of
2017 due to insecurity, including in some regions where
there are now no schools open. That is why we are
calling on the international community to continue its
support so as to address the population's growing need
for the humanitarian assistance and provide financing
that is predictable and sustainable.

Furthermore, Bolivia condemns the constant
attacks perpetrated by armed groups against civilians,
MINUSCA and the peacekeeping forces. We value
and salute the members of the Mission - the military,
police and civilian personnel - who are working in a
volatile and high-risk environment. We commend the
Mission's efforts to identify regions where additional
capacity is needed to protect the civilian population,
in particular its strategy for the prevention of violence
in connection with migration. In that regard, and in
order to increase their efficiency, we encourage them
to implement the recommendations of the internal
report regarding the special investigation concerning
the protection of civilians, so that they may effectively
carry out their mandate in accordance with resolution
2387 (2017). We also reiterate that sexual exploitation
and abuse are unacceptable, and we support MINUSCA
in continuing its efforts to ensure compliance with the
zero-tolerance policy.

Despite the complicated context of the security
situation, we highlight the progress in the protection
of civilians, the strengthening of State authority,
inter-institutional cooperation, the training of the
Central African armed forces, inter alia. Such activities
genuinely strengthen the peace process, and should be
built upon and fully implemented.

Similarly, we highlight the new prefectural
administration, the approval of the national budget for
2018 and the development of a strategic framework for
security sector reform. We commend the Government
of the Central African Republic, led by President
Touadera, on its quest for reconciliation, inclusive
dialogue and understanding among the parties. We also
welcome ongoing efforts to restore the court system
and the progress made to end impunity, including the
condemnation of armed groups, the operationalization
of the Special Criminal Court, the demilitarization of
the prison system and the development of a strategic
framework for security sector reform. We reiterate the
importance of equal participation in all these areas and
within the overall peace process.

We condemn all acts to incite violence - in particular
on ethnic or religious grounds - that undermine peace,
stability and security in the Central African Republic.
Once again, we call on all armed groups to lay down
their weapons, put aside sectarian interests of all kinds
that hinder fruitful dialogue, and reach agreements
that are in the interests of the civilian population and
the stability of the country. In addition, we call on
them to fully commit to the process of demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration.

We urge the Central African Republic to implement
its national programme on demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration. We underscore the efforts of and the
support provided by MINUSCA and the United Nations
Mine Action Service. We highlight the work of both
entities in the area of humanitarian demining.

In conclusion, we welcome the active and ongoing
support of regional and subregional organizations,
the participation of the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the panel
of facilitators of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation, whose political efforts towards peace
and cooperation are of paramount importance to the
process of reconciliation, with strict respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Central African Republic. Central Africans are
primarily responsible for achieving peace and stability
in their country.
