The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Poland for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The most effective way to protect civilians is
to prevent and end conflicts. That is why conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding are, and
will remain, the highest priorities for the whole
United Nations system. Conflict around the world
is unleashing relentless horror and suffering upon
millions of civilians - women, girls, men and boys.
More than 128 million people around the world need
immediate humanitarian aid, and that staggering
figure is mainly driven by conflict. Last year, the
United Nations recorded the death or injury of more
than 26,000 civilians in just six countries affected by
conflict: Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Somalia
and Yemen. Ten thousand of them were in Afghanistan.

Civilians in conflict zones are also subjected to
horrific violations of human rights, including rape and
other sexual violence. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, the United Nations documented
more than 800 cases of conflict-related sexual violence
last year - a 56 per cent increase over 2016. The
consequences of such attacks remain with survivors for
the rest of their lives.

Conflicts continue to force millions of people to
flee their homes for an uncertain future, often with
limited access to basic help and protection. By the end
of 2016, 65.6 million people had been uprooted by war,
violence and persecution. Countless others go missing.
The bombing and shelling of towns and cities kill or
injure tens of thousands of civilians every year and
lay waste to homes and vital infrastructure, including
water and power systems. In Syria, for example, attacks
involving air and ground-launched explosive weapons
reportedly killed and injured significant numbers of
civilians in Aleppo, Deir ez-Zor, Homs, Idlib, Raqqa
and Rif Dimashq, destroying essential infrastructure,
schools and hospitals.

Around the world, medical facilities are routinely
attacked. Humanitarian and medical personnel are
targeted or prevented from carrying out their duties.
In 2017, the World Health Organization recorded 322
attacks resulting in 242 deaths among medical personnel
and patients. That is unconscionable. In some cases,
caring for the wounded and sick - the most basic acts
ofhumanity - can lead to criminal proceedings against
health workers. Medical supplies are looted or removed
from convoys. Parties to conflict resort to threats or
impose bureaucratic procedures that prevent people
from accessing the health care they desperately need.
Women, particularly those who are pregnant or need
antenatal care, are often disproportionality affected.

Conflict is also an important driver of global food
insecurity. Ten of the 13 major food crises in 2017
were driven by conflict. In Yemen, for example, nearly
3 million women and children are acutely malnourished,
and more than 8 million people do not know where their
next meal is coming from.

As bleak as the situation is, my report (S/2018/462)
outlines some reasons for hope. There is growing
recognition that respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights law contributes to reducing
conflict and countering terrorism. In General Assembly
resolution 70/291, adopted in July 2016, Member States
stressed that, when counter-terrorism efforts violate
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
they betray the values they seek to uphold and fuel
violent extremism. I welcome that acknowledgement.
Some parties to conflict and Member States have also
taken steps to enhance respect for the law and improve
the protection ofcivilians. Those steps include measures
to reduce the harm resulting from the use of certain
types of explosive weapons, mechanisms to track
civilian harm in Somalia and the adoption of a national

policy on preventing civilian casualties in Afghanistan.
The United Nations strongly supports those efforts.

We also see Governments, civil society and others
stepping up to advocate for change. Last November
in Maputo, 19 African States adopted a communique
on protecting civilians from the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. I was proud to join the
campaign under the slogan Civilians are Not a Target,
launched by the United Nations and partners on World
Humanitarian Day last year. Such initiatives have the
potential to translate into concrete change. To that end,
my report recommends three actions.

First, all Governments should develop a national
policy framework to protect civilians in conflict. Such
a framework should set out proactive measures that
mitigate and respond to civilian harm caused by national
militaries, partner forces and international coalitions.
They should make arms exports conditional on respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights
law, in line with the Arms Trade Treaty. And they
should improve their ability to protect civilians in
urban warfare, including finding alternatives to the use
of explosive weapons.

Secondly, Member States should support the
United Nations and others in engaging with non-State
armed groups to develop policies, codes of conduct and
action plans to protect civilians. Seventeen non-State
armed groups have already signed action plans with the
United Nations to end the recruitment and use of child
soldiers. We need more of those initiatives.

Thirdly, Member States should support heightened
advocacy on the protection of civilians and take
concerted efforts to ensure accountability for serious
violations, with a view to ending the climate of impunity.
That should include credible national investigations
into serious violations and full support for the work of
the International Criminal Court.

I urge the Council and all Member States to give
those practical measures serious consideration.

I also urge Council Members not to allow political
differences to prevent or undermine action to protect
civilians. That is vital not only to save lives and safeguard
our common humanity; protecting civilians in conflict
is also the only way to lay the foundation for sustained
peace. Violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law in situations of armed conflict

are correlated with protracted wars, with radicalization
and violent extremism. Avoiding civilian casualties and
providing unhindered access to humanitarian assistance
speak to who we are as members of one human family.
They are essential to avoid a cycle of instability and
resentment, and make lasting peace and reconciliation
possible. I urge the Council to do everything in its
power to protect the millions of civilians caught up in
conflict around the world.

