Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): My delegation
wishes first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting to continue consideration of the
extremely grave situation in Palestine.
My delegation is deeply dismayed at Israel's
absolute disregard of repeated calls by the international
community to immediately withdraw from Palestinian
territories. Israel's belligerence towards the Council's
resolutions, particularly resolution 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002), is evidence of its determination to
obliterate the Palestinian people. The recent events in
Jenin, which have had appalling consequences for the
lives and property of the Palestinian population,
demonstrate Israel's disrespect for international law
and international humanitarian law. The assault on the
refugee camp resulted in an estimated death toll of 100
to 200 Palestinians. Helicopter gunships fired at the
camp and bulldozers knocked down houses, some of
them with their occupants still inside. Not even United
Nations facilities were spared.

In this regard, we welcome the decision to send a
fact-finding mission to the occupied territories, to be
led by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, to investigate and report on human
rights violations by the Israeli forces. We hope that the
mission will be undertaken without delay. Israel's
procrastination in allowing the fact-finding mission to
proceed immediately speaks for itself. One can surmise
that Israel is concealing the true gravity of the
appalling consequences of its actions.

My delegation strongly believes that immediate
measures must be taken to address the appalling
humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories. As
we speak, the Palestinian population remains at risk
and continues to suffer human rights violations at the
hands of Israel. For the Palestinians, the Israeli actions
have led to a near-paralysis of life in all its aspects. Mr.
Kofi Annan has stated that Israeli forces have widely
flouted international humanitarian principles and
human rights standards. Mr. Roed-Larsen, the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, has emphasized that there exists a
humanitarian imperative on the ground requiring every
possible action to save lives, and he has demanded that
Israel fulfil its obligations under international law in
that regard. We hope that Israel will come to its senses
and heed the call to cooperate with the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and the International Committee of the Red
Cross.

There has been no improvement in the situation
in Palestine. While Israeli forces might have withdrawn
from some areas of the occupied territories, the
curfews enforced by sniper fire remain in effect,
preventing Palestinians from leaving their homes to get
food or medical help. Palestinians are being rounded up
for questioning. The civilian casualties and the
destruction continue unabated. Mr. Arafat remains
under siege in the Palestinian Authority's headquarters
in Ramallah and is seriously restricted in his ability to
lead his people and contain the violence. Great damage
has been done to the Palestinian Authority and its
institutions, weakening its capacity to provide basic
services to the population. These deplorable conditions
caused by Israel are pulling the parties further apart
and away from the negotiating table. They present
major obstacles to peace, to which Israel claims to
aspire.

In our last statement before the Council on this
issue, my delegation welcomed the peace mission of
United States Secretary of State Colin Powell, hoping
that his efforts would result in a ceasefire and would
lead the parties to resume negotiations on a lasting
solution to the problem. On the contrary, with absolute
disregard for the efforts of its closest ally, Israel
continues to pursue its military operations in the
Palestinian territories. In fact, as the peace mission
ended, Israel swept into two more Palestinian villages.
Clearly, the mission did not achieve the ceasefire and
the implementation of resolution 1402 (2002) for
which the international community had hoped.
Secretary Powell himself noted that Mr. Sharon still
planned to raid Palestinian territories if he deemed it
necessary. There has not been the slightest show of a
cessation of hostilities by Israel. With the failure of
Secretary Powell's mission, Israel will continue to have
a free hand to do as it pleases.

With regard to the international peace conference
proposed by Mr. Sharon, my delegation finds it
inconceivable that such a conference should exclude
the participation of Mr. Arafat, a principal actor in the
peace process and the legitimate leader of the
Palestinian people. That proposal is a non-starter. It
reflects Israel's insincerity about wanting a peaceful
solution to this problem.

Malaysia continues to hold the belief that what is
urgently needed to stop the violence is for the Council
to urgently authorize the dispatch of a United Nations
or international peacekeeping force to the occupied
territories. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General's call for the creation of a third-
party mechanism in the form of a multinational
peacekeeping force as the only means to end the
bloodshed. The peacekeeping force would be able to
stabilize the situation on the ground and pave the way
for the resumption of negotiations. We fully agree that
the force would have to be strong enough to render
ineffective any challenge to its authority. In view of the
serious present and potential dangers to the civilian
population of the current escalation of violence, we
urge the Council to take immediate action to dispatch
an international peacekeeping force to the occupied
territories.

My delegation fears that the worst is yet to come
for the Palestinians. We strongly urge the Council to do
all it can to protect the Palestinian civilian population
and to end the hostilities in the region. It is also my
delegation's earnest hope that the "quartet" and the
United Nations will continue to undertake further
initiatives and will play a prominent role in striving to
bring lasting peace to the Middle East.
