Mr. Alday Gonzalez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
A quick look at the list of crises that the Council has
dealt with this month alone shows clearly that despite
our collective international achievements in terms of
the maintenance of international peace and security,
much remains for the United Nations to do in order to
fulfil the mission that was entrusted to it 70 years ago.

That is why we would like to thank the delegation
of China for this opportunity to take the floor during
this open debate on the challenges we face in terms of
preserving succeeding generations from the scourge
of war and, above all, to discuss the lessons learned
and what actions can be taken in order to complete our
work.

Collective security is based on respect for the
sovereignty and legal equality of States and the self-
determination of peoples. Observance of these principles
has undoubtedly made it possible to avoid a new world
war, but we are convinced that the maintenance of
international peace and security requires all, not just
some, Member States to work together in order to
achieve these objectives with greater efficiency and
effectiveness.

The changing nature of armed conflicts and the
new threats we are facing in the twenty-first century
remind us daily of the relevance of the purposes
and principles of the Charter and of our collective
responsibility to respond to traditional threats and to
the new challenges being posed by non-State actors,
which, through atrocities one more cruel than the
other, violate the basic norms of international law and
threaten structurally human rights and the rule of law.

Mexico believes that there can be no lasting peace
without justice. The effective prevention of armed
conflicts requires also a collective effort to strengthen
the rule of law both nationally and internationally.
It is a prerequisite for ensuring the development
and emergence of more just and inclusive societies.
Development and the rule of law are two sides of the
same coin.

Given the fact that Latin America is the region
that resorts most often to the International Court of
Justice, it is clear that the Mexican State recognizes
the fundamental role of the Court as well as that of the
International Criminal Court in terms of strengthening
of the rule of law. That is why we take the opportunity
of this open debate to remind the permanent members
of the Security Council of the need for them to accept
the mandatory jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice in order to encourage other States to strengthen
their commitment to international justice.

As several speakers who have preceded me have
pointed out already, the current international scenario
requires reflection, analysis and a discussion of the
innovative mechanisms that are needed to improve
the responsiveness and efficiency of the Organization.
Mexico believes that every effort aimed at maintaining
international peace and security and strengthening
the responsibility to protect should be accompanied
by the promotion, respect for and fulfilment of human
rights and international humanitarian law. We have a
collective duty to strengthen prevention and cooperation
mechanisms in order to support and assist Governments
unable to meet their primary responsibility for
protecting their peoples, and we should fight to create
tight bonds between the responsibility to protect and
preventive diplomacy. As a founding Member of the
United Nations, Mexico considers it essential that we
discuss, reach consensus on and implement reforms
that reflect what we have learned over the past 70 years
and, without undermining the guiding principles of
the Organization, move towards a more transparent,
democratic and effective structure.

Without comprehensive reform of its structure and
working methods, the Security Council runs the risk of
falling into irrelevance, exacerbating the problems we
have to deal with and undermining the principles and
purposes that sustain our collective security mechanism.
Both in our national capacity and as a member of the
Uniting for Consensus group, we are working to arrive
at realistic and achievable commitments that address
the paralysis that often prevents timely action on the
part of the Security Council, while at the same time
strengthening its democracy, legitimacy, transparency
and accountability. Reform of the Security Council
cannot be achieved by granting new privileges to a
minority of States wishing to further their national
interests to the detriment of the membership as a whole.
Our goal should be to strengthen multilateralism, not
avoid it. Mexico believes that the Charter's institutional
arrangements cannot contradict the goals it promotes,
and has therefore joined France in developing a code of
conduct that would encourage restrictions on using the
veto in situations involving war crimes, crimes against
humanity or genocide.

We share the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group's conviction that greater
inclusiveness and accountability in the Council will
strengthen its efficiency and effectiveness. We welcome
and support the sustained work done by its members
to improve working methods. The election of the next
Secretary-General presents a unique opportunity to
strengthen transparency and accountability, and to
achieve realistic and tangible reform around the time of
the seventieth anniversary. We should discuss ideas and
proposals for improving the entire selection process,
starting with the nomination of candidates right through
to establishing a more important and decisive role for
the General Assembly.

Mexico has historically advocated for the peaceful
settlement of disputes and remains convinced that
genuinely strengthening the Organization's role depends
to a great degree on strengthening the enforcement
of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
I reiterate my country's commitment to continuing
to participate actively and constructively in the
enforcement and full implementation of the purposes
and principles set in the Charter. The seventieth
anniversary of the Organization compels us to reflect
on the opportunities ahead. Member States must find
sufficient political will to reassess and transform the
way we operate, placing the individual at the centre of
everything we do. None of our responsibilities is more
important than ensuring that women, men and children
around the world have the opportunity to better their
lives and live in peace.

