Mr. Oshima (Japan): Let me first thank
Ambassador De Soto for his first briefing since his
appointment as Special Coordinator. We have high
expectations for his work as we approach the start of
Israel's disengagement from Gaza and part of the West
Bank. We look forward to Mr. De Soto's prudent
handling of that process.

While we welcome the start of the disengagement
from Gaza and appreciate the Israeli Government's
firm determination to implement the withdrawal
despite some domestic opposition, we must express our
concerns over the recent resumption of violence by
militant Palestinian groups and the Israeli army. Such
violence threatens the continuation of the tahadiya. In
those circumstances, it is important that President
Abbas exercise strong leadership to ensure self-
restraint on the part of the Palestinian groups
concerned. We appreciate that Palestinian groups,
including Hamas, have confirmed their continued
observation of the tahadiya. Israel and the international
community should provide effective support for
President Abbas.

The essential point in this connection is that the
withdrawal should be conducted undisturbed and
should make it possible to open the way for the
resumption of the road map's implementation. For that
to happen, it is critically important that the two parties
make the utmost effort and that, at the same time, the
international donor community provide financial and
other support for that effort, including financial support
from Arab countries.

Vigorous efforts are needed on the Palestinian
side to bring about drastic improvement in security
measures. For the Palestinian Authority, the challenge
is to reduce and stop violence. That is important not
merely for a successful disengagement from Gaza or
for the promotion of peace with Israel, but also, in a
more fundamental sense, as proof that the Authority
has the basic capability necessary to function as a
State. We therefore support the reform policy pursued
by President Abbas, just as we also support the efforts
made by General Ward in that area.

Japan supports the coordination efforts made by
Mr. Wolfensohn to secure trade and communications
routes, including easing restrictions on movement and
the construction of a safe passageway. We expect that
Israel will adopt a more flexible attitude that will
ensure the safety of movement of the Palestinian
people and of goods with greater efficiency.

Japan has sought to play an active and
constructive role to promote peace in the Middle. As
part of those efforts, my Government invited Prime
Minister Sharon and President Abbas to Japan.
President Abbas made his visit last May. On that
occasion, a new assistance programme for Palestinians
amounting to $100 million was announced to facilitate
disengagement and rehabilitation in Gaza and the West
Bank. That programme will be implemented as soon as
possible. That was followed by the visit to Israel and
Palestine of our special envoy for the Middle East,
Ambassador Arima, to underscore that the success of
the disengagement from Gaza was a prerequisite for
the revitalization of the road map. Japan will continue
its active engagement in the area of economic
assistance, and for the advancement of the peace
process, including through further emergency relief for
the Palestinian people in Gaza and the northern West
Bank and through mid-term and long-term assistance
for the sustainability of the Palestinian economy.

Concerning the issue of the wall, we saw a
positive development in February of this year, when a
considerable part of the wall's path in the southern area
was rerouted from a course running inside the Green
Line to one coinciding with the Green Line. However,
construction of the wall inside the Green Line
continues at other locations. With regard to this issue,
we have maintained the view that, first, the lives of a
large number of innocent Israelis have been lost
through Palestinian terrorist acts, and that the
Palestinian Authority must make the utmost effort to
suppress terrorism.

Secondly, the construction of the wall inside the
Green Line - which the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice determined to be contrary
to international law - is adversely affecting the
livelihood of Palestinians and is prejudicial to the
outcome of the final status negotiations. It must
therefore be stopped. It is to be deplored that the
construction of the wall inside the Green Line is
continuing. We are especially concerned about the
construction of the wall in the area of East Jerusalem,
which is taking place at the very moment when
heightened caution is required for the success of the
withdrawal from Gaza. That construction is also taking
place in an area that is considered one of the most
sensitive in the final status negotiations and that has a
large number of people who will be adversely affected.

We believe that the resolution of the issue of the
wall and that of settlements is possible only through
the process of the steady implementation of the road
map. That is yet another reason why it is so important
for the two parties to make disengagement from Gaza a
success and to allow that success to flow on to re-
energizing the process of implementing the road map.
Japan stands ready to offer its support to the two
parties to implement the road map and realize the
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace.

Japan welcomes the formation of the Siniora
Government in Lebanon on 19 July. As Lebanon faces
many difficult challenges that will require delicate
handling, we hope that Prime Minister Siniora and his
Government will be able to exert leadership and set
about addressing the many problems at hand as soon as
possible.

