Mr. Lubbers: Let me express my thanks for the
very rich contributions in terms of comments and
questions.

Allow me to begin by responding to the first
remark of the representative of China. He said, quite
correctly, that we have been successful in a number of
situations, which he mentioned. This is an invitation to
the Security Council to broaden its efforts to include
other regions where sufficient success has not yet been
achieved, and I would underline this. This also relates
to a remark made by the representative of Singapore in
which she quoted a statement made two years ago by
Mrs. Ogata, who elaborated on the key responsibility
of the Security Council to build and to keep peace as
essential to reducing the number of new refugees. In
fact, working for peace creates part of the solution:
people can then go home.

I strongly agree also with the statement made by
several representatives that assistance to host countries
is a very important element. It has become very clear in
the context of global consultations that, while the
international community fully accepts, and wants to
continue with, the commitment not to push out but to
find solutions for refugees, this principled attitude can
be put into practice only when there is fair burden-
sharing. But fair burden-sharing is achieved through
different corridors. One of them is, indeed, support for
the host countries, and I will repeat what I said in the
first response: assistance must be given not only to
refugees in the host countries, but also to the areas in
which large refugee populations are located. We have
to relate better to the host communities there.

I want to stress once again in particular - and I
think that this point was made also by the
representative of Ireland - the link with the African
partnership initiative, and, more generally, I would say,
with development assistance. It is absolutely wrong
thinking to see refugees and internally displaced
persons in terms of humanitarian assistance only. It is
very important, if one wants to find solutions, to see
them first as people - men, women, families - who
want once again to play a role in society, to become
productive again, to participate in society. Therefore
we badly need the resources and the partnerships
necessary to go one step further than humanitarian
assistance only. Indeed, I think that a new paradigm
should be developed in the search for solutions.

There is something strange here. If one studies
the history of the High Commissioner for Refugees,
one can see that it all started in 1951 with the ambition
to take care of people who do not have governments to
take care of them. Shortly thereafter, the international
community - the United Nations - came to the
conclusion that an essential element of that mission
should be the achievement of durable solutions. But
that element of the mission was never really made
operational - except occasionally - and it is still
quite weak.

I think that the time has come to take this step
forward. That is indeed the way to end protected
situations. In this context, the Council sometimes plays
a key role in bringing about security and in creating
conditions that allow people to go home; that is true.
But often it starts earlier; in fact, from the very
beginning one has to think in terms of solutions -
fostering self-reliance and empowerment and providing
education. This is necessary in any case, be it for
repatriation, local integration or even for a resettlement
solution.

I was asked to say a few words, but I have to be
brief because we have a time limit. Some things have
become clear from these global consultations. I will
mention two examples, still not concluded. It has
become clear to us that, in new situations, we have to
think more systematically about comprehensive plans
to deal with massive outflows of people. This is not
totally new. It was done with the Kosovars, it was done
with the Vietnamese boat people, and there are other
examples.

Maybe we have to conclude that, in any situation
where within a year, let us say, a substantial number of
people flow out of a country, we should bring countries

together at an international conference and call upon
them to devise a comprehensive plan to share the
burden. In this way maybe they can share that burden
temporarily and not say, "There is a problem there and
we are staying out", but see it as the international
community's problem. This is one important element.

Let me turn to the second element. We have an
agenda for development, in particular with Africa; we
can use instruments and financial resources to end a
number of protected situations and to create
possibilities for repatriation. I agree with the
representative of the Russian Federation that UNHCR
should be an apolitical organization; we are a
humanitarian body. But it is, in fact, very humanitarian
to say to the African leaders and to the rich countries
that, if they embark on new initiatives and partnerships,
they should reserve resources and create conditions
conducive to resolving a number of these problems. I
am saying this in the interest of the people on whose
behalfI speak, who deserve it.

To be frank, I say this also in relation to the
international community and to the Security Council
itself, because, as several representatives have noted,
not to provide solutions to refugees is, in fact, to take
risks with the future. The problems come back time and
again, and therefore we have to go beyond thinking,
"Fine, we have a yearly report from the High
Commissioner, and so it is business as usual". This is
absolutely unacceptable.

The 20 million people with whom I am concerned
represent only a limited number in terms of the
population of this earth, but, believe me, the challenge
is much greater. They are the outcome of tragic
deficiencies in our political systems, and they could be
the cause of new problems. If we complain about the
increase in human trafficking and about increasing
crime, then it is good to be aware that those phenomena
have root causes, and that one of them is the fact that
we simply do not deliver in terms of solidarity and new
opportunities for those people who are victims of a first
round of violence and persecution.

I think it would be better for me to come to a
close. There is so much more to say, but I have been
asked to be brief. I shall use my very last minute to
introduce my new representative here. He was a special
envoy of the previous High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mrs. Ogata, and then for me in the Balkans.
I have now asked him to come to New York because I
am aware that there are ongoing developments and
situations, as well as many questions that deserve more
detailed answers. My man here, Eric Morris, who is
known to the Council, is available to all members of
the Council.

Finally, I want to thank the President for giving
me the opportunity to be here, in the midst of the
Council, to make it clear that the Security Council is
absolutely essential to my work. If there is
improvement, it is thanks to the Security Council and
its initiatives. If there are protracted situations, I think
the Council deserves to have the other parts of the
United Nations family and system, all the countries and
the Economic of Social Council - to which I referred
in my answer to the representative of France -
focused on ending those situations. Only when we
prioritize durable solutions for refugees will there be
peace and security. Without that, one can forget other
things. One can have nice development and assistance
plans, as well as speeches, but they are not going to
work. We must see this in a very practical way.

