Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): Allow me first of all to
join others in commending you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting on an issue which, in our
view, is of primary importance for the international
community. I would also like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-
Marie Guehenno, and the Director of the Geneva
International Centre for Humanitarian Demining,
Ambassador Dahinden, for their well-focused and
detailed introductory remarks.

Bulgaria fully shares the concern about the
harmful and widespread impact of landmines and other
explosive remnants of war on civilian populations,
especially children, humanitarian workers and United
Nations staff, and we recognize the long-term impact
that landmines have on the achievement of durable
peace, security and development. Landmines,
unexploded ordnance and explosive remnants of war
cause severe suffering and damage to the civil
population and have dramatic economic and social
consequences. They place a heavy burden on the
affected countries and make their rebuilding even
harder. That fact has been widely acknowledged by the
international community, and international mine action
is one of the priorities on the agenda of the United
Nations. In this respect, I would like to point out that
Bulgaria was among the first to formally accept and
implement the principles set out in the Ottawa
Convention, thus contributing to the abolition of a
whole class of weapons with indiscriminate affects.

The issue of mine action is especially relevant for
peacekeeping operations, because they take place in
mine-affected regions and mines and unexploded
ordnance seriously hamper the efforts of peacekeepers,
as well as of humanitarian organizations, to render
assistance. Bulgaria considers that the inclusion of
mine-action requirements in peacekeeping mission
planning and structure is of great importance for the
adequate fulfilment of the mandates of the missions.
We welcome the effective coordination of mine-action
activities within the United Nations system and the
important mandate of the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. The role of UNMAS in ensuring
coordination of mine action throughout the United
Nations system and the provision of support to
multidimensional peace operations is, in our View,
essential.

We also support the View that effective mine
action requires the United Nations, non-governmental
organizations and civil society to work in a coordinated
manner, with the United Nations taking the lead role. It
also requires a comprehensive approach combining
mine clearance, stockpile destruction, victim
assistance, capacity-building and mine-risk education.

Acknowledging the fact that the primary
responsibility for the clearance of landmines and
unexploded ordnance lies with the affected countries,
we support the view, as put forward by Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno in his statement, that
peacekeeping personnel could assist in training local
military personnel in demining activities, in accordance
with the International Mine Action Standards, which
have already been developed.

The role of peacekeepers is vital in providing
mine-risk education for the population in the affected
regions. Mine-risk education is, in our view, a key
component for the speeding up of social restoration
processes.

In our view, the inclusion of mine action in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts
is very beneficial for the communities affected. Former
combatants could be employed in mine-action
programmes, thus reducing the risk of diversions and
involving the communities in determining mine-action
priorities. Victim assistance is essential for the post-
conflict reconstruction and economic recovery of the
affected countries. The maiming of civilians poses a
serious threat to the economic well-being of those
countries. The development of programmes for social
reintegration and the re-training of landmine victims
should be an integral part of the mandate of
peacekeeping missions. Last but not least, we think that
sufficient financial resources are of vital importance
for the conduct of mine-action activities. That is why
enhanced cooperation between donor and recipient
countries is needed. Countries in a position to do so
could contribute to the Voluntary Trust Fund for
Assistance in Mine Action.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight a few
points which, in our opinion, are of particular relevance
with regard to the implementation of mine action in
peacekeeping.

First, we share the view that the dissemination of
information is of particular importance.

Secondly, with respect to coordination and
flexibility, the United Nations Mine Action
Coordination Centre in Kosovo is a special case, but it
has managed to encompass all major mine-action
sectors in one homogeneous structure. In our view, that
experience could be shared with other mine-action
programmes, bearing in mind the fact that each
situation is different.

Thirdly, concerning implementation, we think
that we must continue to focus on progress in the field.

Fourthly and finally, concerning victim
assistance, existing structures within the health and
social sectors should be reinforced, and services and
programmes aimed at mine victims should include all
persons with disabilities, regardless of their cause.
International organizations, donors and affected States
should examine further ways of enhancing mine-victim
assistance, including socio-economic reintegration.

