The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Colombia, Indonesia, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Nepal, Peru, the Republic of Korea,
Uganda and Ukraine in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Giraldo
(Colombia), Mr. Jenie (Indonesia), Mr. Gillerman
(Israel), Mr. Spatafora (Italy), Mr. Haragachi
(Japan), Mr. Sharma (Nepal), Mr. Doig (Peru),
Mr. Kim (Republic of Korea), Mr. Batagira
(Uganda) and Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine), took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Council
will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Security Council to document S/2003/710, which
contains the text of a letter dated 15 July 2003 from the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.

I shall now give a briefing in my capacity as the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee of the
Security Council.

It is a pleasure for me to address the Council for
the first time in my capacity as Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), which I have
headed since April. Before I outline the main points of
the programme of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, I
should like to make some general comments in my
capacity not as Chairman of the Committee, but as the
representative of Spain.
Spain's commitment to the fight against terrorism
is well known to all Council members. It is a
commitment involving not only my Government but
also - what is more important - civil society. My
country has suffered for more than 30 years from this
plague, in which more than a thousand of my
compatriots have been murdered. For us, it is essential
that the fight against terrorism be one of the priorities
in United Nations action. That objective must permeate
the Organization's entire mandate. We have learned
that the fight against terrorism will be long and that
there are no shortcuts that will enable us to attain our
goals easily or swiftly. Sometimes we hear voices that
demand swift and drastic solutions, but we must not
allow ourselves to be deceived by such siren songs.

We must continue along the lines of what we
agreed on 23 January in resolution 1456 (2003), which
stipulates in its annex that States must ensure that the
measures they adopt to combat terrorism comply with
all their obligations under international law,
particularly with norms related to human rights, to
refugees and to humanitarian law. We must be
extremely careful in that regard. Legitimacy, law and
reason are on our side, and we must not adopt any
measure that runs the risk of putting us at odds with
them.

Now I should like to speak in my capacity as
Chairman of the CTC.

The Committee is one of the most important
tools, with the greatest and most universal influence,
on which the international community can rely in its
fight against terrorism. The fact that resolution 1373
(2001) was adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which concerns action in case of
threats against peace, gives it a power that is
commensurate with the threat that we face. In the more
than a year and a half since its inception, the CTC has
been involved in an enormous scope of activity. Two
figures are enough to demonstrate that: the first is that,
in September 2001 - when the resolution was
adopted - only two States of the international
community were parties to the 12 conventions and
protocols related to the fight against terrorism. By 30
June this year, there were already 37. For example, the
International Convention for the Repression of
Terrorist Acts Committed with Bombs has seen a 71
per cent increase in its ratification rate, and the 1999
International Convention for the Repression of the
Financing of Terrorism has seen a 94 per cent increase.
The second figure that I wish to touch upon is that, to
date, a total of 385 reports have been received from
States in response to letters sent by the Committee
related to the measures contained in resolution 1373
(2001).

But, beyond statistics, the Committee has done
important work in the field of technical assistance. It is
interesting to recall that the Committee conducts its
work on the basis of three principles: transparency,
equal treatment and coordination. With regard to
transparency, the Committee regularly holds
informational meetings that are open to all Member
States. We also have a web page on which we have
been working for several months to improve and
update; it will soon be available in a more user-friendly
form. Equal treatment is demonstrated by, among other
things, the regular contact we maintain with
representatives of Member States and of international
organizations. Coordination has been demonstrated in
the tightening of the links between the Committee and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). A joint press communique has
been elaborated that compares both Committees to
make it easier for the media to follow the respective
activities of the Committees.

At another level, we wish to point out that, in the
short term, the CTC faces two important challenges.
The first is the paper that it must adopt in the field of
technical assistance. One of the Committee's principal
advantages is its universality, a result of its inclusion in
the United Nations framework. That universality, in our
judgment, should be used to help, to the greatest extent
possible, those States that demonstrate genuine
political will in the fight against terrorism, but at the
same time have difficulties in implementing the
measures contained in resolution 1373 (2001). To that
end, the Committee is taking steps towards a serious
strengthening of its work in that field.

We can now rely on two instruments - the
Directory of Counter-Terrorism Information and
Sources of Assistance and the Matrix of Assistance,
which have been shown to be essential tools but have
also begun to demonstrate certain limitations. They
were adequate when the Committee functioned as a
"switchboard", but we should now like to adopt a more
proactive role. We believe the Committee should be
able to help States that request assistance in the process
of implementing the resolution. The Committee must
be able to ensure that the needs of those countries are
truly met.

But, at the same time, the Committee must play
an increasingly greater role in the promotion and
coordination of available international assistance, using
its broad experience to orient States and international
donor organizations towards the priorities that the
Committee is now beginning to be able to identify. It is
not a matter of giving priority to one State over
another, but rather, of having criteria available that will
enable us to deal first with issues that we consider most
urgent within each State.

The second challenge is that of tightening the
links between the Committee and relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations.
The first step was taken under the British presidency
when, on 6 March, the first meeting with more than 60
such organizations was held here. After the meeting, a
plan of action was adopted that we have been
implementing and that has produced concrete results. I
should also like to highlight the contacts that we have
maintained With the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, the World Customs Organization,
Interpol and the International Atomic Energy Agency,
in which the danger represented by terrorist groups
having access to weapons of mass destruction or to
dangerous material of a radioactive, chemical or
biological nature were highlighted. In our judgment,
the latter threat has not been given the attention it
deserves, which is why we intend to remain seized of
the matter. We must also mention the work that we are
doing with the Inter-American Committee Against
Terrorism, part of the Organization of American States,
which will organize a meeting in Washington on 7
October directly related to the one already mentioned,
held in March.

I should now like to refer briefly to the
programme of work planned for April to July of this
year. We are pleased to share with members that the
great majority of objectives that it set forth were not
only met, but sometimes even exceeded. For example,
the Directory of contacts and their details have been
improved. A first group of 17 international
organizations relevant to the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) has been contacted. In addition,
by having completed the review of 385 reports, we
have exceeded by 35 the reports objective established
in the programme of work.

With regard to the programme of work for the
months of July to September, I do not believe that I
need to refer to it in detail, since all Council members
have a copy of it available to them. However, I wish to
highlight a number of points. Within the spirit of the
Committee's cooperation with Member States, we have
decided to undertake measures to help the 36 States
that have fallen behind in submitting their reports so
that they comply With their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). We shall continue to work to
promote the broadest possible participation in the 12
international conventions and protocols related to the
fight against terrorism. And, as I said earlier, technical
assistance and strengthening cooperation between the
Committee and international organizations will be
priorities for the coming months.

Finally, speaking again in my capacity as the
representative of Spain, I would like to say that my
country will spare no effort to ensure that the CTC
achieves concrete and practical results that contribute
to increasing the number of instruments available to the
international community in its legitimate fight against
terrorism.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

I thank Council members for their understanding
and cooperation.


