The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Togo.

I should like at the outset to welcome to the
Security Council Minister Eamon Gilmore,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and to thank him
for his briefing on the mandate and the multifaceted
activities of his organization under his country's
chairmanship. I commend the efforts that the OSCE is
making in many varied areas, including human rights,
democracy and good governance, the administration of
justice and the rule of law.

We note that the combat against organized crime;
peaceful coexistence between peoples, with an
emphasis on the protection of minorities; the
prevention of and the fight against terrorism; the
protection of the environment; and non-discrimination
are among the most important areas of activity of the
OSCE. We note with interest that those areas broadly
match the issues on the Security Council's agenda for
February: transnational organized crime and violence
against women, including girls, before, during and
after armed conflicts.

Those issues are of great importance to my
country. I am pleased that the OSCE is taking
commendable action in those areas. We also
acknowledge with satisfaction that the OSCE Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights has
considerable expertise in promoting democracy, the
rule of law, human rights, tolerance and
non-discrimination.

It is also encouraging to note that the OSCE
programme includes a human dimension component as
part of its response to the issues of freedom of
expression and religion, intolerance and
non-discrimination. We also welcome the OSCE's
decision to address the difficult issue of racism and
intolerance in sport. Indeed, although current events
highlight the growing problem of racism in sport, there
is an unfortunate and appalling tendency to minimize
the issue.

We welcome the successful work of the OSCE in
assessing the situation of ethnic minorities and the
promotion of dialogue, as well as national legal
reforms to curb ethnic conflict, which can jeopardize
peace, stability and relations within and among OSCE
member States.

The commitment of the OSCE to preventing
conflict using early warning mechanisms, conflict
management and post-conflict reconstruction is an
initiative that should also be encouraged. In that
regard, Togo supports the OSCE's contributions to
bringing peoples closer together, in particular when an
upsurge in nationalism and identity politics carries the
occasional risk of social exclusion and threatens peace.

We also commend the OSCE for its contribution
to calming the situation in Georgia and resolving the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict, as well as for its ongoing
availability to work with the Minsk Group. Its
determination to continue contributing its expertise to
efforts aimed at resolving those various conflicts
should be encouraged. We hope that the OSCE can
make its expertise available to regional and subregional
organizations, in particular in Africa.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Gilmore so that he may
respond to the comments made and questions raised.

