Mr. De Mistura: When I briefed the Security
Council last month (see S/PV.8345), I said that we were
approaching a moment of truth in the effort to convene
a United Nations-facilitated, Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned constitutional committee, which, at the moment,
is the main outstanding item with regard to the way we
should implement resolution 2254 (2015). Everything
else is still on the table but that item remains the most
important one at the moment. A credible and balanced
committee could be the cornerstone of an inclusive
political process for Syrians in the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015), which is the only one we have.

Yesterday, I consulted Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres at length and received very clear instructions
regarding our accelerated effort to convene a credible
and balanced constitutional committee - the only
kind that the United Nations - and by that I mean the
Secretariat - would be willing to convene and the only
one with which it would like to be associated. I will
return to those instructions later. But, first, let us be a
bit more precise about where we are.

As I told the Council last month, some things
are quite clear. The two lists of 50 names each for a
constitutional committee submitted by the Government
and the opposition, respectively, are not in question, but
questions continue to be raised, mainly by the Syrian
Government, about the composition of the middle third
list of 50 names. Let me recall how we arrived at the
middle third list, which is now on the table and which
has been revised more than once and updated into a
new list.

The final statement of the Congress of the Syrian
National Dialogue, held in Sochi, spoke about the need
to include "Syrian experts, civil society, independents,
tribal leaders and women", with "adequate representation
of Syrian ethnic and religious components". The Sochi
final statement made clear that it was via the Geneva
process and through the facilitation of the Special
Envoy that a final selection would be made.

In truth, it went even further than that. The
Secretary-General has asked me to remind the Council
that, in addition to the terms of the Sochi final statement
itself, an explicit United Nations-Russian understanding
was reached during the Vienna consultation, which
took place just before the United Nations attended
the meeting in Sochi. The understanding was that I,
as Special Envoy, would be free to draw not only on
names emanating from Sochi, but also on other names,
including, if necessary, those of Syrians who did not
attend the meeting in Sochi, in order to form a balanced
and credible list. Let me also recall that, in any case,
resolution 2254 (2015) mandates the United Nations to
convene parties in the political process and assigned
to the Geneva talks the task of setting a schedule and
process for drafting a new Constitution.

There should be no doubt that the middle third list
was very carefully developed by the United Nations. We
received input from and listened to many, including the
guarantors and others. Moreover, we also did our own
careful homework. We sought out credible and neutral
Syrian experts, including people who had played a role
in the previous Constitution-making process and could
bridge and build upon the two sides and with whom the
sides could work constructively. We look for respected
civil society representatives, independents and other
Syrians of standing - individuals who, as in any other
constitutional process, could somehow represent the
many Syrians who are not political affiliates but still
deserve a stake in their future. Of course, we know that
all Syrians, like all of us, have a political opinion or
leaning, which is totally natural. But we sought a fair
balance among the various political leanings so that
no one side could dominate the committee. This is a
very key part of what we consider to be the credibility
and legitimacy of the list. We ensured the adequate
representation of various ethnic, religious and regional
backgrounds, as well as a balance between those
living inside Syria and the millions of Syrians, who,
for the moment, are living outside their country due to
the conflict.

Lastly, with the full support of the Secretary-
General and as part of our commitment to giving full
effect to resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security, we insisted that a minimum of 30 per cent
of the constitutional committee should be women. This
meant bringing many qualified and expert women of
all backgrounds into the middle third, and indeed the
proposed middle third is almost half women. That is
what has guided United Nations efforts to facilitate the
middle third and revise it into a new list, as has already
been done. I have also carefully facilitated development
as per resolution 2254 (2015) and the final statement
of the Sochi National Dialogue Congress. They both
stipulate that on a logical basis I should prepare some
basic aspects of the process and rules of procedure that
could enable the constitutional committee to work.

From the three lists of the Government, the
opposition and the middle third, it would be possible
to identify a smaller group, numbering 15 from
each, to form a drafting body for the constitutional
committee. The committee could be mandated to
draft constitutional reform for popular approval, as a
contribution to the political settlement in Syria, leading
to a new political structure and giving effect to the Sochi
final statement of 20 January. Within the context of the
Geneva process to implement resolution 2254 (2015),
such a constitutional reform could aim to embody in
the Constitution and constitutional practices of Syria
the letter and spirit of the 12 principles developed in
Geneva at great length and with a lot of hard work,
endorsed in Sochi, and offering the people of Syria a
vision ofa future that can be shared by all.

The constitutional committee could work in Geneva
with an impartial Syrian chairmanship acceptable to all
components, supported by United Nations facilitation
and with appropriate decision-making arrangements.
Of course, these arrangements should all be consistent
with respect for Syria's sovereignty, unity, independence
and territorial integrity. The United Nations facilitation
should enable the Syrians themselves to engage with
one another and independently and democratically
determine their own future with dignity. Clearly, the
key parties are the Syrian parties, but equally, the
prospect of an effective constitutional committee also
rests on strong support from key countries. They will
be further engaged by us in the coming weeks.
Let me start with the Government of Syria. Deputy
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Al-Moualem
met with the Secretary-General during the general
debate of the General Assembly, a meeting that I also
attended. At the meeting, the Foreign Minister voiced
strong doubts about the Sochi final statement and its
outcome, indicating that the Government had a very
different understanding of those matters. He called
for a fundamental reassessment of the work that had
been done to date on the middle-third list and rules of
procedure, as well as on the United Nations facilitation
role. For his part, the Secretary-General reiterated the
Sochi statement and its outcome, as well as the mandate
of the Security Council, and offered to have me explain
the work that has been done on it in much more detail.
He appealed to the Foreign Minister to ensure that
the Government could work in partnership with the
United Nations.

For their part, two of the Astana guarantors,
Russia and Iran, have also significantly questioned
the middle-third list, indicating that it does not meet
the Government's requirements, despite the extensive
consultations and the Sochi understanding. At the same
time, they have indicated that they are continuing to
engage with the Government of Syria on the matter, and
indeed, as we speak, senior Russian officials will be
visiting Damascus in the next few days. Turkey, which
initially felt that our list could benefit from revision,
has recently indicated its own full understanding of the
logic and composition of the third list.

For its part, the Syrian High Negotiations Committe,
as we call the opposition, confirmed to the Secretary-
General during the general debate its readiness to move
ahead on the basis of the broad package on the table.
The opposition met at the beginning of this week in
Riyadh, and most of the nominees for the constitutional
committee are right now sitting together in internal
consultations in order to prepare for their work. The
small-group countries - Egypt, France, Germany,
Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom and the
United States - have all urged the United Nations
to convene a constitutional committee without delay.
Similar messages have come during the past few days
from a large number of European and Arab Foreign
Ministers with whom I met during the general debate.

I would like to inform the Security Council that
the Government of Syria has invited me to Damascus
next week in a follow-up to the meeting with the
Secretary-General during the general debate. I plan to
engage with them on the work that has been done on the
constitutional committee. If the Council wishes, I will
of course be ready to report back to it after my visit on
whether those direct consultations have produced the
approval of and agreement on a credible and inclusive
third list, as we hope.

Before the end of the month I also intend to invite
the Astana guarantors for consultation with me in
Geneva and to engage with the small-group countries.
In my view that would be our final opportunity to put
the finishing touches to the preparations for convening
a constitutional committee. I would then hope to be in a
position to issue invitations to convene the committee,
if possible during November. I can offer no guarantee
as to whether this is possible, but what I do know after
nine months of preparations is that it is important to
launch a credible constitutional committee and that
whatever transpires, I would like to come back and
brief the Council in November on where we stand.

Let me remind us all that if steps are not taken
towards achieving a safe, calm and neutral environment,
the work of a constitutional committee would not end
up being very meaningful. We all know that. But first
things first. On the constitutional committee front,
despite our best efforts regarding steps towards a safe,
calm and neutral environment, we have seen very few
concrete outcomes during 2018. I hope we will see more
in the upcoming months. For instance, the Working
Group on the release of detainees/abductees and
handover of the bodies and the identification of missing
persons, met again last week in Tehran. We continue
to urge it to come up with its first tangible results, as
many, many people in Syria are waiting for them.

Let us look now at the big picture for a moment
before we go back to the constitutional committee.
A catastrophe has so far been averted in Idlib and
the Russian-Turkish memorandum of understanding
appears to be being implemented. Major strides have
been taken in defeating terrorism, and that should
continue to be a priority. The territorial base of the
Islamic State in Syria and the Levant has largely been
erased, although it does remain dangerous. For the
moment the de facto map of Syria today is relatively
stable, but it must not become a de facto soft partition,
nor a theatre for new international confrontations.

There must therefore be a political path forward.
President Putin and President Erdogan have said that
the Idlib deal offers a window for the constitutional
committee to be established and the political process
to go ahead. The European Union, for instance, will
host a third Brussels conference in March 2019, and
we know that its decisions will depend on a credible
political process. The United Nations has done all that it
can - and, frankly, more - to find a way to convene a
credible and balanced constitutional committee. We are
ready to do more, and do it faster, during the upcoming
months, taking advantage of the Idlib window of
opportunity. However, we are not ready to convene a
committee that is not credible and balanced.

In that regard, having consulted the Secretary-
General, let me also give the Council a heads-up, ifI
may. I will myself be moving on, as of the last week
of November. I have had the honour to serve for four
years and four months as Special Envoy. For some time,
I have been discussing with the Secretary-General my
desire, for purely personal reasons, to move on. I deeply
appreciate his constant support and wise counsel with
regard to this matter, but I will definitely not say
goodbye or engage in reflections today. A month can
be a century in politics. We will continue to have a
very intense and, hopefully, fruitful month ahead.
1 will not lay down my charge until the last hour of
the last day of my mandate. In fact, the Secretary-
General has instructed me that my last month of service
should be used to actively verify whether or not the
United Nations is in a position to convene a credible
and balanced constitutional committee, and report to
the Security Council accordingly. I plan to do so with
clarity and frankness and count on the support of the
Security Council and all Syrian counterparts to do so.

Let me summarize the bottom line of my message,
which has been long.

First, the Idlib memorandum of understanding
provides a unique window of opportunity for launching
a credible and inclusive constitutional committee. We
must take advantage of it. That is, and remains, our
aim. Our assessment is that if there is political will,
there is no reason for a constitutional committee not to
be convened in November - 10 months after the Sochi
declaration. Secondly, the main reason for the delay
in convening in Geneva the first session of a credible
and inclusive constitutional committee involves the
difficulties that the Government has in accepting the
current third list of participants prepared by the United
Nations in accordance with the Sochi declaration
and resolution 2254 (2015). Thirdly, I plan to discuss
that pending issue during my forthcoming mission to
Damascus and report back to the Secretary-General
and the Security Council thereafter on the outcome.
Fourthly, since my personal plan, in consultation with
the Secretary-General, has always been to end my
mission, for purely personal reasons, in the last week
of November - four years and four months after it
began - my intention, and as per the instructions of
the Secretary-General, is to dedicate this crucial last
month to actively verify, once and for all, the feasibility
of the implementation of a credible and inclusive
constitutional committee, as well as the implementation
of the Sochi declaration.

I will therefore report in November to the Secretary-
General and the Security Council on the status of the
implementation of the constitutional committee in
order to allow the Secretary-General and the Security
Council to draw their own conclusions, so that my
own successor can start his or her own mission with a
clean slate.

