Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Let me start by thanking
you and congratulating you on your very able
leadership of the Security Council during this month.
We know that you have not been doing this for long,

but you are doing it professionally and as a great
veteran. We thank you. I would also like to thank
Mr. Gambari for his informative and concise report.

I would like to start by expressing the
condolences and sorrow of the people of Israel to the
people of Lebanon for the death of another member of
the Gemayel family, which has paid, over the years, so
clearly for its moderation, pluralism and liberalism.
This death is just another sign of how extremism and
fundamentalism are taking their toll in our very, very
tough neighbourhood, and how the Lebanese people as
a whole and that particular family in particular are
paying a high price.

We all know from where that extremism stems,
we all know whose fingerprints are so apparent in this
pattern of assassinations. We wait for the day when
moderation and common sense will prevail in Lebanon
as well as in our region as a whole.

We are today discussing the situation in the
Middle East. I beg to share with the Council my feeling
that, however precise the Under-Secretary's reports are
and have been in the past and however many debates
we have about the situation in the Middle East, the real
situation in the Middle East was made manifest to us
today in that horrible assassination.

The real situation in the Middle East is the
situation on the ground. It is the situation where the
Gemayel family is paying the highest price for
moderation. It is the admission, today yet again by
Hizbollah, that it is being funded by Iran, that sponsor
of terror and master of evil. It is the continuous
shelling of Israeli cities by Qassam rockets, killing and
maiming innocent civilians.

And yet - and yes, sadly - it is also the plight
and pain of the Palestinian people, held hostage by a
terrorist Government.

This, Mr. President, is indeed the situation in the
Middle East. And all of this can be changed overnight.
It can in fact stop right now, as we speak. All that has
to happen is, first, that Iran and Syria relinquish terror
and stop generating it throughout our region. Secondly,
Hamas must accept the three demands of the
international community as expressed by the Quartet
and this Council. Thirdly, the Hamas-led Palestinian
Government must immediately stop firing Qassam
rockets into Israel. Fourthly, our boys, Gilad Shalit,
Udi Goldwasser and Eldad Regev, must be released
immediately.

All this can end right now, in one second. But it
cannot end as the result of speeches here or biased
resolutions in the General Assembly. It cannot end
even as the result of lectures from that great bastion of
democracy and the rule of law, the terror Government
of the Palestinian Authority.

It is a decision that only the Palestinian people
can take and only the parties can resolve. The choice is
clear and the end can be very near. We sincerely hope
that, for once, our neighbours will make the right
choice. If they do, they will be surprised by how far
Israel will be willing to go together with them in order
to secure the reality of the peace and prosperity of two
States living side by side in this war-torn, bloodshed-
ridden region that yearns for peace and has
demonstrated yet again today why it needs it so badly.

