Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Let me, first of all,
thank Under-Secretary-General Kenzo Oshima for his
excellent briefing this morning. It has been extremely
useful and very comprehensive.

The situation in Angola is at a very crucial stage
at this point. After the signing of the peace
memorandum, the country is about to start with a
reconstruction programme. At the same time, it is also
faced with a severe humanitarian situation stemming
from the return of UNITA troops, internally displaced
persons and refugees. Certainly, this is a situation in
which the country needs the utmost assistance.

We agree with Mr. Oshima's remarks that it is the
primary responsibility of the Government of Angola to
take care of its people. We agree fully with that. But, as
he has pointed out himself, the situation is
overwhelming at this point. This is the time when the
country will require all the efforts necessary from the
international community to face up to the that situation.
We therefore believe that there is a need for very close
cooperation between all the donors and the
Government of Angola to enhance the capacity of the
Angolan Government to face the problem it is having.
Obviously, we will have an opportunity to discuss
all other matters when we receive the report of the
Secretary-General. At this point in time, we think that
there are certain issues which need to be emphasized.
One is the need to look at the problem of the return and
the resettlement of the internally displaced persons and
the refugees. We note that there are approximately 4
million people involved, which is almost a third of the
population of Angola.

Minister Brattskar has talked about the need for
mine clearance. I think we should be able to discuss
that problem when we discuss the report of
Ambassador Gambari. It is absolutely important that
the country be cleared of the mines in order to enable
the refugees and the internally displaced persons to
return to their normal functions.

We believe that there is also a need for
humanitarian aid workers to have access to all areas,
without hindrance. We have read some reports that
there are certain areas which were not accessible
because of the behaviour of certain people. I also note
that the Government of Angola has recently decided to
relieve one of governors of his functions. I do not
know if Mr. Oshima can shed some light on whether
that will help to provide humanitarian aid workers with
the necessary access to certain areas. There is also the
major problem of infrastructure - the lack of
airstrips - which is also preventing aid from reaching
the people most in need.

Despite the fact that the country has the ability
and potential to come to the aid of its people, we think
that this is the time when the international community
should make a very special effort to assist the country
to try to resolve this pressing problem, because the
people of Angola deserve to see the dividends of peace.
We fear that if we do not do it at this time, the situation
may be reversed. We look forward to the report from
Ambassador Gambari, and we hope to be able to
discuss further the needs of Angola.

