Mr. Nqakula: Allow me at the outset to express
my deep appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
invited me to the Security Council in order to interact
with the members here. I bid a good afternoon to all
the members of the Security Council and the executive
representative of the Secretary-General. Today is the
second time that I have had the singular honour to brief
the Security Council on the work we are doing in
Burundi with respect to the search for durable peace in
that country.

When I briefed the Council last year, our report
was an expression of hope that we were on the verge of
completing the various steps of the Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement between the Government of
Burundi and the Parti pour la Liberation du Peuple
Hutu-Forces Nationales de Liberation (Palipehutu- FNL), but the Burundi peace process, from the Arusha
negotiations to the Dar-es-Salaam peace process, has
always had its ups and downs. It is, of course, in the
nature of negotiations that many hiccups and bumps
are experienced as such processes unfold.

The Burundi negotiations were particularly
difficult given the deep distrust between the
negotiating parties. We believe this time around that a
significant step forward has been taken to resolve the
matter of the Palipehutu-FNL - the only group in
Burundi that has stayed out of the democratization
08-64243
process in that country. The Facilitator of the Burundi
peace process submitted a report in October to the
leaders of the regional initiative of the Process, chaired
by Uganda.

That report formed the basis of the discussions of
the summit of the heads of State and Government of
the Great Lakes region, held in Bujumbura, Burundi,
on 4 December. The Government of Burundi and the
Palipehutu-FNL, as has been the practice right through
the process, were represented at the summit, as were
the African Union and the Secretary-General, through
his Executive Representative. The summit finalized the
four outstanding matters with respect to the
implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement. Those questions were always threatening
to scuttle the peace process and, on a number of
occasions, led to a stalemate.

The Palipehutu-FNL had been demanding certain
concessions from the Government regarding the
integration of their combatants into the armed forces of
Burundi. In the beginning, the Palipehutu-FNL agitated
for the disbanding of the Burundi army, whereupon a
new defence force would be created for the country
through the amalgamation of chosen troops from the
current army and combatants of the Palipehutu-FNL.

That demand was shot down by the leadership of
the Regional Peace Initiative when it was first raised,
before the signing of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement on 7 September 2006. The summit of the
heads of State and Government of the Great Lakes
region, sitting on the same day, also rejected the
Palipehutu-FNL demand on the basis that the Burundi
army was an institution that had been established in
keeping with the law of the country, based on the
Arusha negotiations.

The Palipehutu-FNL nonetheless continued to
argue for an arrangement that would be defined by
what they called a forces technical agreement. The
arrangement was designed to produce a new army.
Although an effort was made in the beginning to create
a system to find common ground, the work ground to a
halt. Two matters the Palipehutu-FNL had raised that
the parties at the summit agreed to were the release of
political and war prisoners by the Burundi Government
and the appointment to the organs of the State of the
leaders of the Palipehutu-FNL. President Pierre
Nkurunziza, the Head of State of Burundi, had already
committed himself in the past to implementing both of
08-64243

those demands. He said, though, that he wanted to
release detainees into the assembly areas when those
areas were up and running. He has offered the
Palipehutu-FNL 33 positions for their senior members
in the State institutions.

The Palipehutu-FNL was told by the parties at the
Summit that it needed to apply to register as a political
party in Burundi in order to participate in the social,
economic and political life of the country, but that it
could not do so under its current name. The name
Palipehutu means the Party for the Liberation of the
Hutu People.

The summit agreed that the name Palipehutu
militates against the letter and spirit of the Burundi
Constitution which stipulates that political parties in
Burundi must be open to all Burundians and have to
reflect a national image and in no way shall advocate
violence, exclusion or any kind of hatred, especially
regarding ethnic, regional, religious or gender
belonging. Palipehutu-FNL was instructed, therefore,
to change its name. It is currently informing its
members about that decision.

The first group of Palipehutu-FNL combatants
will report to the assembly areas on Friday, 12 December,
for the start of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. That exercise will have to be
completed by 31 December, in keeping with the
decision of the summit.

The completion of the implementation of the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement has taken a long
time, given that the Agreement was signed in
September 2006. Various attempts have been made to
resolve whatever problems have arisen in the course of
the process. A number of meetings have been held to
resolve the problems and, on a number of occasions,
binding documents have been signed to consolidate
those agreements. But every step forward has been
accompanied by new demands and retrogression.

One of the major breakthroughs was recorded
when the leadership of the Palipehutu-FNL went back
to Burundi to help implement the Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement and push forward the peace
process. The breakthrough did not open all the doors
that we thought it would. The period following the
return to Burundi of the leadership of the Palipehutu-
FNL did not resolve all the problems revolving around
the implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement. The Facilitation's Political Directorate had
to intervene just before the arrival in Burundi of
Mr. Agathon Rwasa, the Palipehutu-FNL's leader, when
war broke out again between the Government forces
and the Palipehutu-FNL. The intervention was in the
form of a joint declaration between the two parties,
foreswearing violence. No major attacks have
happened since then. The situation continues to be
calm in that country.

In the face of more dilly-dallying, the Facilitation
took the two parties to South Africa for confidence-
building. The exercise culminated in the signing of the
Magaliesberg Communique, which underscored that
the successful and earliest conclusion of the peace
process in Burundi was primarily the responsibility of
the Government of Burundi and the Palipehutu-FNL.
The Communique was signed on 10 June this year. In
the face of more difficulties after the Magaliesberg
meeting, the Facilitation arranged a meeting in Ngozi,
Burundi, where the two parties once more made
commitments.

The Facilitator of the Burundi peace process has
been instructed by the Regional Peace Initiative fully
to implement the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement
by 31 December. The period from January 2009 will be
used as a mop-up phase. The Facilitation team will
then scale down its operations and the African Union
Special Task Force will begin its withdrawal, to be
completed by the end of March 2009. The Facilitation
will then close its operations at the end of March. The
Facilitator will report to the Regional Peace Initiative
as soon as all of the elements of the mandate have been
finalized in the New Year.

