Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate on the implementation
of note S/2010/507, on the working methods of the
Security Council, which is, in itself, an exercise of
transparency and accountability. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Maria Cristina Perceval of Argentina
for her able leadership of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and
for her unique talent in advancing important reforms
for the benefit of the United Nations membership as
a whole. I commend in particular the Ambassador of
Argentina for the concept paper contained in document
S/2013/630 on the enhancement of consultations
between the Security Council and troop- and
police-contributing countries adopted yesterday,
which, as Ambassador Perceval stated, will enable
those countries to effectively contribute to decisions
regarding peacekeeping operations.

It is clear that there have been efforts over the past
few years to improve the Council's working methods.
However, the recent positive trends should not obscure
the underlying need for more reforms that match the
realities. We still have a long way to go to achieve the
milestones set by our Heads of State and Government
during the 2005 World Summit on the working methods
of the Security Council, mainly to make it more broadly
representative, increase its efficiency and effectiveness,
enhance its transparency and accountability, improve
the implementation of its decisions and reinforce its
legitimacy.

Indeed, Rwandans yesterday and Syrians today can
attest to the danger of being abandoned by the Security
Council in times of need. Gridlock and ineffectiveness
within the Council caused by the political interests
of some members have cost millions of lives. For
Rwanda, the veto or even the threat of veto calls for
all of us to give it due attention. In that regard, we
regret the frequent abuse of that privilege and call on
the permanent members to refrain from using the veto,
particularly in the case of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

Our country is also concerned by the trend of
continued infringement on the right to equal and
timely participation by all members of the Council in
negotiations and processes. We deplore the worrying
trend to divide the Council into two different bodies, one
being more equal than others, that could even receive
separate briefings by the Secretariat on important
issues on the Council's agenda. We also note with
regret the continued practice whereby draft products
of the Council, mainly resolutions and presidential
statements, are shared between permanent members
ahead of time but circulated among the elected 10
only a few days - or even a few hours - before their
adoption.

Cooperation between the Security Council with
regional and subregional organizations is another
critical area as far as working methods of the Council
are concerned. We have witnessed tremendous
achievements over the years on that issue, but we still
believe that interaction with regional and subregional
organizations should be further streamlined. It is
important to hold regular consultations between
political organs and the secretariats of the concerned
organizations. In that regard, we wish to stress
once again the need for respect for decisions of the
African Union, as well as for timely and meaningful
consultations with the continent on decisions related
to African conflicts, which unfortunately constitute
70 per cent of the Council's agenda.

Consultations with other organs of the United
Nations should also be strengthened. One of them, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), is the ideal partner
of the Security Council, as it deals with post-conflict
situations and consolidation of peace. In that regard,
Rwanda is of the View that the members of the PBC
that are also members of the Security Council have
the primary responsibility to ensure that the Council
can draw on the advice of the PBC in a timely and
meaningful manner, and that the PBC is able to meet
the Council's expectations.

Like the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg,
we wish to reiterate our belief that the contribution
of configuration chairs can be valuable in close
consultations with the Council as well as in drafting
resolutions on countries on the PBC's agenda.

Yesterday, we had a private meeting with
representatives of the International Court of Justice,
and we believe that the Security Council could also
consider requesting advisory opinions of the Court on
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Before concluding, Rwanda expresses its
appreciation to Pakistan for reviving the wrap-up
sessions in January 2013. We have all witnessed how,
over the past months, this type of meeting has become
useful both to the general membership of the United
Nations and to the Council members themselves. I hope
that more Council members, particularly the newly
elected countries, will embrace the practice. In the
same vein, we support the holding of more interactive
dialogues, Arria Formula meetings and open debates,
particularly on country-specific situations, to allow the
general membership to contribute to the discussion and
share their experience.

I would conclude by stressing that enhancing the
legitimacy of the Security Council will ultimately
require deep reforms, including the expansion of its
membership in both the permanent and non-permanent
categories, with the same rights and privileges as
constantly requested by the African Group and the
L.69 group, of which Rwanda is a member. But for the
immediate term, we the States Members of the United
Nations request a responsive, engaging and accountable
Security Council that is up to the complex task ahead
of it.

