Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
This debate is taking place as the Security Council is
conducting negotiations to make some changes in the
oil-for-food programme. As members of the Security
Council, we are aware of the responsibility delegated
to us by the other Members of the United Nations in
order to represent them in this important organ,
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace
and security. Thus, we feel it appropriate that, on
certain occasions such as this, the Security Council
take into account the views of other Members of the
United Nations before adopting decisions on highly
important issues.

The first point we wish to make is that this matter
appears on the agenda of the Security Council precisely
because of its impact on international peace and
security. That is why the Government of Iraq is subject
to the sanctions regime.

The oil-for-food programme was adopted by the
Security Council as a provisional measure to alleviate
the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people affected by
the sanctions regime. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General on this topic, in document
S/2001/505, concludes that, despite the limitations and
difficulties that have restricted the effective
implementation of the oil-for-food programme, it has
contributed not only to arresting the decline in but also
to improving the living conditions of the average Iraqi
in many cases.

The report also highlights aspects of the
humanitarian programme where improvements could
be made to enhance its functioning. These include
extending the so-called "green lists" to other sectors in
order to include all kinds of articles, except for those
referred to in resolution 1051 (1996); simplifying the
plan of distribution and making it more flexible;
reducing the large number of applications, that remain
on hold; and defining with greater precision the
elements considered to be of dual use. From these and
many other aspects, it is clearly possible to make
improvements in the oil-for-food programme, which
should have a positive impact on the humanitarian
situation of the Iraqi people. However, in order to
ensure the proper functioning of the programme, the
Government of Iraq must cooperate. As the Secretary-
General indicates,

"It is essential for the Government of Iraq to
prioritize its contracting, giving particular
attention to the food, health and nutrition
sectors". (S/2001/505, para. 132)

He also mentions the need to avoid delays in the
submission of applications and to expedite the issuance
of unopened letters of credit for already approved
applications.

During its informal revision of the sectors of
contracts on hold, the Office of the Iraq Programme
reiterated the need for members of the sanctions
Committee that are placing contracts on hold to be
more clear as to the criteria for such an assessment and
more clearly to identify the elements they consider
problematic for export to Iraq. In this vein, the so-
called "goods review list" proposed by the United
Kingdom will shed further light on the elements to
which the international community believes Iraq should
not have access ifit is to be prevented from rearming.

The least that can be expected from members of
the Security Council is that we comply with our own
resolutions. Accordingly, and taking into account the
agreement in resolution 1352 (2001), the members of
the Security Council are currently considering various
proposals to enhance the functioning of the oil-for-food
programme. Under the coordination of the United
Kingdom, meetings of experts have been held
concerning the text of a draft resolution and an annex
of proceedings. These consultations of experts have
been useful and considerable progress has been made.
We hope that all delegations will participate
constructively with a view to drafting a consensus text
in the coming days. Only in that way will we be
complying with our own resolutions.

Sanctions are not an end in themselves. They are
simply a tool of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
should not forget that, as such, they are an alternative
to the use of force. In this case, it is important for the
Government of Iraq to have a clear understanding of
what the international community expects from it,
including guarantees for regional security, before
sanctions are lifted. That is why a decision allowing the
necessary changes to be made in the oil-for-food
programme, acceptable to all members of the Council
and in conformity with the spirit of resolution 1352
(2001), would help to create consensus between the
Security Council and Iraq, thus leading to the lifting of
sanctions.

