Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to express my delegation's deep
appreciation to you and your friendly country, Madam
President, and to salute and thank Secretary-General
Kofi Annan and his Special Representative, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, for their tireless efforts and valuable
contribution to the promotion of the rights of the child
in armed conflict. I also wish to assure you of my
country's full commitment in supporting all such
efforts.

Caring for children's physical, mental and
psychological development is a duty, as well as a social
and economic necessity for all the countries of the
world, regardless of their cultures and civilizations and
of their level of economic growth and scientific
advances. I have no doubt that the success of the 1990
World Summit for Children in setting a number of
ambitious targets and objectives aimed at supporting
children and development, and the ratification of the
1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child by 191
countries, gave clear evidence that the international
community is committed and willing to respect the
rights, capabilities, dignity and welfare of the child.
However, despite all the important achievements
of the last decade, we have witnessed a number of
factors that have adversely affected children in many
areas of the world, such as economic crises, the
deepening of debt and the spread of epidemics and
diseases. The most dangerous of those factors is the
spread of armed conflicts and the radical changes
introduced to armed conflict in recent years, such as
open disregard for rules of international law,
particularly humanitarian law, and the permitting of all
forms of abuse against civilians. This change in the
nature of armed conflict has led to the aggravation of
problems affecting children in armed conflict,
regardless of the international efforts that have been
made to prevent recruitment of children, release child
soldiers and reunify them with their families, protect
them from organized crime and promote their
rehabilitation in and integration into their societies.

We, the people of the world, took it upon
ourselves in the Charter to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. But unfortunately, after more
than 50 years have passed, armed conflicts are still
killing, injuring and destroying children. Conflicts
continue to kill millions of children who have become
targets or tools of wars. We have witnessed the effects
of conflict and post-conflict on children in more than
50 countries. Many have been killed, abducted or
besieged, or maimed by anti-personnel landmines; the
number of children whose mental, physical and
psychological development has been impaired in war-
torn societies continues to grow; and millions have lost
their homes and families, not to mention their
childhood, adolescence and school years. Some of
them have been in a continuous state of shock because
of the events they have witnessed.

While human rights covenants and
conventions - including the Convention of the Rights
of the Child and the 1949 Geneva Convention and its
two Protocols of 1977 - represent landmarks in the
protection of children in areas of armed conflict, the
gap between these rules and their implementation
continues to widen and grow in an unprecedented way.
Although we believe that the main responsibility for
bridging this gap and implementing international rules
aimed at protecting children in armed conflicts lies
above all with national Governments, we are also fully
convinced that the international community has an
important role to play in providing the necessary
technical and financial support to protect, reintegrate
and psychologically rehabilitate children.

In this regard, from this podium Egypt urges the
international community to make all necessary efforts
to carry out the following measures. First, it must
ensure that all parties at war are committed to
protecting children from exploitation, abuse, Violence,
rape, displacement and murder. Secondly, it should
bring to justice all those who target children with
impunity and implement and comply with the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.

Thirdly, the international community must strive
to implement the Programme of Action adopted by the
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as it has
positive effects on reducing conflicts and protecting
civilians, especially women and children. Fourthly, it
must mobilize and coordinate humanitarian relief
efforts and respond to the developmental needs of
children in the areas of education, health care and other
social services in post-conflict situations in order to
replace the culture of violence - in which children in
areas of armed conflict have been raised - with a
culture of peace and development. This should be done
while ensuring full coordination and cooperation with
the concerned countries and guaranteeing that the
rights of children are not used as a pretext to interfere
in a country's internal affairs or to politicize a specific
cr1s1s.

Finally, my delegation would like to affirm that
Egypt will untiringly stress the need to protect children
and promote their basic rights, including their right to
life and development in areas and territories under
foreign occupation. We wonder in this regard: is it not
high time to halt all military and violent actions
directed against civilians and children in the occupied
Palestinian territories? Is it not time to put an end to
the torture, tears and sorrow of Palestinian children,
whose innocent lives the Israeli forces continue to take,
without regard for moral, political or international
commitments, while disregarding and flouting the cries
for help and relief that they make? Today, as the
Security Council is considering, for the second or the
third time, the issue of protecting children in armed
conflict, the Palestinian child is still living in very
inhumane circumstances, which touches the conscience
of the international community.

We believe that our duty, as part of a civilized
world, and the role of the Security Council in the new
millennium, is not only to express regret and remorse
for the suffering and death of Palestinian children who
may have been killed by a stray bullet or have lost
those who once cared for them, or whose basic rights
have been violated, but also to protect their lives and
promote their rights, dignity and welfare.

Children are the future of our civilization and of
every community. Their development, their protection
and the promotion of their rights is a joint
responsibility for us all. Future generations will harvest
and reap the fruits of either war and Violence or peace
and development.

