Miss Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I would also like to begin by thanking
Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
their important briefings this morning.

Thanks to the Security Council's consideration of
the issue over the past decade, there have been many
recommendations and strategies for the protection of
civilians first and foremost, as well as to overcome
obstacles to that end and to ensure that civilians
receive the humanitarian assistance and protection they
deserve. However, many of those recommendations
have not been implemented as a result of many
impediments. Those include the lack of political will
and, generally speaking, goodwill. In that connection,
we would like to focus on the need for various political
views not to impede the Council's mission when it
comes to its responsibility for powerless civilian
populations who fall victim to armed conflicts.

Those efforts led to the Security Council's
establishment of a Working Group tasked with the
protection of civilians and to draw up plans to put an
end to all murder and other forms of violence,
including sexual violence, affecting civilians.
However, the thrust of the recommendations and
presidential statements by the Council have
unfortunately not yielded the desired results. We
therefore call for respect for all legal obligations and
resolutions adopted in this area, as the failure to
implement them would lead to the proliferation of a
culture of impunity and more violence against
civilians.

Over the past two years, the Security Council has
addressed many fundamental issues to enhance the
effectiveness of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We have also reconsidered efforts undertaken
to further promote the protection of civilians. Many
proposals and ideas have been put forward to meet the
challenges identified in the report of the Secretary-
General in 2009 (S/2009/277). However, several
fundamental issues must be clarified, including with

regard to the responsibilities of the Security Council
and the international community and speedy
intervention to address the horrors carried out against
civilians in armed conflict in areas of political
instability. It is also important to adopt a
comprehensive approach that allows the Council to
tackle the issue of the protection of civilians in
innovative ways not yet considered by the Council.

Many important events this year have compelled
the Security Council to consider the issue of the
protection of civilians and to take swift and decisive
action - for instance, to assist the brotherly Libyan
people. My country has participated in international
efforts to protect Libyan civilians and to provide the
necessary assistance in accordance with international
legality and resolution 1973 (2011). In that regard,
Qatar has committed itself to implement the resolution
regarding the protection of civilians in populated areas.
We have deployed substantial assistance in the context
of the overall emergency humanitarian assistance
provided to Libya. We have also chartered several
flights to ship hundreds of tons of foodstuffs, as well as
1,450 tons of medical equipment and supplies to that
country. More than 400 wounded persons have been
transported to Qatari hospitals. We have also shipped
approximately 1,000 tons of food supplies and medical
supplies by sea. That is in addition to the in-kind
assistance and equipment valued at $18 million. A field
hospital with full medical facilities has been provided
for Libyans on the Libya-Tunisia border. Qatar has also
transported to various safe areas more than 8,000
refugees from Misrata.

With regard to efforts by Qatar-based
humanitarian organizations, they have provided
assistance in kind as well as medical and nutrition
assistance to people on the Tunisian border, amounting
to $2.5 million. We have also worked to provide the
necessary assistance to refugees moving across the
borders of Tunisia and Egypt.

Qatar was among the first countries to join the
international contact group on Libya. We hosted the
group's second meeting, at Doha on 13 April, as an
international forum with the top priority of protecting
civilians.

Foreign occupation is one of the main threats to
the protection of civilians. People under occupation
suffer from a variety of challenges that exacerbate their
situation. Given the inhuman embargo and practices
routinely carried out in the Gaza Strip, we call for
every possible measure necessary to protect the civilian
population of Palestine from the aggression of Israel,
the occupying Power.

In conclusion, the protection of civilians is not
just a humanitarian concern. We must also work to take
comprehensive measures by seeking to implement
existing laws for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, without any sort of discrimination or
selectivity and in accordance with international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

