Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda) (spoke in French): Like
previous speakers, I should like to welcome the
presence here this morning of the Secretary-General.
This is a sign of the determination of the United
Nations to help to resolve conflict in the Great Lakes
region and to achieve peace there.

I should like also to thank Mr. Guehenno and
Mr. Ngongi for their statements concerning recent
developments and events in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which, in my view, were assessed
positively.

I should like also to thank Mr. Solana for his
initiative of travelling to the region to see for himself
the magnitude of the crisis in Africa, which is evidence
of the fresh impetus given by the international
community, and the European Union in particular, to
assist that region finally to overcome the crises
afflicting it and the attendant untold suffering.

We are grateful to the President of the Council for
having convened this important public meeting on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is
taking place at an important moment: the day after the
establishment of the Government in keeping with the
Lusaka accords and the inter-Congolese dialogue. We
are also at this time prompted to reflect on the future of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and that of the
Great Lakes region as a whole.

The Government of Rwanda welcomes the
establishment of an inclusive Government in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has become
a reality with the return to Kinshasa of the primary
leaders of the rebel movements - the Mouvement
national de liberation du Congo and the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD)-
Goma - as well as the swearing-in of the four vice-
presidents of the Republic, who were nominated within
the framework of the establishment of the Transitional
Government.

Throughout the Congolese crisis, the Government
of Rwanda has consistently drawn the attention of the
Council and of the international community to the need
to establish an inclusive Government strong enough to
re-establish authority on its territory and sufficiently
responsible to ensure respect for the security of
neighbouring States. This concern was once again
emphasized by His Excellency President Paul Kagame
during his meeting with the Security Council mission
in Kigali last month.

The establishment of the Transitional
Government is not an end in itself. My Government
therefore hopes that it marks the beginning of a firm
commitment to genuine peace and stability within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as in the
region as a whole, and that it will provide a legitimate
means of rallying Congolese people of all convictions
around a shared ideal of unity, justice and equality
before the law in a country where exclusion in any
form would be banned, with a view to rebuilding a
prosperous Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My Government would like also to express the
hope that the Transitional Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will shoulder its
responsibilities with regard to the various armed
groups in its territory by promoting effective
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement
programme, with respect for the accords previously
signed in Lusaka and Pretoria.

My Government is committed to cooperating with
the Transitional Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in order to find answers to
issues of security, sovereignty and peace in the region,
in the interests of our respective countries and peoples.

My Government reiterates its full cooperation
with MONUC and hopes that the Mission will be
strengthened in a manner that is commensurate with its
important task.

The President (spoke in Spanish) The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Nepal. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

