Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Costa for their
mutually complementary briefings.

The representative of Greece will shortly make a
statement on behalf of the European Union with which
France fully associates itself. I will make just a few
remarks on the problem of the anti-drug campaign.

I wish first to welcome Russia's initiative. The
United Nations has a central role to play in the fight
against the scourge of drugs. It must establish the
guiding principles of international cooperation in this
area as in many others. The General Assembly, at its
twentieth special session in 1998, adopted seminal
texts in this regard.

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) is unquestionably the best instrument for the
implementation of anti-drug policies. Its technical
assistance and support programmes are irreplaceable,
and its leading role deserves to be further strengthened.
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
must also make a useful contribution.

The Security Council must do its share in this
effort. Trafficking from Afghanistan constitutes a
serious threat to international peace and security. Today
drugs are among the ranks of other major threats, such
as terrorism, arms proliferation and organized crime.

This threat affects everyone - Europe included,
of course. An important share of Afghan opium is
consumed in Europe. The transit countries are also
harshly affected, and in growing numbers. The
traditional route across the Balkans unfortunately has
now been joined by a whole series of routes across
Central Asia. The distinction between transit countries
and consumer countries is no longer relevant. The
countries of transit are now also consumer markets and
have experienced the brunt of the effects of this
situation: the destabilization of already fragile
economies, a breakdown in State structures because of
corruption, an explosion in criminality and a
deterioration in public health.

For Afghanistan, of course, the production of and
trafficking in drugs represents an enormous challenge.
The continuation of poppy cultivation blocks reforms
that are vital to the modernization of the country.
Struggling against poppy cultivation in Afghanistan
means making progress in two major areas of the Bonn
process - that of security in the provinces and that of
strengthening central authority vis-a-vis local
strongholds. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), under the remarkable
leadership of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, is providing
irreplaceable support to the Afghan authorities on both
these fronts.

But the battle is not won. After a considerable
decline in 2000-2001, opium production in Afghanistan
was estimated by the United Nations to be at 3,400
tonnes in 2002. The 2003 harvest will most likely be of
the same magnitude. It suffices to look at the brochure
distributed today to see the extent of the gravity of this
problem.

Recently, President Karzai took courageous
measures to confront this challenge. A plan of action
was adopted by the Transitional Government. It is very
significant that this plan proposes a long-term strategy
for the complete elimination of poppy cultivation in
Afghanistan by the year 2013. We must support these
measures, together with the lead nations: the United
Kingdom, in charge of the fight against drugs;
Germany, for the police; and Italy, for judicial reform.
This presupposes supporting the sustainable
development of replacement crops. Afghanistan is by
no means doomed to remain the world's biggest opium
producer. Poppy cultivation is not a traditional activity
in Afghanistan.

It is important that the international community's
response to the drug scourge respect certain principles.
All instruments must be used: repression, prevention
and treatment. The objectives must be well balanced:
the reduction of supply and demand. Coordination
needs to be improved, regionally and internationally.

In order to implement this strategy and to tackle
the problem in all its aspects, international
mobilization is indispensable. Upon France's initiative,
the representatives of 55 countries gravely affected by
the trafficking of opium and heroin produced in
Afghanistan met in Paris on 22 May of this year. Over
30 Ministers were present. A declaration, the Paris
Covenant, was adopted at the conclusion of the
meeting; it has been submitted for circulation as an
official Security Council document. By this Covenant,
the Ministers agreed to combine their countries' efforts
to strengthen national capacities, to develop regional
partnerships and to establish a multilateral strategic
framework under United Nations auspices. Precise
follow-up measures have been planned; for example,
the establishment of a regional structure in charge of
centralizing information, developing shared analyses
and, as needed, conducting joint action.

This international mobilization must be ongoing.
It is indispensable that the United Nations, the Security
Council and the General Assembly participate fully in
the implementation of this strategy. This is why France
completely supports the Presidential statement that will
be adopted at the conclusion of this meeting.

