Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I wish to thank Special
Envoy Eliasson and Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for their briefings and their tireless efforts to
advance the agreed agenda for Darfur. I also wish to
thank Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent Observer
of the African Union (AU), for her contribution to our
debate.

Italy supports the early and swift deployment of a
robust peacekeeping force in Darfur to protect civilians

and assist in the implementation of the agreements
between the Government and the rebels. We hope that
the status-of-forces agreement can be signed without
further delay, as agreed by the Secretary-General and
the President of the Sudan at the margins of the African
Union Summit.

We welcome the progress reported by Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno, particularly on the issue
of the participation of non-African countries -
although it is regrettable that the Nordic countries will
eventually not be part of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

Italy shares the assessment of the Secretary-
General that UNAMID will be only as effective as the
political process it is mandated to support. For us,
consistent with the Addis Ababa conclusions of
November 2006, the political and peacekeeping tracks
are equally important and mutually reinforcing. Urgent
progress is therefore needed in the political process as
well.

I wish to reiterate Italy's full support for a joint
United Nations-AU mediation. It is fundamental that
we all rally behind the efforts of the two Envoys aimed
at consolidating a critical mass among the rebel
movements that could allow the process to move
forward. We invite all rebel movements to seize the
current opportunity for full direct negotiations with the
Government. Continuing the fighting can no longer be
an option once that opportunity is in hand.

Italy is pleased to have contributed $511,000 to
the trust fund in support of the joint mediation. We will
soon provide additional funds, both for that and for the
United Nations-Darfur Community Peace and Stability
Fund.

Italy was impressed by the attendance of a
number of representatives from Darfur civil society at
the Sirte opening ceremony. We believe that civil
society has a lot to say about how the conflict should
be settled and how the agreement should be
implemented. We hope that its participation in the talks
can continue. We also look forward to further progress
in the Darfur-Darfur dialogue and reconciliation
process.

We remain concerned at the lack of progress in
the humanitarian situation. The extension of the
moratorium on restrictions to humanitarian
organizations by the Government is a welcome step
that needs to be accompanied by renewed commitment
by all parties in Darfur to allow unhindered access to
humanitarian aid.

Italy is also concerned about the human rights
situation in the region, in particular for women and
children. The latest report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict in Darfur provides a
sobering account of that reality. Italy looks forward to
discussing that report in the Working Group soon.

The importance of regional actors in settling the
Darfur conflict cannot be underestimated. It is vital
that Chad and the Sudan recommit themselves to the
Sirte process, resolve their differences through
dialogue and re-establish cooperative relations, which
are necessary for peace and stability in the region.

Let me also recall that there can be no impunity
for the crimes committed in Darfur. Italy supports the
opinion and conclusions of the Council of the
European Union on 28 January and its call on the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court.

The Security Council adopted a very important
presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/41) on the eve of
the opening of the Sirte meeting. The Council
underlined its willingness to take action against any
party that sought to undermine the peace process,
including by failing to respect the cessation of
hostilities or by impeding the talks, peacekeeping or
humanitarian aid. We think that that statement very
well reflects the sense of frustration of the international
community over the slow progress and the prevailing
impunity for What has happened in Darfur. I fully
concur with Special Envoy Eliasson when he said that
there must be a price for the lack of cooperation. Our
question is about the timing for such a price and
whether there is anything that the Council can do now
in that respect.

