Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank the Under-Secretary-General
and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs for
her briefing.

Appeals are regularly made from this organ to
preserve and strengthen the security system for which
the Security Council is the guarantor. It is a common
priority and objective, and arms control, disarmament
and non-proliferation are its pillars. As the President
of the French Republic recalled in this Chamber
last September:

[o]ur responsibility is that we owe it to those
who came before us and to those for whom we
are responsible is to preserve and strengthen that
regime at a time when it is being seriously tested."
(S/PV8362, p. 3).

The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF)
Treaty was a central element of that. France regrets that
no solution could be reached to maintain it in force.
The end of that Treaty increases the risks for instability
in Europe and erodes the international arms control
system. I would like to underscore that France's position
is clear and consistent, and there is nothing surprising
about it.

The viability and effectiveness of disarmament
and non-proliferation instruments require that those
agreements be fully respected and implemented. Russia
bears responsibility for the termination of the Treaty,
which it has continued to violate despite our calls for
the consistent implementation of the INF Treaty. The
development of a new intermediate-range missile
system by Russia increases the threat to European
security interests. We regret that it has again not
shown any willingness to comply with its international
obligations and has not taken any concrete steps in
that direction.

In the current context, we wish to maintain a
measured, balanced and responsible commitment to
ensure the security of our populations and to preserve
peace and regional and international stability. However,
that imperative also requires restoring mutual trust and
dialogue and giving us the means to do so.

The world cannot engage in a new arms race,
the price of which we would all pay; that would be a
dangerous step backwards, to the detriment of the
gains that underpin our security. Supporting and
strengthening disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control processes is essential, taking into account
the deterioration of our security environment.

We must redouble our efforts to preserve existing
conventional and nuclear arms control instruments and
rebuild a robust international framework. It must be
based on real and verifiable instruments and the law to
preserve and build on the achievements ofrecent decades
and respond to the strategic challenges of tomorrow.
France will continue to work towards strengthening it
and encourages all other actors to follow suit.

