Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Allow me, first of all, to
thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to
organize this important debate in the context of the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations. I would
like to join those who spoke before me in expressing
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his briefing.

As clearly indicated in the Preamble of the Charter,
the United Nations was established, among other things,
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
As the Preamble also makes clear right from the outset,
the United Nations is intended to be an Organization
of the peoples of the United Nations. Over the past
70 years of its existence, the United Nations has indeed
been an indispensable body for advancing collective
security and promoting multilateral cooperation among
its Member States in line with the spirit of the Charter.

There is no doubt that the Organization has passed
through many challenges; it has had its successes and
failures. But I am sure we all agree that the United
Nations is the only indispensable universal Organization
we have that we cannot live without. That is true in
all the areas of its purposes. The question is how we
can make this premier international Organization much
more relevant in addressing the challenges and threats
faced by humankind in the twenty-first century.

There is no doubt that the United Nations collective
security system has helped to reduce the danger
of war and, in peacekeeping, the Organization has
made enormous contributions. However, the global
geopolitical landscape has changed tremendously since
its establishment. The increasing number of intra-State
conflicts and the threat of terrorism and violent
extremism, as well as other transnational crimes by
non-State actors, are posing greater risks to world
peace and security than ever before. The prevalence of
poverty and inequality, the spread ofpandemic diseases,
the impact of climate change and other socioeconomic
challenges also have serious implications for the
security and survival of humankind as a whole. That is
why, particularly at this juncture in history, we need the
United Nations more than ever before.

That is also why the Organization has to be able to
address its weaknesses and make a greater difference,
not only in the security area but also in the economic,
social, human rights and humanitarian spheres. That
is why the reform of the United Nations is so critical:
so that the Organization lives up to what is stated in
the Preamble of the Charter that it is the Organization
of the peoples of the United Nations. Obviously, the
Organization can only be as strong as its Member
States representing their respective people are prepared
to make it.

The year 2015 offers a unique opportunity for
us to reaffirm our commitment to multilateralism by
summoning the political will and political leadership
necessary to achieve the transformative agenda that we
have agreed to carry forward in the post-2015 period.
That cannot be achieved without the full cooperation
of all countries - developed and developing - based
on our respective capacities. Failing to do so will have
serious repercussions for the peace and prosperity of our
world. For instance, terrorism and violent extremism is
not a matter of concern for a few Member States that
are directly affected, but a threat to the peaceful and
harmonious existence of humankind as a whole. That
is why we have to fight it together, without any double
standards, in the spirit of resolution 2178 (2014).

It is also incumbent upon us to address the root causes
and manifestations of terrorism. Ending poverty is not a
socioeconomic issue alone, and that is why the success
of the post-2015 development agenda is so crucial.
Therefore, it is in the enlightened self-interest of all of
us - both developed and developing countries - to
work towards the realization of the ambitious goals that
we have set for ourselves within the framework of that
agenda and demonstrate the necessary compromise
to agree on its means of implementation during the
Third International Conference on Financing for
Development, to be held in Addis Ababa.

In conclusion, what all this means is that we have
a historic responsibility to take bold steps in many
areas. In that regard, we need not only reaffirm our
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, but also muster the courage
and commitment to rise up to the challenge. Ethiopia
is fully committed to do its part, as it has done over
the past 70 years. Our country knows full well, from
its own experience, that, as Emperor Haile Selassie
stated in his address to the General Assembly in 1963
in referring to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations, "their value depends wholly on our will to
observe and honour them and give them content and
meaning." (A/PV1229, para. 5)

