Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): As this is the first time this month that I take
the floor in the Security Council, allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. I would also like to thank you for
convening this open meeting so that the Council may
discharge its responsibilities in full view of the
representatives of the international community, on
whose behalf it carries out its work.

With regard to the subject under consideration, I
shall be very brief in describing the situation so that we
can recall the true nature of the issue.

As members are well aware, Palestine was
occupied during the period of the British Mandate. The
year 1947 witnessed the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), on the partition of Palestine. In
1948, the occupying Power established its State in
Palestine with invaders who came from all over the
world. They were people who were not born there and
who can never claim that the land was theirs at any
time in history.

Since then, the Zionist objective remained secure
and recognized borders. Since then, the declared Arab
objective has been the liberation of Palestine - until
the catastrophe of 1967. The Israeli objective never
changed, while the Arab objective receded shamefully.
The goal of the liberation of Palestine was replaced
with that of the elimination of the consequences of the
aggression of 1967. Then came the 1973 war, which
achieved some military victories, but which brought
political defeat to the Arabs. Unfortunately, the Arabs
accepted this.

Let us consider the Israeli objectives. What is the
Zionist concept of Israeli security? As the Council and
the whole world can see, it is not the kind of security
that is achieved through documents, conventions,
agreements or demilitarized areas. Nor can it be
achieved by a multinational force to separate the two
warring parties. The Zionist concept of security
requires the complete alteration of the military,
economic, political, cultural and psychological
character of the whole Arab region, creating a situation
that would make it impossible for Arabs to assert their
historical rights to their land. That has actually been
achieved in the case of some Arabs.

What happened in return? The Arabs took further
steps towards what was called peace. They agreed to
join what was called the peace process. They attended
the regional and international conferences of that
process. Then they discovered that what was required
of them was capitulation - and the declaration of
capitulation - not the achievement of peace.

Our Palestinian brothers have suffered greatly.
They thought that they, too, could take that route in
order to recover a part of their land. What did they
obtain? They accepted Oslo, Madrid, Wye Plantation,
Camp David and Sharm el-Sheikh: they accepted
everything to which they were invited and which they
were asked to sign.

What happened, and why did it happen? Some
Arabs offered peace initiatives, from Fez to Beirut.
What did they receive in return? All the initiatives
proposed by the Arabs were rejected. They received
nothing in return for all their concessions. All the
concessions made by our brothers in Palestine received
a negative response. That proves a very important
point: the occupying authorities in Palestine do not
seek peace; nor do they desire it. They do not even
need peace. They seek only destruction and are
sabotaging any initiative that aims at making peace in
the region.

This is not a figment of my imagination. I am
citing Uri Avneri, who, by the way, is not Libyan. He
has said that the goal of the occupying authorities in
Palestine is simply the destruction of any peace
initiative. He said this in his recent article entitled,
"How to Torpedo the Saudis". He was referring to the
initiative of Prince Abdullah, which was endorsed by
the Beirut Summit. We know very well what the
Zionist terrorist army did to the Palestinians
immediately following that initiative's endorsement at
Beirut.

That puts a direct responsibility on the Council.
Most unfortunately and regrettably, it condemns the
Council. This Council is called the Security Council.
Council members have seen what has happened to
international peace and security in the region and
because of the region. The Council knows everything
that has happened, and it has been unable to adopt any
resolution. That means that the Council is not free and
is not the master of its own affairs. It is not even
international: it does not truly serve the cause of
international peace and security. That is a fact
recognized by all Council members even if they do not
admit it. Where is the democracy in the work of the
Council? Where is the transparency in the work of the
Council? This is the Council's responsibility. If the
Council is unable to discharge its responsibility, every
people under occupation must have the right to self-
defence. That is a historical and God-given right. They
must be able to resist those who occupy their land,
detain their people, imprison them, send some to meet
their maker, send others into exile and destroy homes
with their residents inside.

How can we allow those who defend their lands
against occupiers to be branded as terrorists? This is
warped logic. The terrorist is the one who comes to
occupy, to kill, to exile, to imprison and to destroy.
That is the real terrorist. Those who have the right to
respond in defence of their honour, dignity and land are
the occupied, not the occupier.

Do Council members imagine that, in the face of
the arrogance of power, we have forgotten the meaning
of words and their true weight? Some Arabs are so
afraid of death that they have died of fear; they died of
their fear to say a single word in self-expression. Since
they are dead nevertheless, they might as well speak
out.

All of the countries of the world that have
suffered colonialism know the meaning of occupation
and the importance of martyrdom and self-defence,
dignity and freedom. The Palestinians are free to
defend themselves. They are not terrorists. The
terrorists are those who persist in occupying their
lands.

It is now the Council's turn to act. If it is unable
to discharge its Charter duties and responsibilities, then
at least once it should boldly condemn the aggressor
and occupier. We know that the events in Palestine are
part and parcel of all the schemes and plans being
prepared for the region as a whole. We are fully aware
that all Arabs will be standing in line to be punished
one after the other if they do not come to see, before it
is too late, that they are all targeted. We believe that
they have all now understood and recognized that they
are all targets.

I affirm here that it is not always the rulers who
make the decisions. There comes a time when the
decisions are made by the people. If the masses have
been seduced by the illusions of peace and the peace
process, we can thank the Zionists for having
interrupted that seduction with everything they have
done and continue to do. If that should occur, however,
the Security Council will have nothing to do.

An Arab poet once said that what is justly ruined
can be justly rebuilt. We are awaiting justice and it will
not be long in coming. It will not be the Palestinians
alone who choose to die - they are already dead
anyway. All the inhabitants of the region will become
bombs that cannot be stopped so long as their rulers are
not up to making the difficult decisions needed to deter
aggression, restore dignity and liberate their usurped
lands. That day is inexorably coming. I say this not in
the interest of endorsing a resolution, but in order to
record it for history.

Those who are rising in Palestine are Palestinians.
They were not imported. That is an irrefutable
sociological fact. The Council has been trivialized by
the Zionist authorities, just as they trivialized the entire
United Nations when they prevented a Council mission
from going to Jenin to discharge its responsibility.
What did the Security Council do then? Nothing! It had
no reaction. If such an action were taken by an Arab
country, the Council would have imposed sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter. The Zionist
authorities have continuously trivialized the Council by
failing to comply with any of its resolutions. What is
the Council going to do? Arafat and the Palestinians
are always the ones who are wronged.

The calculations of history always prevail over
those of power and might. Any study of history reveals
empires that have risen and subsequently collapsed and
disappeared. That is what will happen to those who
believe that they can impose their will and ideas on
entire peoples, who are created in God's image. When
the Libyan people faced Italy, it was the very first
occasion on which the aeroplane, a great innovation at
that time, was used for military purposes. We resisted,
however; we resisted the latest technology of that time
with our bare hands and any tools that were available.
We lost precisely half the population of our country,
but we achieved our freedom, as many others have
done. This will happen in Palestine, too. I place these
words on record here in the Council so that any future
scholar, in considering the Council's activities on this
humanitarian question, will find at least one voice that
spoke the truth without seeking to conceal it.

When the Council was requested to send
observers - mere observers - it failed to do so. It is
high time for this Council to recover its prestige and a
certain degree of credibility, if it cannot recover it all. I
insist on this because we respect this Council and the
United Nations. We want to respect international
legality, too, but what international legality is there
when the United Nations is weak? We want a strong
United Nations that stands firm, in accordance with its
Charter and the rules of international law - the power
of the law, not the law of power.

The Council should reach its decisions through
direct dialogue, just as I am speaking here. Decisions
should not come in envelopes from capitals under
economic and political pressure from the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the other
international financial institutions, as well as military
pressure and threats.

Such resolutions cannot express the will of the
international community, on whose behalf we are
working. We are making these comments so as to
ensure that they will be on record for the benefit of all
those who take a keen interest in ensuring that the
United Nations and the Security Council are strong -
something that we should all support.

I pray to God that representatives will have the
courage to tell the truth to their capitals so that one day
we will be able to create a strong Security Council and
a strong United Nations that will be our refuge against
the arrogance of power.

