Mr. Motoc (Romania): Romania associates itself
with the statement to be delivered by the Irish
Presidency of the European Union. In general, we
highly appreciate the European Union's overall
commitment and substantial contribution in boosting
the peace and stabilization process in West Africa. I
shall therefore make only some specific comments on
the topic under consideration.

First, I would like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, for the initiative of convening this timely
meeting, as well as for the decision to conduct separate
debates on the reports on West Africa and Central
Africa respectively, having in mind the specificities of
each of the two regions.

We commend the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2003/ll47). Romania can
support the observations made by Assistant Secretary-
General Kalomoh, for which we are grateful.

The outcome of the consultations we held
recently on the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) and the United Nations Mission in cote
d'Ivoire (MINUCI) complemented the overall positive
assessment of the implementation of the main
recommendations following the Security Council
mission to West Africa. True, six months is too short a
time frame to make progress on the wide array of
problems facing peace, security and stability in a
number of West African countries. It is, however,
encouraging to see one of the countries most severely
affected by conflict in the area, namely Liberia,
entering a new course that responds to some of the
mission's findings and conclusions. We look forward to
a successful outcome of the reconstruction conference
on Liberia, to take place on 5 and 6 February, as a sign
of the enduring commitment of the international
community to Liberia's future.

We also commend as noteworthy, in that respect, the
emerging success story in Sierra Leone and continue to
support the idea of the important linkage between
establishing peace in Liberia and consolidating stability
in Sierra Leone within the overall progress in the Mano
River Union subregion. C6te d'Ivoire could follow on the
same path if all the parties fully implement the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement, with increased United Nations
engagement and support through the timely
deployment of a peacekeeping operation.

More importantly, the Security Council has taken
up many of the recommendations falling within its area
of responsibility in its consultations, debates,
resolutions and presidential statements on Liberia,
Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone and C6te d'Ivoire.

The Security Council mission to West Africa
itself not only addressed issues specific to individual
countries but also pursued the conditions of West
Africa as a whole and the need for the international
community and the entire family of United Nations
institutions, funds, agencies and programmes to
generate a new momentum of support, assistance and
partnership with the West African subregion.

Some steps have been taken in this regard also. In
that respect, we commend the regional meeting held in
Freetown on 14 November 2003, bringing together the
heads of the United Nations peacekeeping and political
missions and force commanders in West Africa. It is
expected that the next meeting, planned to be held next
month in Dakar, will consolidate that new
development. For its part, the Security Council should
support the meeting further so that it can become a
forum for addressing the most pressing issues affecting
the subregion, in particular cross-border problems.

On the other hand, given the number and scope of
recommendations made by the Security Council
mission with regard to West Africa as a whole, there
still remains a lot to be done. It is Romania's view,
based on its experience in its own region - Central
and South-Eastern Europe - that only by addressing
the cross-cutting regional issues can a durable answer
be found to the core of instability that continues to
threaten and undermine not only peace in West Africa
but also any hope of overcoming its pervasive
underdevelopment in the foreseeable future.

There is indeed a particular pattern of instability
and common challenges in this subregion: a sizable
population composed mainly of youth that are heavily
armed and capable of moving without restraint from
one country to another, carrying with them over the
porous borders not only weapons and the culture of
violence but also instability and destruction. The
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
exploitation of and illegal trade in natural resources
further compound the difficulties in a subregion
generally faced with a deficit of good governance.

Given the complex and interrelated nature of the
sources of instability in West Africa, an integrated
approach covering the whole region and addressing the
challenges at their core is required. Consequently, we
should be seeking ways to make such an approach bear
effectively on the decision-making process of the
Security Council.

Likewise, Romania supports the enhancement of
the United Nations role in the region, and we believe
that the United Nations Office for West Africa should
be given the responsibility to ensure the regional
coordination of all organizations involved, thus making
their impact more significant. For instance, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) moratorium on light weapons should be
considered in articulation with similar endeavours
taken at the international level, increasing its chances
of becoming operational.

We could perhaps think of an even more substantial
role for this Office, going beyond coordination and
asking it to provide ideas and suggestions for solutions
to regional issues, in parallel with support for
meaningful and constructive dialogue at the bilateral
and subregional levels. In that regard, we look forward
to the report of the Secretary-General on cross-border
issues in West Africa, with a view to further analysing
the practical ways the Council can address them.

In the same context, we welcome the European
Union's consideration of a regional strategy for West
Africa that will focus on conflict prevention and
resolution, including the perspective of a special
partnership with ECOWAS.

The ultimate goal of increased international
support should be to help the countries and peoples of
the region implement themselves confidence-building
measures both at the political and economic levels.
Nothing is more important than African ownership.

Finally, one of the important points underlined in
the wrap-up discussion on the work of the Security
Council for the month of May 2003 was that the
findings and recommendations of Security Council
missions should become a consistent and integral part
of the Council's decision-making process. It is true that
not all the recommendations fall within the purview of
the Security Council, but the measure of
implementation of the entire package of
recommendations should be considered as one of the
benchmarks by which to evaluate such missions as
effective instruments for conflict prevention,
management and resolution. The Security Council
should continue to pursue a holistic approach in
implementing recommendations from its missions on
the ground. Or, to quote, ifI may, an African saying, it
is important to run, but it is also important to reach the
finish line and to know when one has arrived at the
final destination.

