Mr. Lowcock: As all members of the Council
know, the Syrian conflict has now entered its eighth
year. When weapons speak, civilians pay the price - a
relentless price with horrific violence, bloodshed and
unspeakable suffering. The past few months have been
some of the worst yet for many civilians in Syria.

Today I want to start with the situation in eastern
Ghouta. Since the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018)
on 24 February, military operations in eastern Ghouta,
in particular air strikes, have reportedly killed
more than 1,700 people. Thousands more have been
injured. Attacks on critical civilian infrastructure,
such as medical facilities, continue to be reported.
There have been at least 28 reported attacks on health
facilities since mid-February and more than 70 verified
incidents since the beginning of the year. The World
Health Organization has reported that attacks on health
facilities, health workers and health infrastructure were
recorded during the first two months of the year at three
times the rate that we saw during 2017.

In recent weeks in Damascus city, at least 78 people
were reportedly killed and another 230 injured by shells
fired from eastern Ghouta. That includes reports of at
least 35 people killed and scores wounded on 20 March,
when Kashkul market in Jaramana, a suburb in the
south-eastern part of the city, was struck by a rocket.
Tens of thousands of civilians have been displaced from
Douma, Harasta, Sagba and Kafr Batna in recent days
and weeks. So far, reports indicate that some 80,000
civilians have been taken to places in Damascus city
and rural Damascus. Nearly 20,000 combatants and
civilians have been transported to locations in north-
western Syria.

Nearly 52,000 civilians from eastern Ghouta are
currently being hosted in eight collective shelters
in rural Damascus. That displaced population has
endured months of limited access to food, medical care
and other essential items. In the words of the United
Nations Humanitarian Coordinator, Ali Al-Za'tari, who
met and spoke to some of them, those people are "tired,
hungry, traumatized and afraid". Most of the collective
shelters do not have the capacity or infrastructure to
accommodate such large numbers of people. They
are extremely overcrowded and severely lacking in
basic water, sanitation and hygiene facilities. There
are a number of serious protection concerns related to
risks of gender-based violence, unaccompanied and
separated children and restrictions on movement. The
United Nations is not in charge of the management
of those shelters. However, since 13 March, together
with humanitarian partners, we have mobilized a rapid
response to provide evacuees with basic support in
close coordination with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and other local partners. So far, more than 130,000
non-food items have been distributed, 130 emergency
toilets have been installed, and water trucking services
have been provided to most shelters. In addition,
supplies to feed more than 50,000 people and a total of
38 mobile health teams and 18 mobile medical teams
are currently providing support to those in need inside
the shelters.

Humanitarian organizations also need access to the
people still trapped within eastern Ghouta, in particular
in Douma, where fighting and siege continue. The
United Nations and its partners are ready to proceed
to Douma with food for up to 16,500 people, as well
as health, nutrition, water, sanitation and hygiene
supplies, but facilitation letters need to be signed by the
Government of Syria.

I reiterate the Secretary-General's call on all
parties to fully respect international humanitarian law
and human rights law in order to ensure immediate
humanitarian access and guarantee the protection of
civilians, including in relation to displacements and
evacuations. The United Nations and its partners require
unimpeded access to all those affected by the situation
in eastern Ghouta. That means access to the areas
where civilians remain, through which they transit and
to which they exit, such as collective shelters, in order
to ensure that effective protection mechanisms are in
place so that we can deter any possible violations and
provide remedial protection support.

Eastern Ghouta is not the only place in which
humanitarian needs continue to increase. In north-
western Syria, in recent weeks, an estimated 183,500
people have been displaced by hostilities in Afrin district
in Aleppo governorate. The majority - some 140,000
people - have fled to Tell Rifaat and the remainder
have gone to Nubl, Al-Zahraa, Manbij, Hasakah and
surrounding areas. That massive influx of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) is putting a strain on host
communities, which are already overwhelmed.

Two days ago, on 25 March, an inter-agency convoy
to Tell Rifaat delivered assistance for some 50,000
people. However, overall, humanitarian partners are
still struggling to gain sustainable access to the area.
Moreover, access to Aleppo city for IDPs from Afrin
district is currently restricted. Of particular concern
are medical evacuations that are urgently required
for severely sick people to receive care in specialized
hospitals in Aleppo city. Four deaths due to the lack of
proper health care have already been reported.

Between 50,000 and 70,000 people are estimated
still to be in Afrin city. Humanitarian access to the
city and its outer perimeters is possible through cross-
border operations mandated by the Council. Today,
the Government of Turkey told us that it is positively
disposed towards such access, and we plan to run
convoys in the very near future. We know that needs
are very substantial.

In Idlib governorate, the situation remains
catastrophic, with almost 400,000 people displaced
since mid-December. Local capacity to assist is
overstretched. Thousands more people are now arriving
there from eastern Ghouta, with no sites or shelters
available for the vast majority of them. We have
received reports of an increase in violence in Idlib in
recent days. According to local sources, on 20 March
air strikes hit an IDP shelter on the outskirts of Haas
village in southern rural Idlib governorate, reportedly
killing at least 10 displaced people and injuring another
15. On 21 March, air strikes on Kafr Battikh village,
also in southern rural Idlib governorate, reportedly
killed scores more. The next day, the central market in
Harim town was hit by an air strike, reportedly killing
35 people, including many women and children. On
12 March, air strikes also resumed in southern Syria,
with attacks being reported in and around Dar'a city.
There have been no air strikes in those areas since an
agreement was reached last year on the establishment
of a de-escalation zone for parts of the south of
the country. That therefore appears to be a major
unwelcome development.

Let me turn to Raqqa. On 19 March, we
received approval from the Syrian authorities for
an assessment mission to Raqqa city by the United
Nations Mine Action Service, the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World
Health Organization. As Council members know, we
have been seeking agreement to that for some time.
That was on 19 March.

Three days later, on 22 March, the United Nations

Department of Safety and Security deployed a team to
conduct a security assessment. They report that while
the city is considered calm and stable, considerable risk
remains. Raqqa city is still highly contaminated with
landmines, unexploded ordnances, explosive remnants
of war and improvised explosive devices. We hope that
access to Raqqa city will be possible for humanitarian
aid deliveries via Qamishli, Manbij, Aleppo, Hamah
and Horns, depending on operational and logistical
arrangements. The United Nations and our partners
are now preparing a humanitarian assessment mission,
which is likely to take place next week.
Next I shall address Rukban, on the Syria-Jordan
border. United Nations partners received permission
from the Syrian authorities on 8 March to organize a
humanitarian convoy from Damascus to reach people
in need along the Syria-Jordan border. Last week, on
19 March, the United Nations itself received permission
to join that humanitarian mission. Preparations are
ongoing, and a first humanitarian convoy is expected
to deploy soon. As the Council knows, we have been
seeking approval for that for many months.

As we sit here today, almost at the end of the month,
we have reached some 137,000 people in need through
inter-agency convoys - that is, cross-line convoys
sent to hard-to-reach and besieged areas - to Tell
Rifaat, Al-Dar al-Kabirah and Douma. That is limited,
incremental progress, compared to the first part of the
year, thanks to the extraordinary efforts of the team on
the ground and some of those around this table. But
we are essentially just given crumbs - an occasional
convoy here and there, often, coincidentally, shortly
before our monthly briefings to the Council.

A total of 5.6 million Syrians in acute need cannot
live on crumbs, and with a quarter of the year gone,
our level of access is currently far worse than it was
this time last year. We need the support of all Council
members and members of the International Syria
Support Group humanitarian task force to do their part
to exert their individual and collective influence over
the parties.

A few days ago, the Government of Syria and
others asked for more United Nations help with
humanitarian aid in eastern Ghouta. In response, we
have, first, proposed that a team of United Nations
emergency response experts be deployed to strengthen
efforts on the ground. Visa requests for the team have
been submitted. Secondly, we have confirmed a new
allocation of $20 million from the Syria Humanitarian
Fund, which is managed by my Office, for eastern
Ghouta and those displaced from Afrin to provide
shelter materials, improve sanitation for displaced
people, ensure that safe water is available, provide
life-saving medicines and medical services and put
in place measures to enhance protection in relocation
sites.

The United Nations and its partners, on average,
reach 7.5 million people every month with life-saving
humanitarian assistance across the whole of Syria.
Clearly, without that assistance, the situation would be
even more catastrophic than it is now and the loss of life
even greater. The United Nations has no money of its
own to do those things. We can do them only because
we receive voluntary contributions from our donors. I
want to take this opportunity to thank everyone who
has supported our appeal over the last year, including
our top donors: the United States, Germany, the United
Kingdom, the European Union, Norway, Canada, Japan,
Denmark, Sweden, Qatar, Kuwait and the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia.

Resolution 2401 (2018) was adopted just over
a month ago. I ask all in the Council to make the
resolution a reality. Whatever the difficulty, the United
Nations and its partners remain determined to follow
through, for the sake of the Syrian people.

