Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): About five weeks
ago, when the Council held an open debate on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, there appeared to
exist different perceptions of the situation and, hence,
differing approaches as to the future course of action. It
is reassuring for us, listening to the important statements
of African leaders before the Security Council today, to
note that there now exists a greater potential for
convergence. This opportunity has to be nurtured, pursued
in full earnest and given a concrete shape.

The commitment of the leadership to peace and
security for the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region has been demonstrated
today by the representation at the highest level of Lusaka

 

signatories, including the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) Secretary-General, Mr. Salim Salim. Secretary-
General Kofi Annan's close involvement deserves our deep
appreciation.

In this context, let me say how much we owe to the
leadership of the United States, to the personal intervention
of Secretary of State Albright and to Ambassador
Holbrooke for his tireless endeavour in making this historic
meeting happen. His initiative has made our collective
intervention for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo a realistic proposition.

The last six months have proved that the Lusaka
Agreement remains the most pragmatic and practical basis
for the resolution of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and for peace and security in the Great Lakes
region. The deviation from the peace process and the
manoeuvres aimed at a military solution are bound to fail.
Such a path has instead established an illegal war market,
helped a business bonanza flourish and drained valuable
resources. It has exacerbated the dire humanitarian and
socio-economic condition of hundreds of thousands of
innocent people.

The message of this gathering of the African
leadership at the United Nations appropriately underlines
that the next crucial step will require greater understanding,
larger cooperation and bolder decisions to seize the
opportunity that exists here and now.

President Masire brings statesmanship and influence to
the process as the neutral facilitator for the inter-Congolese
dialogue. His role is of critical importance. He will have
our full support in his efforts for national reconciliation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We believe he will
receive the same support and cooperation from all the
parties concerned.

Turning to the future course of action in concrete
terms, Bangladesh takes the following position on the five
areas of major concern.

The first area of concern is the question of the
framework for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We join others in affirming that the Lusaka
Agreement remains the most viable basis for peace and
security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the subregion. The Agreement is comprehensive. It is
supported by the Security Council resolutions that recognize
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
all States in the region. Its implementation will require
unwavering political will, sincere commitment and the
effective cooperation of all the signatories. The Lusaka
mechanisms, notably the Joint Military Commission, have
already received commitments of financial support from
several countries, which we hope will realize their pledges
urgently. Resources for the facilitator's mission are also
needed immediately.

Second is the concept of operation and the mandate
of the proposed United Nations peacekeeping mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Ambassador
Kamel Morjane, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, has been in the field. Ambassador
Holbrooke has also been on a tour of the region recently
and has come back with a first-hand assessment of the
situation. We believe that in the given context, the
outlines provided in the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/2000/30, of 17 January,
represent a realistic proposition. The Security Council
needs to act quickly on this proposal so that the United
Nations military presence is established without delay. We
regard this as an interim mission in preparation for a
larger and more robust peacekeeping mission. As and
when necessary, Bangladesh remains ready to contribute
to the expanded peacekeeping mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Third is the need for progress towards the third
phase. A more robust mission with a Chapter VII
mandate needs to be considered in due course for the
implementation of the remaining provisions of the Lusaka
Agreement, including the disarmament and demobilization
of armed groups,monitoring and verifying the withdrawal
of foreign troops and securing the frontiers.

It is underlined that real progress through these
phases would be possible only with concomitant national
dialogue and reconciliation. We call upon all parties to
cooperate fully with President Masire in this regard.
National reconciliation will of course require
re-establishment of State authority over the entire territory
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and end to the
pillaging of the country's natural resources.

Fourth is the full implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and moving beyond. This would involve the
implementation of chapter 12 of annex A of the
Agreement, providing for normalization of the security
situation along common borders between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbours. An extended
mandate of an expanded United Nations Organization

 

Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo should be
envisaged in that perspective.

Finally, as the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
been the theatre of several external conflicts involving the
Congolese people and their neighbours, a comprehensive
political settlement will be essential. In this respect, we
support the idea of an international conference to deal with
issues relating to peace and security, post-conflict peace-
building and democracy and development in the Great
Lakes region.

This morning the World Food Programme appealed
for safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian
organizations to all people in need of food aid and other
relief supplies in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Given the grave food security situation, we urge the
Council and all parties concerned to support this appeal.

We hope the next couple of days will be seized in
order to narrow the differences and to commence the much-
awaited national dialogue. It would be a significant
achievement if the Lusaka signatories could approve here
in New York the new calendar agreed by the Political
Committee at Harare last week, setting a practical schedule
for implementation. This will be critically important for the
momentum that is much needed by the international
community, including United Nations agencies, to carry
forward the initiative for peace. It is essential that a culture
of peace should be fostered to replace the culture of war
and violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the embattled Great Lakes region, to the benefit of all.

