Ms. Rice (United States of America): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Chairmen for their
briefings and for their dedicated leadership of the
Council's three counter-terrorism-related Committees.

The importance of this work and of the broader
international efforts to combat terrorism has been
underscored tragically and repeatedly in recent weeks by
the attempted bombing of a flight bound for Detroit last
Christmas Day, by the March bombings in the Moscow
subway, by the very troubling events in Times Square
just days ago, less than a mile from where we meet, and
by the deadly bombings in Iraq just yesterday.

These are stark reminders that terrorism remains
one of the most complicated threats to address.
Transnational terrorism is a truly global challenge.
Citizens of dozens of countries around the world, the
vast majority of whom are not from the United States,
have been victims of terrorism and violent extremism.
The United States recognizes that no single country can
address this threat alone. Therefore, the United States
will continue to reach out, on the basis of mutual interest
and mutual respect, to forge international coalitions.

The United States has set a clear and focused goal
to work with all members of this body to disrupt,
dismantle and defeat Al-Qaida and its extremist allies.
One critical element of this effort is strengthening our
counter-terrorism partnerships with the United Nations,
including the relevant Security Council subsidiary
bodies, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force and its newly established Support Office.

The United States is committed to more sustained
and strategic counter-terrorism engagement with the
wider United Nations membership to further our
common objectives. To this end, the State Department
hosted a meeting on 9 April to strengthen cooperation
among United States and United Nations experts
involved in counter-terrorism capacity-building in the
Sahel. The meeting involved some 25 experts from
United States Government departments and United
Nations offices and agencies, including representatives
from the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
Executive Directorate (CTED) and the Monitoring
Team of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). We look forward to continuing
such dialogue with the United Nations experts.

Before turning to the work of the three Council
Committees, I should like to highlight three core
principles that underpin our approach to United Nations
counter-terrorism work. The first is inclusiveness and
transparency. All of the Council's counter-terrorism-
related Committees should remain mindful of the need
to make their work as transparent and as accessible as
possible to the wider United Nations community,
national actors, regional organizations and civil society.
We encourage further engagement by the three
Committees with the wider United Nations membership
on a broad range of issues to ensure that the
Committees' work is well understood.

The second is implementation. Let us not forget
that the Council's counter-terrorism framework
obligates all of us to implement it. We recognize that
many countries require assistance to do so, and we are
committed to making capacity-building more innovative
and far-reaching. But both the Committees and the
Council itself further emphasize the importance of full
implementation of this framework by Member States.

The third is relevance. We must ensure that our
counter-terrorism work in the Council and the wider
United Nations system is connected to ongoing
national and regional efforts on the ground to deal with
the threat.

I should like to thank Ambassador Apakan for the
exceptional job he has done guiding the Counter-
Terrorism Committee during his first five months as its
Chair and helping to reinforce these core principles.
Ambassador Apakan has made the Committee more
efficient and has worked extremely well with CTED
Executive Director Mike Smith to keep the general
membership up to date on the work of the Committee
through open meetings on topics such as international
legal cooperation and maritime security.

It is imperative that the CTC and CTED continue
to focus on areas of strategic priority. We are therefore
pleased that CTED recently visited Yemen and has
provided us with its preliminary conclusions from that
visit. We also hope that partners will work with the
Yemeni authorities to build up the necessary counter-
terrorism capacities, which will also help them to deal
with other security threats within their own country.

Let me turn to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al
Qaeda and the Taliban. The 1267 sanctions regime
remains one of the most effective counter-terrorism
tools of the United Nations and a symbol of
international consensus against the threats of Al-Qaida
and the Taliban. The regime has evolved significantly
over the past 11 years, and the Council has devoted
great effort to ensuring that it is fair, effective and
relevant to the ever-changing terrorist threats. The
United States welcomes the significant enhancements
to the regime's listing and de-listing process outlined
in resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009). In
particular, we are confident that the establishment in
resolution 1904 (2009) of an Ombudsperson to
facilitate the Committee's review of de-listing petitions
will help ensure that the de-listing procedures are as
fair and transparent as possible.

We are pleased by the Committee's progress in
carrying out its work to implement the package of
reforms in resolution 1822 (2008), including the
Committee's comprehensive review of nearly 500
individuals and entities on its consolidated list to
ensure that each entry is as up-to-date as possible and
to determine the ongoing aptness of the listings. We
also acknowledge the Committee's efforts to develop
and post online narrative summaries of reasons for
listing each entry on the consolidated list. These
reforms will make Committee efforts more accessible
and understandable to the wider United Nations
membership, and they will bolster the ability of
Member States to implement the measures required.

I want to acknowledge and thank Ambassador
Mayr-Harting for the tremendous efforts devoted by
him and his team and all of the experts on the 1267
Committee. They have worked steadfastly to
implement these reforms. We all know how time-
consuming and resource-intensive this work has been,
and we greatly appreciate their oversight of this
process.

As the Council noted in resolution 1887 (2009),
the Nuclear Security Summit held in Washington, DC,
in April underscored that the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) is
critical to preventing the spread of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. Let me again thank its
Chairman, Ambassador Heller, for his tremendous
work. We must continue to find ways to strengthen the
cooperation of the Council's three counter-terrorism
Committees, despite their differing mandates.

We fully embrace the 1540 Committee's current
work plan, including its emphasis on working groups.
Going forward, the Committee must focus on garnering
support for a more robust and sustainable funding
mechanism, such as that suggested by President
Obama: a voluntary fund to help States achieve full
implementation of the resolution's mandate.

We also look forward to careful consideration of
renewal of the Committee's mandate, with a timeline
looking out as far as a decade or more. In the near
term, we encourage integration of the Committee's
2009 comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004)
outcomes. We underline the need for multilateral
cooperation. We stress the importance of additional
national reporting to the Committee, and we urge the
sharpening of national implementation plans. Again I
want to underscore our gratitude to Ambassador Heller
for his excellent leadership.

In conclusion, we are pleased with the direction
that these three Committees are following. We believe
that under the capable leadership of the Committees'
current Chairs, United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts will guide and reinforce actions of Member
States to deter terrorism, including the threats posed by
Al-Qaida and the Taliban, as well as proliferation
efforts by terrorist non-State actors.

