The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Albania, Germany and Serbia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jeremic'
(Serbia) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Neritani (Albania) and Mr. Ney (Germany)
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Zannier to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council's prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
2
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Skender Hyseni.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Hyseni to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/692, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, on whom I now call.


