Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Burundi welcomes the initiative taken by
the presidency of the United Kingdom, which, for the
second year in a row, is organizing a debate on justice
and the rule of law. We would also like to welcome the
Secretary-General's very clear-sighted report
(S/2004/6l6) around which we are basing our debate.
In order not to take up too much time, I shall
deliver a condensed version of my statement and
distribute the full text.

This debate is taking place more than four months
after the adoption by the Council - on 21 May
2004 - of resolution 1545 (2004), which authorized
the deployment of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi. It is also taking place a few days after the
deposit, here in New York on 21 September 2004, of
the instruments of ratification of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court by the Government of
Burundi.

Last year I concluded my statement to the
Council by affirming that Burundi needed a form of
justice that would bring reconciliation and healing,
after having emphasized that, in order for it to come
about, such reconciliation must be based on truth and
justice.

Since that time, provisional immunity granted to
political leaders returning from exile, as well as the
release of hundreds of political prisoners, as
recommended by an international ad hoc committee,
have caused upheaval in the prisons of my country.
Indeed, prisoners from various political groups in the
country have come together and denounced what they
are calling a justice that protects those who gave orders
and punishes those who followed orders. They have
threatened to make public all the secrets they hold with
regard to the responsibility of certain current leaders
for the violence that has afflicted the country.

What does that mean? It means that the
provisional immunity granted political leaders is an
extremely delicate political instrument in a situation of
internal conflict where a manipulating elite is already
hiding behind mass actions. It also means that the
peace process is failing, if the high-level officials
accused or convicted for playing a role in the national
tragedy were those primarily responsible for the
elections. This is even more dangerous when the
elections could lead to a situation where the
executioners are rehabilitated and given popular
legitimacy, while the victims are once again
threatened - more so than before - and are forced to
seek shelter, which they would not find, when they
were expecting reparation and rehabilitation.

The Security Council, which was asked in the
Arusha Peace Agreement to set up an international
judicial commission of inquiry, first preferred to send
to Burundi an assessment mission from the Secretary-
General last May. I was pleased to learn this morning
that the report of the assessment mission is finally
going to be made available very soon. The mission was
able to observe on the ground the strong desire of
Burundians of all political stripes to see the
commission of inquiry established as soon as possible.

The peace agreement also provides for the
creation of a truth and reconciliation commission. The
texts creating that commission have just been adopted
by the National Assembly, and the Senate will approve
them as well during its current session.

Burundians are beginning to worry, because they
still remember another piece of work left unfinished by
the United Nations: the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry on Burundi (S/1996/682),
which set out very serious conclusions on the
identification of those behind what the same report
called acts of genocide. The report was shelved instead
of leading to concrete action or being reviewed or
supplemented, if the Council deemed necessary. The
Council's lack of action on its own report created a
situation in which some Burundians now refer to the
conclusions of that report while others reject it.

Another investigative report came out two years
later. What I have in mind is the report (S/1998/1096, annex) that assembled information on the sale or
supply of arms to those Rwandans based in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo who were
responsible for genocide. The report not only
confirmed the existence of deliveries of arms to those
mass killers, but it contained unpublished documents
on cooperation between those killers and the
Burundian rebel movements, also located in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. No action followed
that report, which nevertheless shed light on the threat
of genocide that still exists in the Great Lakes region,
as confirmed by the heinous massacre on 13 August of
Congolese refugees in the Gatumba camp in Burundi.

Here again, the Gatumba investigation is
dragging its heels. Its conclusions would allow the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi - and
even the United Nations and the African Union - to
decide on legal and political action to be carried out
with regard to the groups responsible for the massacre,
in particular the PALIPEHUTU/FNL, which has
claimed responsibility for this deed from the very first
day and which heads of State of the subregion have
now declared to be a terrorist organization.

The Security Council has already shown that it
can take strong measures to try those responsible for
serious crimes - when, for example, it created the ad
hoc international tribunals for the former Yugoslavia
and for Rwanda, the Special Court for Sierra Leone
and the extraordinary chambers to try Khmer Rouge
leaders in Cambodia. For the time being, Burundians
are asking only for an international judicial
commission of inquiry. When the truth emerges from
that investigation and from the investigation to be
carried out by the national Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, Burundians will be in a position to decide
what type of justice should be meted out to the guilty
in order to achieve reconciliation. But this United
Nations contribution is urgent, because after elections
it will be politically delicate to try those who have
been elected, who will in fact be tempted to initiate
laws that will protect them and whitewash them
forever.

Since the deployment of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi (ONUB), the Organization has
been playing a central role in the follow-up of the
peace process in Burundi. The Burundian population
hopes that, thanks to the presence and the assistance of
ONUB, the peace process will culminate in a genuine
peace that will lay the foundation for economic
reconstruction and national reconciliation. Because
ONUB is deployed in the field, it is, de facto, a
credible point of reference and the international
community's legitimate representative in Burundi. That
is why the head of ONUB, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, is trying, in addition to
mediation, to coordinate and synchronize the activities
of external and internal partners for peace in Burundi.
The Government of Burundi reiterates its commitment
to cooperate fully with Ms. McAskie, who is leading
ONUB on behalf of the Secretary-General and the
Security Council for the cause of peace in Burundi and
on its borders.

