Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to join
my colleagues in welcoming the President of the Swiss
Confederation, His Excellency Mr. Didier Burkhalter,
to the Council today, and to thank him for setting out his
priorities as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

The United Kingdom strongly supports the OSCE.
As a major regional security organization in the
European space, it is well-placed to complement many
areas of the work of the United Nations. The strength
of the OSCE's institutions means that, when the will
of all its participating States is present, the OSCE can
significantly contribute to the promotion of security,
stability, democracy and the rule of law across its
region.

I would like to express the United Kingdom's strong
support for Swiss priorities in the OSCE. As Chair ofthe
Security Committee, the United Kingdom is working
closely with the OSCE chairmanship to develop many
of those priorities. We welcome the focus on counter-
terrorism, notably on disrupting terrorist financing,
by working in support of resolution 2133 (2014) to end
revenue streams obtained by kidnap for ransom. We
also welcome the OSCE's continuing work in a number
of other areas, not least those related to resolution 1540
(2004), on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and subsequent resolutions to encourage
regional bodies to assist in implementation; resolution
2117 (2013), on small arms and light weapons, including
in relation to the Arms Trade Treaty; and resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. With
regard to the latter, I would like to stress the inclusion
of preventing sexual violence in conflict.

We also welcome the Swiss focus this year on
the Western Balkans, where the OSCE has a long-
standing presence. It can add value there to the
actions of the European Union and other international
organizationsm - for example, through election
facilitation, through intercommunity relations, on
media freedom and on the rule of law. In Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we have been deeply concerned by the
violence that has accompanied recent protests. Those
protests must be a wake-up call for all ofus. There needs
to be a major international effort to help strengthen
Bosnia and Herzegovina's institutions and its territorial
integrity. The OSCE will undoubtedly have a role in
that effort.

An important focus for the international community,
including the OSCE, is the current situation in
Ukraine, which has seen serious violence and dramatic
developments in recent days. That violence has led to
the deaths of more than 80 people and left more than
600 injured. Such horrific scenes have no place in
twenty-first century Europe. Our condolences go out
to the families of all those who lost their lives, and our
sympathies to go those injured.

Events have been moving swiftly in Ukraine,
as Yanukovych has left Kiev. In his absence, the
Ukrainian Parliament has voted in a series of decrees
by large majorities, the details of which were circulated
to Council members this morning in a letter from the
Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the United Nations.
They include the formation of a unity Government.
That Government must now move rapidly to build a
stable, inclusive and fair political system and work to
fulfil the aspirations of the people of Ukraine. They
must create the conditions that will allow for free and
fair elections in May and ensure accountability for the
serious human rights violations and acts of violence
that we have witnessed during the past three months.
We hope the Government will call on the undoubted
expertise of the OSCE. Free and fair elections are
crucial for rebuilding the confidence of Ukrainians and
avoiding future tension.

We would like to pay tribute to the work of the OSCE
in Ukraine. Last December's OSCE Ministerial Council
took place in Kiev against a backdrop of large-scale
public protests. Since then, the OSCE has played a
positive role in efforts to support a peaceful solution
through the good offices of the OSCE for mediation.
We welcome the announcement that Mr. Burkhalter has
appointed the respected Swiss diplomat Tim Guldimann
as his personal envoy to Ukraine.

The United Kingdom is committed to supporting
a stable, united and economically prosperous Ukraine.
The role of the international community must be to
allow ordinary Ukrainians to decide their future.
That is not a zero-sum game. All in the international
community want a stable and prosperous Ukraine. We
all now need to work together help restore stability and
protect Ukraine's economy.

I again thank Mr. Burkhalter for his presentation
today. The United Kingdom will continue working
closely with him and his team in Vienna to ensure that
our shared vision for the OSCE as a forum for dialogue
and cooperation across an often divided region can be
advanced during 2014.

