Mr. Oussihamou (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, Sir, let me congratulate your friendly
country on its accession to the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I thank you for convening
today's open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I would also like to
thank Mr. Mladenov for his extensive briefing.

In that regard, the Kingdom of Morocco again
stresses the utmost importance it attaches to the
Palestinian question. Morocco and His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, Chair ofthe Al-Quds Committee, attach
great importance to the Palestinian question and the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and consider
them a national issue. We would like to recall the
intensive efforts made by His Majesty King Mohammed
VI in support of the cause of the Palestinian people and
of their legitimate and just aspirations, including the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State along
the borders of 4 June 1967 and with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

Our firm position regarding the Palestinian question
aims at achieving just and lasting peace in the Middle
East based on relevant international resolutions, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State solution. We
have always supported all initiatives leading to reviving
the stalled political process since 2014, by creating the
necessary conditions for a return to the negotiating
table. The international community is preoccupied
with conflicts in the region and at the international
level. Israel continues its illegal settlement-building
and judaization activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Unfortunately, we can find no prospects
for reaching a solution to the Palestinian question. We
have closely followed the recent decision to recognize
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. Given that Jerusalem
is a symbol of tolerance, peace and coexistence, His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, as Chair of the Al-Quds
Committee, has expressed his deep personal concern,
and the concern of Arab and Muslim countries and
peoples following that decision.

In that regard, on 6 December 2017, His Majesty
King Mohammed VI sent a letter to the Secretary-
General in which His Majesty stressed that any threat to
the legal and historic status of Jerusalem would lead to
a religious conflict and to further tension and violence.
It would undermine prospects for peace and lead to
further extremism and violence. As part of the Arab
ministerial delegation of the Arab Peace Initiative, and
commissioned by the League of Arab States, Morocco
has followed up on the repercussions of the dangerous
unilateral decision.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco remains
an active partner in all initiatives aimed at meeting
the aspirations of the Palestinian people. We renew
our call for the protection of the historic and legal
status of the city of Jerusalem, and of all the rights of
the Palestinian people, including their right to live in
dignity in their own State along the borders of 4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Morocco
calls on the international community, in particular the
Security Council, to do their utmost and assume their
responsibility and push for a permanent settlement
of the Palestinian question based on international
resolutions, which would further contribute to peace
and security in the Middle East.

