Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for your presence
among us here today, and Colombia for having
organized this open debate on peacebuilding. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General; the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh; his predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda; and the
representative of the World Bank.
France associates itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union.

We note today that, despite the 2010 review, the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is still being
defined. I would therefore like to make three comments
concerning this matter.

First, the primary role of the PBC is to identify,
together with the States concerned, the needs on
the ground and the stakeholders who are already
involved. Contact with those in the field offers a
picture of the needs on the ground. The work carried
out in the case of Guinea is an example of this. The
mapping exercise carried out by Luxembourg and Japan
provides us with a precise, quantifiable picture of the
existing shortcomings and projects needed to remedy
them. This exercise deserves to be repeated in other
country-specific configurations of the PBC.

The identification ofthe most pressing areas should
be the result of an in-depth dialogue with the relevant
State. To facilitate this dialogue, there are integrated
peacebuilding offices in a number of post-conflict
countries, such as Burundi and the Central African
Republic. The country-specific configuration of the
Commission must be in close contact with these offices,
and their exchanges must be fluid. That dialogue will be
effective only if links with the field are strengthened.
As was demonstrated by the Security Council's visit
to western Africa, the PBC is sometimes lacking in
visibility in States in the region, in particular Sierra
Leone.

Once the work to identify needs has been completed,
it is important for the PBC to be able to play its political
supporting role. On the one hand, an important element
of the tasks entrusted to the Peacebuilding Commission
is that of advocacy, especially for resource mobilization.
On the other hand, the PBC should open a dialogue with
the authorities of countries on its agenda in order to ask
them to take specific commitments and follow up with
results on the ground.

The signing of mutual commitments or
peacebuilding plans with a State is not in itself enough
to guarantee that they will in fact be implemented. For
example, the peacebuilding plan for South Sudan is
blocked for now as a result of budgetary austerity. In a
number of situations, States do not possess the means
to cover and fully participate in all projects under way.
It is therefore essential to establish priorities and to be
realistic.

Finally, the key element of the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission is coordination. The PBC
was designed as a platform for contact between the
various members of the international community,
including the international financial institutions, which
play a decisive role in this regard. Partnerships with
them must be developed. Coordination is a long-term
endeavour. To ensure the sustainability of the
international community's commitment, various efforts
aimed at reviewing the topic have been launched, such
as, inter alia, the review of civilian capacities. The issue
of partnership development lies at the very heart of that
review. We believe that that approach provides us with
the best hope for a long-term commitment.

The international community must not create
conditions of dependence where a State is kept on life
support, but rather conditions for recovery. An excellent
option is the drawing up of contracts such as the New
Deal for International Engagement in Fragile States
developed at the 2011 Forum on Aid Effectiveness, in
Busan, which involved defining a State's commitment
and so involves it in the project. Initiatives aimed at
promoting the recovery of a viable economic fabric
must be especially encouraged. The joint informal
event of the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission in June on partnerships for
youthjob creation in States emerging from conflict was
useful. That approach should also be reflected on the
ground in each State on the PBC's agenda.

I will conclude by underscoring that to bring a
coordinated response to post-conflict situations and
to make sustainable any return to peace and stability,
the Commission must work as a flexible and responsive
mechanism, one bringing all players together in a joint
action plan. It therefore behoves us to be especially
vigilant with regard to the risks of bureaucratization of
this young institution.

Mr. Wittig (Germany) Madam President, let me
begin by thanking you, Ambassador Nestor Osorio
and your whole delegation for today's important and
timely initiative and for preparing an excellent concept
note for our debate (S/2012/511, annex). Let me also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, as well
as the current and former Chairs of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and Vice-President Von Amsberg
of the World Bank for their insightful statements. Let
me also commend Assistant Secretary-General Judy
Cheng-Hopkins for her important work at the helm of
the Peacebuilding Support Office.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
on in today's debate.

We are here today not only to discuss the latest
annual report of the PBC (S/2012/70), but also to speak
in more general terms about how we can enhance the
role of the Commission within the United Nations
system, and in particular the impact that it has in the
field. In our view, the PBC has not yet entirely realized
its full potential. What can be done better? The concept
paper prepared by the Colombian presidency raises
important questions. The PBC's engagement with a
country needs to be flexible and has to evolve on the
basis ofa continuous assessment. Our approaches must
be context-specific; there is no single approach that will
fit all situations. However, there are a few overarching
points and principles that seem important to us.

First, we need to clarify what the role of the PBC
is and set realistic expectations. It seems that the PBC's
success has often been measured only by its capacity to
mobilize resources. Resource mobilization, including
by mobilizing non-traditional donors, is indeed a key
role of the PBC. But it needs to be clear that that is not
its only role. Supporting countries politically as they
emerge from conflict and fostering coherence among
international actors are other core tasks outlined in
the PBC's founding resolutions. Eligibility for funding
by the Peacebuilding Fund is therefore also linked
to a country's national commitment to a political
peacebuilding process. To marshal resources is not an
isolated task but has to go hand in hand with a credible
and nationally owned political process. The PBC
can only be successful if there is a genuine political
commitment by the national Government in question to
a political peacebuilding process.

Secondly, effective political support of countries
on the PBC's agenda can only work if there is close
cooperation between the PBC and other key actors
on the ground, namely, the executive representatives
and Special Representatives of the Secretary-General.
The roles and responsibilities of the different actors
must be clearly outlined in order to avoid overlap. The
first meeting between the PBC country configuration
Chairs and the Secretary-General's representatives for
countries on the PBC's agenda, which took place in New
York in May, was an important step in the right direction.
In our view, such a dialogue needs to take place on a
much more regular basis. The comparative advantage
of the PBC compared with United Nations missions on
the ground is its intergovernmental structure, which
should allow it to lend the the Secretary-General's
representatives additional political weight.

Thirdly, the PBC must make better use of the
political leverage of its individual members. PBC
member States need to become better at assisting
the PBC country configuration Chairs in their work.
Members of the PBC's Organizational Committee and
the PBC country configurations have a responsibility to
support the PBC so that it can have a true impact on the
ground. The PBC was created as a body composed of
members of different United Nations bodies, including
seven members of the Security Council, precisely for
the reason that those members bring their political
weight and experience from other bodies to the PBC's
activities. The intergovernmental nature of the PBC
needs to be much better used in order to support the
countries on its agenda.

Fourthly, the PBC needs to maintain stronger
and more regular rapport with other key partners in
the field, especially with major donors such as the
World Bank, active bilateral donors and other relevant
international actors. I therefore welcome the presence
of Vice-President Von Amsberg of the World Bank
at today's meeting. His statement on the improved
coordination between the World Bank and the PBC in
post-conflict situations is reassuring. We encourage
both sides to make full use of their potential for future
cooperation. It is only through a regular, strong rapport
that gaps and overlaps will be identified, be they in
resourcing or in civilian capacity-building.

Fifthly, we believe that there need to be more
interactive and dynamic relations between the PBC and
the Council. We welcome the fact that the Chairs of
the PBC country configurations are regularly included
in briefings to the Security Council. Council members
should, in our view, also consider inviting the PBC
country configuration Chairs, as appropriate, to closed
consultations of the Security Council. Furthermore, we
should work on expanding existing informal ways of
interaction between the PBC and the Security Council
outside the Consultations Room. In that connection, we
have had fruitful informal exchanges of views on both
Burundi and Liberia. We think it could be beneficial to
the work of the Council to have more of those informal
exchanges of views.

The PBC's Organizational Committee can do better
in using the advantages of its unique intergovernmental
structure. It could potentially serve as an ideal platform
to create stronger links between developments that take
place outside the United Nations, such as activities of
the World Bank, but also such initiatives as the New
Deal for International Engagement in Fragile and the
peacebuilding agenda of the United Nations. Equally,
the PBC could help to link certain processes within
the United Nations, such as the post-2015 development
agenda, to the peacebuilding agenda.
Having myself served as Chair of the PBC's
Organizational Committee, in 2010, I am very well
aware of the opportunities, the challenges and the
limitations of that unique intergovernmental body. All
of us created it together in order to achieve more durable
peace and development in countries emerging from
conflict. It is therefore also our common responsibility
to make it work.

