Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): Thirty-five years ago, in this very Chamber, a
United States Ambassador presented photographs and
evidence of Cuban military aircraft alleged to have rebelled
against our Government and bombed airports in Cuba. A
few days later the President of the United States took it
upon himself to refute this allegation and acknowledged his
Government's responsibility for those actions, which
preceded the Bay of Pigs invasion. Today similar slanders
are coming from similar sources. Let us hope that honesty
and courage will lead to their refutation.

Meanwhile, this Council, frequently slow and
negligent, is once again, with its actions today, rushing
into a distortion of its mandate under the Charter to
safeguard international peace and security. International
peace and security are not what is threatened today; it is
the peace, sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of
Cuba, which have been endangered for more than 35
years, precisely because of those who today, from a
position of strength, are promoting actions against my
country and trying to manipulate this Organization and
this Council.

During the past 20 months, 25 aircraft originating in
United States territory have violated Cuban airspace. In
every case this has been officially communicated to the
United States interests section in Havana.

The Government of the Republic of Cuba has
irrefutable proof that the two aircraft in the present case
were in Cuban airspace when they were shot down. On
that same day - 24 February - three aircraft originating
in the United States had violated Cuban airspace in the
morning hours.

Two hours before being shot down, one of the pilots
of the aircraft heading for Cuba was warned that defences
had been activated in various areas north of Havana and
of the risk they would run by entering those areas. He
replied that he would fly there despite the prohibition.

Cuba has repeatedly communicated, both publicly
and officially to the Government of the United States -
including to the Federal Aviation Administration - the
dangers to aircraft that such unauthorized flights in our
airspace entail. Despite those warnings, which it publicly
acknowledges on several occasions, the Government of
the United States of America took no effective measures
to prevent such flights from taking place in Cuban
airspace.

On many occasions, including very recently, Cuban
territorial waters and airspace have been violated by
organizations based in the United States that, in civilian
guise, have committed innumerable terrorist acts, while no
effective measures have been taken by the Government of
that country to stop such actions originating in its
territory.

 

A few hours ago the testimony of Juan Pablo Roque,
one of the pilots of the organization Brothers to the Rescue,
was made public. It included irrefutable proof of the links
between that organization and the Cuban American National
Foundation, which is known to engage in terrorist activity,
and ultra-reactionary American Congressmen. The pilot
testified that he had been instructed to carry explosives and
explore Cuban roads and economic targets where they could
be placed.

The pilot's testimony says,

"For example, in 1993 Jose Basulto, the
President of the organization Brothers to the Rescue,
asked me for information on specific stretches of road
in the city of Cienfuegos where an aircraft could land
and unload explosive charges, to be placed in high
tension towers that would then be blown up, thereby
affecting the national energy system. I can say that
from November 1994 to April 1995 Basulto gave me
instructions on anti-personnel pellet weapons that were
to be introduced into the country for the purpose of
carrying out attacks on persons, particularly attempts
against the life of President Fidel Castro."

There is also a plan by which Mr. Basulto wants to
link even more closely the anti-revolutionary forces in
Miami with elements that might support internal terrorist
plans in Cuba.

The pilot stated that Mr. Basulto had personally
engineered the purchase of a Czech-made L-29 aircraft,
Dolphin model, to train pilots in take-off and landing on
various stretches of road and airstrips, with the goal of
carrying out direct assaults against Cuban bases and
military installations. He went on to point out that the funds
for all of these activities originate essentially in the Cuban
American National Foundation. He pointed out that the
main purpose was to provoke incidents to heighten tension
in relations between Cuba and the United States. Finally, he
added that he had personally informed Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) agent Oscar Montoto, under the alias
"The Slim Man", of all the operations undertaken by
Brothers to the Rescue in violation of Cuban airspace.

Violations of Cuban airspace have increased and
become more provocative since the signing and
implementation of the migration agreements between Cuba
and the United States, the hindering of which is an avowed
objective of the organization Brothers to the Rescue. That
organization, both before and after the signing of the
migration agreements between Cuba and the United States,
has been engaged in the illegal transport of immigrants,
in violation of Cuban and United States laws and of
United Nations norms.

The behaviour of the Government of the United
States in attempting to unscrupulously manipulate this
incident for political purposes, is fully in keeping with
that Government's record of protecting and defending
well-known international terrorists, such as Orlando
Bosch, Luis Posada Carriles and Hernan Ricardo, all
responsible for the murder of 72 persons through the
sabotage of an airborne Cuban commercial aircraft in
1976. That genocidal act did not prompt the slightest
denunciation by the United States. Instead of bringing the
matter to the United Nations, it took it upon itself to
guarantee the necessary economic and political resources
for protecting the perpetrators.

According to its own statements, Brothers to the
Rescue has dedicated itself in recent months to
provocative activities intended to subvert Cuba's
constitutional order. Its leader, a participant in the events
of 24 February, has publicly announced its recent
contributions, amounting to thousands of dollars, to illegal
organizations operating in Cuba in the service of a foreign
Power. The interfering attitude of the United States, in an
attempt to legitimize a non-existent right to determine the
future of Cuba, has created a provocative context for
these organizations, which hope to be able to act with
impunity, guaranteed the protection and encouragement of
the Government of the United States.

It is regrettable that certain provisions of the
Convention on International Civil Aviation are subjected
to partial and unilateral interpretation. We are amazed that
due reference has not been made to the undue use of civil
aviation in terms of article 4 of that instrument, which
states:

"Each contracting State shall agree not to use
civil aviation for purposes which are incompatible
with the purposes of this Convention."

We are also amazed that in the flagrant manipulation
being performed today no reference is made to
subparagraph (d) of new paragraph 3 bis, which was
incorporated into the treaty in 1984, and which clearly
stipulates,

"Each contracting State shall take appropriate
measures to prohibit the undue use of civil aircraft
registered in that State, or used by a user whose

 

main office or permanent residence is in that State, for
any purpose which is incompatible with the purposes
of this Convention."

In that regard, we can construe "incompatible
purposes" as those that preclude the purposes contained in
article 44 of the Chicago Convention. Thus, examples of
incompatible purposes would be those that preclude or
endanger the peaceful use of civil aircraft, that are
incongruous with the harmonious coexistence of States or
that violate a State's own air regulations or those of other
States.

The Chicago Convention is one of those treaties
containing a preamble that constitutes a commitment by
virtue of its structure. Its clauses set forth and determine the
purposes for which the provisions of the treaty are to be
applied - for example, so that

"the future development of international civil aviation
can make a vigorous contribution to the creation and
preservation of friendship and understanding among
the nations and the peoples of the world, whereas its
misuse could constitute a threat to general security."

I should like to draw attention to a note now being
disseminated by the Cuban Ministry of Foreign Relations:

"Yesterday, the President of the United States
made a statement to the press in further reference to
last Saturday's incident, in which two pirate aircraft,
originating from a base in Florida, once again
penetrated Cuba's maritime space and airspace and
were shot down. William Clinton's words were
intended, first, to reaffirm the main arguments used to
condemn the events from some people's point of view
and were therefore nothing new; and, secondly, to
announce the measures to be applied against our
country.

"As a first step, the President promised
agreement with the Congress of his country, with
which he has had differences in this regard, in
adopting the Helms-Burton bill, which is aimed at
further strengthening the blockade of Cuba. He asked
for the support of the Security Council in condemning
and imposing sanctions on Cuba, a position that
contradicts the General Assembly's condemnation, on
four consecutive occasions, of the United States
economic blockade against Cuba.

"Another measure proposed - the suspension
of travel to the island by Cuban-Americans -
affects primarily many families living in the United
States, mainly in Florida, as well as in our country.
The proposal to raise funds to increase the broadcast
capabilities of the misnamed Radio Marti is in clear
contradiction of the position of some sectors in the
United States that advocate cutting the costs incurred
by such forms of interference.

"Above and beyond the contradictions and
absurdities of these measures, the greater injustice is
that they are being taken against a country that is the
victim of the blockade, of terrorist acts and of
repeated and increasingly arrogant violations of
Cuban airspace and maritime space. What measures
are to be taken against terrorist organizations that,
from United States territory, plan and carry out
armed actions and violations of the airspace of a
sovereign nation? What measures are to be taken
against the authorities of the United States, who
have been warned more than once and whose duty
it was to prevent these flights?

"There is no reason whatsoever to impose
sanctions on Cuba. However, the unfair and cruel
measures announced by President Clinton seem
meagre to the representatives of the extreme right of
Cuban descent in the United States who, in calling
for increasingly severe sanctions, only contribute to
exacerbating the political climate in the United
States with the aim of hamstringing the incumbent
President in the 1996 elections. The extreme right
based in Miami and its gangs, acting at the margins
of American law and having turned that Florida city
into their private demesne, have brought their ideas
to prevalence through blackmail and terror. The
intolerance of these gangsters of the extreme right
has become the prevailing norm of conduct there,
recalling the worst days of the medieval Inquisition.

"A cable sent out from Miami yesterday by the
British news agency Reuters stated that the radio
stations in that city continue today to be a forum for
the most intransigent and virulent sectors, which
have clamoured for embassies and agencies that
organize travel to Cuba to be burned down, for
aircraft flying to the island to be blown up, for
President Fidel Castro to be assassinated or for
another invasion to be launched. The dispatch
concluded by stating that spokesmen for groups of
the extreme right, complaining that the United States

 

has tied the exiles' hands, have called for war
preparations.

"Added to these howls from Florida are the
aggressive statements made yesterday in El Salvador
by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, in which he
asserted that President Clinton had not included any
military action against Cuba among his measures, but
reserved the right to adopt such measures against the
island: new threats, new measures against our
economy, new actions to intensify the blockade, new
laws to bring the people to their knees through hunger
and illness.
"The leaders of the United States and the
miserable traitors in our country who try to collaborate
with them should know: this is a struggle to the death
for the fatherland. Cuba does not fear or accept
threats. It has heard them in heaps for more than 35
years and has never trembled before them, not even
when facing the possibility of nuclear destruction. This
position was clearly laid out in the notes sent out
recently by the Ministry of Foreign Relations and was
reaffirmed yesterday at a press conference by the
President of the National Assembly of People's
Power, Ricardo Alarcen de Quesada.

"Furthermore, the clear and unwavering position
of our small country currently enjoys the solidarity of
the most diverse organizations in various parts of the
world. Now, after the fact, laments are being heard for
the loss of human life, but the bitter truth remains
that, when pirate air raids could have been
discouraged, prohibited and stopped by those who had
the power to do so, repeated warnings were ignored,
and some even applauded those reckless adventures.

"These events are taking place as we approach
the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Bay of Pigs victory,
fully and unflinchingly determined to face and quash
again other such attacks as circumstances require, on
the basis of our constant will to wage a defensive war
that will never end in triumph for the aggressors. Our
people's spirit of struggle and victory remains staunch
in the face of any threat."

In view of the hour and of the fatigue of
representatives, I shall not present in full the notes from my
Ministry of Foreign Relations or the chronology of
violations of Cuban airspace between 1994 and 1996; these
can be made available to delegations in the form of official
documents.

On many occasions - and when serving on the
Council my country was no exception - Presidents of the
Security Council have invoked rule 20 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure to demonstrate clearly to
the international community that, in line with basic ethical
behaviour, they would not attempt to benefit from the
prerogatives of their office. Such behaviour has been
lacking in this instance, and it is abundantly clear that the
fact that the United States is presiding over the Council
at this time has engendered a very particular dynamic and
very particular features in the Council's work.

I wish in conclusion to make it very clear to the
Security Council that neither the presidential statement
before it, if issued, nor any other action will be acceptable
to Cuba if it does not include a clear, unequivocal
condemnation of the acts of aggression against my
country carried out from the territory of the United States,
a clear condemnation of the flagrant violations of its air
space and territorial waters and an explicit condemnation
of the terrorist acts against Cuba and its people that have
been and continue to be committed and brazenly planned.

We hope that sanity will prevail and that the
members of the Security Council will have the wisdom
needed to put an end here and now to the unfair,
inequitable and grossly manipulative proceedings initiated
against my country.

