Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I should like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), our colleague
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his comprehensive
briefing on the latest developments in Kosovo, which
has highlighted how the use of language could cause
real problems and how loose talk, some would say
rhetoric, could lead to a dangerous situation.

I also welcome the presence of Minister Nela
Kuburovic' at today's meeting and would like to
thank her for her statement. I also thank Ambassador
Ms. Vlora Citaku for her remarks.

At the previous debate (see S/PV.7891), we made
our position very clear with respect to the need to
ensure that all the issues surrounding Kosovo are
resolved in a just and fair manner, without ignoring the
interests of any, big or small. We would like to reiterate
our support for the peaceful and amicable resolution of
all outstanding issues between Belgrade and Pristina in
accordance with the Brussels Agreement.

We also welcome the ongoing efforts being made
by the European Union in facilitating dialogue between
the two parties, including the convening of the two
high-level meetings by the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy in the reporting period.
We note the latest political and security
developments in relations between Belgrade and
Pristina, and we are concerned by the slow progress in
the practical implementation of dialogue agreements
between the two parties during the reporting period.
In this regard, the lack of concrete steps towards the
establishment of the Association/Community of Serb-
majority municipalities in Kosovo as well the delay in
completing judicial integration in northern Kosovo,
as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/387), should be seen as a source of concern.

We also note the controversy in relation to the
proposal on the transformation of the Kosovo Security
Force and the strong reaction that it has created. On
the other hand, however, we recognize some of the
positive developments as highlighted in the report,
including the resumption by members of the Kosovo
Serb political grouping of their participation in official
activities of the Assembly and Government of Kosovo,
the conduct of voting for the Serbian presidential
election throughout Kosovo without any incident, and
the lessening of tension in northern Kosovo.

Ethiopia also fully supports the work that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has been undertaking in the discharge of
the mandates bestowed on it within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999), particularly its good offices to
defuse tensions and promote consensual solutions to
problems on the ground. It is our hope that UNMIK
will continue to promote political dialogue and human
rights, strengthen community reconciliation, and
ensure security and stability in Kosovo and the region.

In concluding, I should like to state that security
and stability in Kosovo and the region will ultimately
be ensured when there is the necessary resolve on
the part of all parties to address the real challenge
they face. In this respect, we encourage both parties
to remain committed to dialogue and negotiation in a
spirit of understanding and compromise on mutually
acceptable ways.

