Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Ms. Bintou Keita, for her briefing on
the latest events in the Republic of Haiti and on the
activities of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). We also welcome the
Prime Minister of Saint Maarten.

We regret the events that occurred during the
month of July, which confirm the importance of
and the obvious link that exists between economic
development and stability, and highlight the failure of
structural adjustment prescriptions that do not take into
account local realities or the effect they can have on the
population, in particular on the poorest sector - which,
instead of benefiting from such measures, is stripped
of what it has - and that undermine the economic,
political and social stability of the country .

We believe that, in light of these facts, it is of the
utmost importance that Haiti work in pursuit of political
consensus with a view to promoting its economic
development. In that understanding, we reaffirm our
commitment to that brotherly country and call on the
international community to continue working to meet
the remaining challenges, mainly with respect to
the security sector and the rule of law. Such support
must be made in consultation and close coordination
with the Government of Haiti, in strict respect for its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

We also commend the positive progress in the
aforementioned areas and welcome the appointment of
Jean Henry Ceant as Prime Minister of the Republic
of Haiti. We underscore the renewed commitment of
the Government to consult with all sectors in order
to form a new and inclusive Government, focused on
fighting poverty and developing agriculture, energy
and infrastructure. To that end, there must be greater
alignment of external cooperation with Government
priorities, keeping in mind the scope of the Sustainable
Development Goals and the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Likewise, it is important to strengthen the State's
capacities to face natural disasters, with respect to which
we commend such humanitarian actors as UNICEF, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the United Nations Disaster Assessment and
Coordination Team for their coordinated assistance in
this area. We call on the international community and
donors to provide financial support to consolidate the
humanitarian response plan.

We appreciate the progress made in the struggle
against cholera through the new approach of the
Secretary-General. The United Nations and its
Members have a collective responsibility to ensure its
full implementation. In that understanding, we call on
the international community to work and to fulfil its
commitments, as well as to provide cooperation to the
Republic of Haiti in the construction of sound sanitation
and health systems. Cholera remains a critical problem
that affects not only sanitation and access to water, but
also all areas of development and stability in Haiti that
remain priorities for Haitians, as highlighted during the
Security Council's visit in June 2017.

Regarding the progress towards the benchmarks
and their results, we reiterate that these must be worked
out in strict compliance with the MINUJUSTH mandate
in the areas of rule of law and security, in accordance
with resolution 2350 (2017).

We commend the work of the Mission regarding its
community Violence reduction programme, involving
women and young people at risk in activities that
provide them with the tools and capacities to generate
income and encourage the community to engage in
dialogue. We encourage the Mission to pursue this
work, which has proved to be useful in the reduction
of crime, complements the interventions of the Haitian
National Police, and promotes community dialogue
and confidence in the work of the Haitian police and
institutions of the rule of law.

We welcome the support provided to governmental
institutions in the areas of justice, human rights and
security, and we commend the Mission's work on
sexual exploitation and exploitation. We encourage
MINUJUSTH to maintain these efforts under the
principle of zero tolerance for those responsible
for such crimes, who, if found guilty, should be
punished accordingly. We reiterate our concern about
the issue of children without paternity as a result of
sexual abuse perpetrated by MINUSTAH personnel,
and we note that the Mission has undertaken a project
that aims to cover tuition and lunch for children of
victims of those abuses.

We emphasize that there can be no development
without peace and no peace without development.
In that regard, we believe that the international
community must pool efforts and increase synergies
with the Government, when necessary and within the
framework of the MINUJUSTH mandate, to achieve
the main objective, which is to sustainably maintain
peace, in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

In conclusion, we welcome the appointment of
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime as Special Representative
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti. We wish her success in her
functions, and we are confident that she will perform
them impartially, within the framework of her
mandate. We reiterate our call to the Secretariat to take
geographical representation into account when making
appointments to the organization's senior management.

