Mr. Kim (Republic of Korea): Let me begin by
expressing my congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency. Speaking before the
Security Council for the first time since my official
accreditation to the United Nations - it was just last
Friday - I can assure you that my delegation will
continue to extend its full and active support to the
Council.

In the light of the progress that has been made in
the field of counter-terrorism, my Government believes
that resolution 1373 (2001) has garnered renewed
significance as a legally binding and universally
applicable framework. Given the global nature of
terrorist threats, we value the crucial role of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) in ensuring the
national counter-terrorism preparedness of each and
every member of the international community. The
CTC has demonstrated remarkable competence in
addressing potentially weak links in our united efforts
to prevent and combat terrorism.

I now turn to the CTC's latest quarterly work
programme (S/2003/710). While fully supporting the
programme of work, the Republic of Korea would like
to share some of its observations.

First, we note that the CTC has now received
national reports from all 191 Member States. That is a
long overdue but certainly welcome development.
Since the reports are highly diverse in their stages and
in their focus, we believe that careful consideration
should be given to country-specific realities. For its
part, the Republic of Korea submitted its third report to
the CTC last May.

Secondly, my Government commends the
progress made in the legal and legislative aspects of
international efforts to counter terrorism. The Republic
of Korea is currently a party to 10 of the 12 terrorism-
related international conventions and protocols. Having
already signed the remaining two, we are expediting
the process of enacting the necessary domestic
legislation for early ratification, preferably before the
end of this year.

Finally, my Government expressed its interest in
the matter of assistance at the Security Council meeting
on the CTC held in April. I am pleased to report to the
Council that we have since begun to offer training
programmes in airport and seaport security and
customs services. We are also planning to provide
training courses in the area of cyber-terrorism in the
coming months.

