Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I just start
by saying that l was disappointed by the Russian
representative's explanation of vote in the previous
meeting (see S/PV.8409). As he himself stated, he
did not actually make an explanation of vote, but a
substantive statement. In doing so Russia showed
contempt for the Security Council and its members by
not accepting a procedural vote by the Council. Russia
has regularly discussed Ukraine here under a different
agenda item. In this instance Russia deliberately chose
a provocative title for the meeting, which it knew that
it would lose. I ask myself why. I assume that Russia
knows how weak its position of substance is, and
thereby hopes to turn attention on process and play the
part of the Victim. It will not work because yesterday,
by Moscow's own admission, Russian vessels opened
fire on and seized three Ukrainian vessels approaching
the Sea of Azov. We are deeply concerned about the six
injured Ukrainians and the 23 others who have been
detained by the Russian Federation. We call for their
immediate release.

We condemn Russia's deplorable use of military
force. This further demonstrates Russia's ongoing
contempt for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial
integrity and its contempt for the global rules-based
international system, which the Organization serves to
uphold. It follows Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea
in 2014 and its construction of the Kerch Strait Bridge in
May, which constitutes a further violation of Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Yesterday's action
follows months of Russian harassment of international
shipping in the Sea of Azov, presumably aimed
at destabilizing the Ukrainian economy. Russia's
actions are not in conformity with the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 2003 Russia-
Ukraine bilateral agreement that provides for the
freedom of passage for each State's vessels in the Sea
of Azov, including military ships. Russia's actions
must stop immediately. International shipping must be
allowed free passage in the Sea of Azov. All parties
must exercise restraint.

We have seen this game before. Russia wants to
consolidate its illegal annexation of Crimea and annex
the Sea of Azov. Russia seems to hope the international
community will simply acquiesce and accept this as a
new reality. Well, we will not. The United Kingdom's
position is clear. We do not and will not recognize the
illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula by Russia.
The General Assembly made its position clear in
resolution 68/262, of 27 March 2014, and we continue
to fully support Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders
and territorial waters, which is why on 31 July the
European Union sanctioned six new entities in
connection with Russia opening the Kerch Bridge. We
continue to work closely with international partners to
ensure the sanctions remain in place as long as Russia's
control of the peninsula continues.

Russia's illegal annexation constituted a deliberate
Violation of a number of international agreements and
commitments, including Article 2 of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act, the Budapest
Memorandum and the 1997 Russia-Ukraine Treaty
of Friendship. But that is just a start. Russia's actions
are also causing human suffering. Appalling human
rights abuses in the Crimean peninsula continue with
the widespread persecution of such minority groups as
the Crimean Tatars. The Crimean Tatars face regular
harassment and risk arrest, detentions and threats of
seizure of their property. They have had their rights of
worship, assembly and expression restricted.

The Crimean Tatars are not the only people
suffering at the hands of Russia. Anyone who expresses
even mild discontent or voices their opposition to the
illegal annexation of Crimea risks being charged with
extremism and given a lengthy prison sentence, which
has forced many into exile. Russia continues to ignore
calls by the General Assembly for the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to visit Crimea.

We remain clear in our support of the rules-
based international system, which Russia continues
to flout. Russia must not be allowed to rewrite history
by establishing new realities on the ground. But this
is sadly not the first time Russia has indulged in such
reckless and provocative acts this year. Russia was
responsible for a chemical-weapon attack on British
soil, and its agents were caught red-handed in The
Hague. Russia has steadily increased tension in the Sea
of Azov and has now, by its own admission, fired on
Ukrainian ships, injuring sailors on board. Those are
not the actions ofa responsible country dedicated to the
maintenance of international peace and security and to
upholding the United Nations Charter.

As my Prime Minister recently made clear,
like others in this Chamber today, we remain open
to a different relationship with Russia, one where
Russia desists from these attacks that undermine
international treaties and international security and
refrains from actions that undermine the territorial
integrity of its neighbours, and instead acts together
with the international community to fulfil the common
responsibilities we share as permanent members of
the Security Council. We hope that the Russian State
chooses to take this path. However, Russia's actions
over the weekend do not give much ground for hope.

