President Putin (spoke in Russian): May I say
first of all that Russia attaches particular importance to
today's Security Council summit meeting. In gathering
here we are not only demonstrating our shared
responsibility and solidarity in combating the global
terrorist threat; it is of fundamental importance that it
is precisely the United Nations and the Security
Council that can become the coordinating centre, the
headquarters for the international antiterrorist front. It
is here, today, that the most important ideological,
political and organizational foundations for the fight
against terrorism are being formulated. Russia
welcomes this approach and is ready to act to
strengthen the central role of the United Nations in
insuring international security and stability.

The Security Council resolution adopted at the
initiative of the United Kingdom reflects the lessons
learned in this war against terrorism and sets forth new
substantive tasks, including the need to end incitement
to terrorism. I believe that such actions must be
qualified as criminal by all States, without exception.

Our common task is to create a truly solid front in
the fight against this evil. Any attempts to condone
terrorism, to flirt with terrorists or to use them for
different political purposes must be condemned
unanimously. Those who advocate terrorism, propagate
the ideologies of racism and ethnic or religious
intolerance must be fought, using not only the power of
the State but also engaging civil society, the mass
media, cultural and humanitarian cooperation and
interreligious dialogue.

On behalf of my country I have just signed the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism. As is known, it was Russia that
initiated that document, and we would like to thank our
partners for their support. We worked together, and we
have now created an efficient legal instrument for
tackling this real threat of the possible use of weapons
of mass destruction by terrorists.

I believe that at this session of the General
Assembly it may well be possible to complete the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
The issues of fighting terrorism and its roots, taken as a
whole, are questions needing our further cooperation
and must, we believe, be permanent items on the
agenda of this United Nations, the Security Council
and other United Nations bodies.

The Russian Federation is deeply convinced of
the need to enhance the effectiveness of the Security
Council in preventing armed conflict, particularly in
Africa. In that connection, we attach great importance
to the resolution just adopted by the Council on this
matter.

