Mr. Baja (Philippines): My delegation welcomes
this open meeting by the Chairman of the Al Qaeda
and Taliban sanctions Committee and commends
Ambassador Munoz for another comprehensive and
insightful presentation of the work of the Committee.
The Council is once again experiencing the personal
commitment of Ambassador Mufioz in advancing the
work of the Committee. I was privileged to witness
first-hand the dedication of Ambassador Mufioz and his
team, including his assistant, Carla Serazzi, as well as
that of the Secretariat, when I accompanied them on
the mission to South-East Asian countries, including
my own, the Philippines, as well as Cambodia,
Thailand and Australia, last October.

The strengthened mandate accorded by the
adoption of resolution 1526 (2004) early this year
provided new impetus for the work of the Committee.
It also created a new Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, which has been very effective and
which has provided invaluable support in the fulfilment
of the functions and achievement of the objectives of
the Committee. My comments will deal primarily with
the usefulness of the visit aspect of the Committee's
work, which distinguishes it from other Committees.

Under this strengthened mandate, the Monitoring
Team visited by country last August and the Chairman
and his team in October. The two visits this year, on
the technical and the political levels, have been
mutually beneficial both to my country and to the
Committee. The visits heightened awareness among the
implementing agencies in the Philippines of the global
effort against terrorism, including best practices
adopted by other States. In turn, the Committee was
informed about the intensified enforcement action
taken by the Philippine authorities against suspected
terrorist activities and about the difficulties
encountered in the implementation of the sanctions
regime.

The technical visit of the Monitoring Team
showed that some success, particularly in tracing
movements of funds for terrorism purposes, has been
achieved through efforts in implementing the
sanctions. There was also recognition that regional and
international support and assistance is needed to
further deal with the Al Qaeda threat. By the same
token, the Chairman's visit to my country allowed the
team to assess the commitment of the Philippines in the
global fight against terrorism. In his oral report to the
Council on the October mission to the South-East
Asian region, the Chairman observed that President
Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo's in-depth knowledge of the
issues at hand was a fine example of the dedication and
commitment of the Philippines to the global fight
against terrorism. That concern for the issue at the
highest level is concretely demonstrated by the fact
that the two inter-agency bodies most involved in
policy and enforcement against terrorism are both
directly under the Office of the President.

The anti-terrorism efforts of my Government are
not focused solely on enforcement measures but also
take into account the need to address the underlying
causes of terrorism. Thus, an integral part of those
efforts is to consider economic and social development
concerns. The l6-point counter-terrorism programme
of the Philippines includes, among other elements,
furthering the peace process with rebel groups and the
promotion of Christian-Muslim solidarity and interfaith
dialogue. There are, however, more challenges ahead
and many more steps to take, particularly since the
Al Qaeda threat is continuously mutating and
transforming itself. The strategy to meet this
phenomenon must therefore be dynamic and flexible.
Thus, my delegation fully supports the enhanced
dialogue between the Committee and Member States.

The reports in which Member States are required
to provide information on individual situations or
experiences of their countries in implementing the
sanctions are important and useful. The information in
those reports provides valuable lessons to the
international community as a whole and to other
individual countries and can be the basis for enhanced
dialogue between a Member State and the Committee.
The reports, of course, are not an end in themselves,
but are tools to make the global fight against terrorism
more effective. My delegation therefore calls upon
Member States to avail themselves of the opportunity
of greater interaction with the Committee, or with the
Monitoring Team on a technical level.

With the valuable contribution of Ambassador
Munoz, in providing leadership to the Committee, and
with the lessons learned and unlearned through his
briefing this morning, my delegation looks forward to
similar leadership from his successor in the fight
against terrorism perpetrated by Al Qaeda and the
Taliban.

