Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Republic of Korea
for organizing this important open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, presided over
this morning by Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade
Kim Sung-hwan. I also welcome the participation of
the Ministers from Azerbaijan, Rwanda and Brazil.
Likewise, I would like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the director from the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their informative
statements. Lastly, I wish to thank the delegation of
the United Kingdom for leading the consultations on
the important draft presidential statement that we will
adopt later on.

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), the
protection of civilians in armed conflict has occupied
a central position on the agenda of the Security
Council, as evidenced by the numerous resolutions,
presidential statements and other measures adopted by
the Council intended to overcome the major challenges
to protecting civilians. The track record of the past
14 years is encouraging, given the significant normative
framework that has been developed. However, that is
still insufficient both in terms of implementation and
impact on the ground.

The report of the Secretary-General published on
22 May 2012 (S/2012/376) describes a difficult situation
that often includes a failure by parties to a conflict to
abide by their obligations flowing from international
humanitarian law and instruments on human and
refugee rights.

As the Minister from Rwanda pointed out, the
situation of civilians takes on more serious dimensions
in the context ofrecent conflicts, which are spreading in
an extremely dangerous manner, as well as in situations
involving terrorism, separatism and transnational
organized crime. Such situations have become genuine
threats to the security and lives of civilians, as well as
to national and, at times, international patrimony. The
capacity to acquire weapons and secure financing, as
well as the dangerous alliances among various groups,
mean that civilians are often held hostage by Virtue
of threats, intimidation and acts of reprisals by such
groups. We hope that the next report of the Secretary-
General will take up those new challenges, in order
that the Security Council can have at its disposal
information and analysis concerning this phenomenon
in order to better protect civilians.

Peacekeeping operations with a mandate to protect
civilians continue to be an important tool at the
Council's disposal. Their effectiveness depends upon
sustained support from the international community in
ensuring the implementation of mandates by providing
the necessary resources to prevent attacks on civilians
and to strengthen the capacity of the country concerned
to meet its responsibility to protect civilians.

In our quest to better protect civilians in armed
conflict, we should continue to pay particular attention
to women and children, who are often targeted for
extreme violence and every manner of atrocity in
time of conflict. Sexual violence, in particular rape,
continues to be among the violence to which women
and girls continue to be subjected. Children continue to
be killed in conflict, often coerced into taking up arms
and used as human shields by armed groups and forces.
Given their vulnerability, it is incumbent upon all of us
to pay ongoing attention to the specific needs ofwomen
and children.

Journalists and humanitarian and health workers
also pay a high price for their commitment to protecting
civilian victims and easing their suffering. This group
also has the right to protection.

Conflicts produce thousands of refugees and
displaced persons, who are sometimes exposed to
inhumane practices on the part of the armed groups
that control refugee camps. Those groups also commit
grave Violations of international law, human rights law
and refugee law. Control over civilians by non-State
actors in refugee camps, including sometimes the
lack of distinction between armed elements and
civilians, remains a continuing threat and inhumane
practice whereby civilians are forced to live under
threat, blackmail and want. In such conditions,
complicity - direct or ill-advised - on the part of
States hosting camps, as well as the total avoidance of
any responsibility on the part of armed non-State groups
amount to a denial of rights that is both unacceptable
and immoral.

The report of the Secretary-General is clear on this
in stating that

"Humanitarian activities continue to suffer
from interference by State and non-State actors
pursuing a non-humanitarian agenda that results
in the disruption of humanitarian projects and the
diversion of assistance" (S/2012/376, para. 14).

It is time that we correct this anachronistic situation
by finding lasting solutions. That means registering
refugees and carrying out a census in every single
situation - steps that are both essential preconditions
and permanent obligations in protecting civilians and
providing assistance.
Given the challenges on the ground, reducing
the number of civilian Victims of violence entails
long-term efforts based on promoting all aspects of
the protection of civilians - legal, humanitarian
and security - in all United Nations activities.
The Security Council therefore cannot evade the
imperative need to establish a protective environment
built through development, strengthening capacity,
promoting democratic values and peacefully settling
political, social and territorial differences before they
lead to armed conflict with unforeseen repercussions
for civilians. On those two complementary aspects, the
work of the Council in promoting and consolidating
peace remains crucial and beneficial.

