Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Jordan for its initiative in convening today's
open debate, and we welcome Crown Prince Al Hussein
bin Abdullah II and Minister for Foreign Affairs Judeh
to New York to preside over the Security Council. I
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing.

In recent years, terrorism and violent extremism
have run rampant in some regions of the world. Some
young people have been deceived, incited or coerced by
terrorist organizations and violent extremist ideologies,
and become the tools and Victims of terrorist and
extremist activities, attracting the heightened attention
and awareness of the international community. Young
people are the future of the world. Protecting them from

the dangers of terrorism and Violent extremism is the
common responsibility of the international community.
China believes that the international community should
take the following measures.

First, we should resolutely fight terrorism and violent
extremism. Terrorism and extremism are the public
enemies of humankind. The international community
should make concerted and determined efforts in
countering all forms of terrorism and Violent extremist
activities and create a peaceful and stable environment
for the development of young people. Counter-terrorism
activities should abide by the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations - respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the countries concerned - and give full play to the
leading role of the United Nations and the Security
Council. Anti-terrorism efforts should not adopt double
standards, much less associate terrorism with a specific
ethnicity or religion.
Secondly, the channels through which terrorists
and extremist force deceive and incite youth must
be cut off. At present, terrorists and extremist forces
use the Internet and other new media to propagate
terrorist and extremist ideologies and to deceive and
incite young people, causing serious harm. The United
Nations counter-terrorism mechanisms should actively
promote strengthened cooperation on the part of the
international community; adopt effective measures to
resolutely counter attempts by terrorists and extremist
forces to use the Internet for such activities as
recruitment, incitement and planning and fund-raising;
frustrate their attempts to target young people.

Thirdly, the root causes of terrorism and Violent
extremism must be eliminated. Poverty, unemployment
and underdevelopment are fertile ground for terrorism
and Violent extremism, and major factors that make
youth susceptible to the misguidance of those forces.
The international community should pay close
attention to the issue of development and actively help
the countries concerned with their economic recovery
and development. All countries should strengthen
their efforts to educate and provide employment
opportunities for youth. The United Nations and other
international organizations should also continue to play
an active role in helping the countries concerned, in
particular developing countries, upgrade their capacity
to nurture and assist young people.
Fourthly, dialogue among civilizations should
be strengthened to combat terrorist and extremist
ideologies. Diversity among civilizations is the
basic feature of human society, and dialogue among
civilizations is an important path to achieving mutual
understanding, respect and peaceful coexistence among
different ethnicities, cultures and religions. It is also an
effective tool for helping the youth reject Violence and
eschew terrorist and extremist ideas. The international
community, including the relevant United Nations
agencies, should vigorously advocate the spirit of the
dialogue of civilizations, namely, respect, openness
and inclusiveness; promote enhanced exchanges and
mutual learning among people in all circles of society,
including young people; and foster an enabling social
environment in which all ethnic groups, cultures and
religions are treated as equals and coexist harmoniously
and peacefully.

Youth represent the future of the world's
development and peace. China is ready to join the
international community in actively fighting terrorist
and violent extremist actions, safeguarding world peace
and stability, and creating a harmonious, peaceful and
stable environment for the healthy development of
young people.

