Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): New Zealand fully
supports the current efforts of the Council to revise the
sanctions regime in respect of Iraq in order to permit
the restoration of normal trade as far as possible, while
maintaining effective controls on goods which may
assist Iraq to rearm with weapons of mass destruction.

Sanctions are an indispensable tool for the
Council, but they are also a blunt instrument. My
delegation considers that sanctions must be targeted for
maximum effectiveness and focused so as to minimize
any harmful impact on the humanitarian needs of the
civilian population concerned.

The urgent need to alleviate the serious
humanitarian suffering of the Iraqi civilian population
is well recognized. It was out of concern for the
civilian population of Iraq that the oil-for-food
programme was first put in place. It was not, however,
designed as a long-term mechanism to meet all the
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi population. That said,
the oil-for-food programme should be able to fulfil
their basic needs. New Zealand has welcomed the
efforts of the Council, particularly since the adoption
of resolution 1284 (1999), to improve the situation of
ordinary Iraqis by making the programme more
effective.

The lifting of the ceiling on Iraq's oil exports and
the streamlining of the approval process for importing
civilian goods have been demonstrable improvements
in the way in which sanctions have been applied to
Iraq. They have given the Government of Iraq the clear
means of meeting the needs of its civilian population.
That the Government of Iraq has chosen not to do so,
and continues to undermine the effectiveness of the
programme through its current refusal to export oil,
remains a matter of grave concern to my Government.
The key to removing the need for any sanctions
regime is clearly in the hands of the Iraqi Government.
It must comply with the resolutions of the Council,
including by admitting United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
inspectors into Iraq in order to verify that it has met its
disarmament obligations. My delegation fully endorses
the Council's efforts to secure Iraqi compliance with its
obligations to disarm.

We recognize that the cooperation of the
countries of the region in particular is essential to make
the proposed new arrangements workable and effective,
and we welcome clear recognition of this fact by the
Council. The current sanctions regime against Iraq has
been characterized by compliance problems. The
successful implementation of the changes proposed to
the sanctions regime will require the full cooperation of
all Member States.

The commitment of the Council in resolution
1352 (2001) to bring about significant improvements in
the flow of commodities and products to Iraq will be of
benefit to the region as a whole. The restoration of
normal trade is an important step in Iraq's return to the
modern world and will also be of great benefit to the
Iraqi Government itself, should it choose to cooperate.

