Mr. Sjflberg (Norway): At the outset, let me
welcome the participation here today of the Foreign
Ministers of the region and the representatives of the
various agencies and bodies. Their inputs are highly
valued and are important for the Council in the
consideration of the situation in the Great Lakes region
and beyond, at this opportune time when the prospects
for peace are real and at hand.

For at least two decades, seven of the 11
countries of Central Africa have been ravaged by
violent conflicts, resulting in untold suffering and loss.
As the countries gradually emerge from conflict, it is
imperative that focus be placed on peace-building, in
close cooperation with the international community.
The countries of Central Africa need to embark on a
process of development with political, security, social
and economic dimensions. External support for the
making of agreements must be matched by support for
their practical implementation.

The conflicts in Central Africa are interlinked and
regional approaches to conflict management thus
essential. The efforts made by the States in the region
to promote regional cooperation and collective security
are encouraging, but more needs to be done. The main
responsibility for peace-building rests with the
countries themselves, but the international community
can assist importantly in this process.
Peace-building requires the deliberate and
coordinated use of a broad spectrum of instruments to
promote a stable and lasting peace within and between
States. Norway promotes a comprehensive approach
that includes activities to help promote reconciliation,
good governance, democracy and respect for human
rights. An essential element in peace-building is also
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants. Other security-related issues are
humanitarian mine action, getting small arms under
control and security sector reform.

A further dimension of peace-building to which
we attach great importance is social and economic
development. This includes finding lasting solutions
for refugees and internally displaced persons.
Infrastructure and key public functions must be
rehabilitated or constructed. Peace-building also
encompasses support for education, health and
productive sector development.

In accordance with Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), Norway further emphasizes the
importance of mainstreaming gender issues in conflict
prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-
building. The equal participation of women at all levels
of decision-making and implementation is essential for
success.

We acknowledge and appreciate the
comprehensive efforts of the United Nations to make,
keep and build peace in the region through various
missions, special and personal representatives and
envoys of the Secretary-General. Norway will continue
to support the process of making the United Nations
more efficient and effective in planning and conducting
complex peace operations. This means strengthening
the capacity of the Department of Political Affairs and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as well as
the United Nations Development Programme and other
entities with an operative role, while ensuring clear
lines of authority and the delineation of roles in order
to enhance synergy and avoid duplication of efforts.
Hopefully, this will enhance Member States'
willingness to provide financial and human resources
for these operations.

We strongly encourage close cooperation between
the United Nations and the international finance
institutions. Several of the countries in the region have
large outstanding debts, which in some cases prohibit
the full involvement of these institutions. Norway will
consider supporting multilateral debt initiatives for
these countries in order to facilitate the full
engagement in the reconstruction and development
efforts of the World Bank, the African Development
Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

Norway has developed a strategy for our
contribution to coordinated international efforts to
promote conflict resolution and peace-building in the
Great Lakes region. Although we have allocated
substantial resources for this purpose, they are
nevertheless limited and should be utilized as
effectively as possible.

Norway has supported the inter-Congolese
dialogue in the amount of $500,000. We have also
allocated 25 million Norwegian kroner to the Trust
Fund for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme in the Great Lakes region set
up by the World Bank in 2002. In addition, our
humanitarian assistance and transitional assistance to
the region has amounted to Nkr235 million in 2002.

Notwithstanding the recent strides made towards
peace in the Great Lakes region and beyond, the
deplorable security situations in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Burundi are highly
alarming. They could very well have negative
repercussions on the security and stability of other
countries as well. We are worried that the renewed
fighting is putting the peace processes at risk. Reports
of a rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation are
deeply disturbing and we must all act together to
solidify the gains made on the political level so that
these may be translated into real progress on the
ground.

Finally, poverty and violent conflict have far-
reaching repercussions. We are all, directly or
indirectly, affected by their destabilizing consequences.
It is essential to help prevent the outbreak of Violent
conflicts, to pave the way for peace while conflicts are
still being fought and to rebuild societies after peace
has been restored in order to promote durable peace
and sustainable development. Our hope is that, through
this debate here today, we have fleshed out these issues
in such a way that we can all act together in this
fashion.

