Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I thank the
Presidents of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and the Prosecutor
of the ICTY and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for the reports and today's briefings.

At the outset, let me stress the United Kingdom's
continued support for the efforts of the ICTY and the
Mechanism. They carry out essential work to tackle
impunity. Faced with so many crises today, it is
absolutely crucial that we speak with one voice when
we say that there can be no impunity for the most
serious international crimes.

As the recent trial of Radovan KaradZie at the
ICTY shows, there is no end date for justice. The
United Kingdom welcomes the completion of a number
of ICTY cases: the Karadeie and Seselj trials and the
Stanisic' and Simatovic' appeal. We welcome the fact
that these are in line with the lastest timetable set out
by the Tribunal. We are also pleased to hear that the
Mladic' case and the Prlic' appeal are still on track. We
look forward to the outcome of the HadZic' case and
the remaining ICTY appeal. While we understand
that it may be a challenge to meet the projected time
frame in the Prlie appeal in particular, we hope that the
November 2017 date will be met in all cases.

We understand the challenges of staff attrition. Let
me take this opportunity to emphasize that the work of
the ICTY staff is vital and highly valued by the United
Kingdom. We rely on them to see their roles through
until the end of the mandate. We commend the efforts
of the ICTY leadership to retain staff, which we know
will continue. We are also pleased that the transition of
the ICTY to the Mechanism is on schedule.

We note the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) on the ICTY (S/2016/441)
and we look forward to the Trbunal's reponse in its
next report. It is vital to take a pragmatic approach and
ensure that resources are not diverted from completing
the ICTY's core task - its case work.

In the aftermath of conflict, any international
tribunal, including the ICTY, can only address the cases
of most serious concern. That does not mean that other
crimes should not be addressed. On the contrary, it is
vital that national justice systems ensure accountability.
In that context, we note the ongoing concerns of the
Office of the Prosecutor with the pace and effectiveness
of national war crimes prosecutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. There are positive developments, such
as the progress in resolving pending Category II cases,
and we continue to believe that these challenges can
be overcome. We urge the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to work with the ICTY and other partners
to do so.

We are also concerned that national war crimes
prosecutions in Serbia are at a crucial point, with many
more cases still needing investigating and prosecuting
in Serbia against Serbian nationals, particularly cases
against senior and mid-level accused. Again, there
have been important achievements by the Serbian
War Crimes Prosecutor's Office. We urge the Serbian
Government to support efforts to ensure accountability,
and in particular to appoint a new Chief War Crimes
Prosecutor as a priority for the incoming Government.

We also urge cooperation between all States of
the region. We are pleased that cooperation with the
Prosecutor is satisfactory in most respects, and we call
on all States to act on those areas where it is not. We
note the recent decision of the High Court in Belgrade
regarding transfer of the three defendants in contempt
proceedings arising from the Seselj case. Serbia has an
obligation to cooperate with the ICTY, and we hope that
the Serbian authorities will make every effort to ensure
transfer to the ICTY of the individuals concerned.

Turning to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, we are very pleased with its
work over the past six months and, indeed, since its
commencement. The Mechanism is moving into a very
important new phase in its life, dealing with retrials
and appeals from ICTY rulings. We are confident that
the Mechanism will take all appropriate measures to
ensure that these cases are handled efficiently and
effectively in order to see to it that decisions are taken
within a reasonable and in respect for due process.
We look forward to receiving further information on
timelines in the next report. We welcome the news that
the recruitment of staff for the Mechanism is proceeding
well and that staff with ICTY and ICTR experience are
being drawn upon. Again, good staff are key to success.

We thank the Prosecutor for the continued efforts to
locate and arrest fugitives, and we welcome the arrest
and handover to Rwanda of Ladislas Ntaganzwa. We
hope that the remaining eight fugitives can similarly be
brought to justice, and urge all States to cooperate to
that end. We also welcome the work being undertaken
by the Mechanism on reviewing the level of support
provided to acquitted and released persons in order
to achieve appropriate efficiencies, and we support
ongoing efforts concerning relocation.

We are pleased with the smooth handover to the
Mechanism of the ICTR's functions on its closure, and
we thank the Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania for its continued strong support and interest
in the Mechanism's new permanent premises in Arusha.
We are also pleased that the Mechanism has implemented
some of the recommendations from the OIOS audit and
is working on others. The Mechanism has a vital role
to play in the international criminal justice system, and
we have every confidence that it will continue to carry
out its residual functions appropriately.

