Mr. Akashi (Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs): I cannot but congratulate you,
Mr. President, on presiding over this meeting. You are an
old friend and a very experienced diplomat, well-known to
all of us. I am delighted to see you presiding over the
meeting.

I wish to express appreciation to the Security Council
for putting the issue of protection for civilians in conflict on
its agenda, and I welcome this opportunity of sharing with
members the views of the United Nations and those of the
humanitarian community.

We live in a time with an unparalleled need for
protection. From the humanitarian viewpoint, it often
appears that we live in a world engulfed by crises that
threaten a growing number of civilians. The figures speak
for themselves. Today, some 90 per cent of the victims are
civilians; in the First World War, only 10 per cent of
victims were non-combatants. Some 80 per cent of the
people in need of protection are women and children. The
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) estimates that
during the last two years, 2 million children have been
killed in warfare, and some 12 million have been made
homeless. An estimated 42 million people worldwide were
dependent on humanitarian assistance in 1995; that figure
is 60 per cent higher than it was 10 years before.

Such a dramatic increase in the number of people in
need of assistance is compounded by the complexity and
nature of contemporary crises and the difficulty of relying
on traditional protection instruments to safeguard the basic
rights and integrity of people endangered by conflict. The
majority of people in need of assistance are displaced in
their own countries or trapped in besieged cities, and are
often in need of protection from the very authorities that
are responsible for their safety. Recent estimates indicate
that there are 22 million to 24 million internally displaced
persons worldwide, greatly outnumbering the 16 million
refugees who have sought asylum or have recently been
repatriated.
The growing number of people who are displaced
and of others who are adversely affected by warfare
highlights the importance of reformulating our
understanding of protection requirements and points to the
timeliness of this debate today. The most compelling and
problematic challenge confronting humanitarian actors in
today's conflict zones is the difficultly of providing
assistance in hostile environments where civilians are
directly targeted and the work of relief agencies is
deliberately obstructed. When people are forcibly
uprooted and pushed from their homes, and the aim of
warfare is to inflict maximum pain, protection
requirements are quite different from what was needed in
more traditional humanitarian assistance operations.

As we redefine protection needs, we are in effect
redefining threats to the peace. There is a growing
recognition that security, first and foremost, concerns the
well-being of people, and that it is not of lesser value
than the security of States. Increasingly, the concept of
sovereignty is fundamentally linked to the ability of States
to respect and safeguard the security of their citizens.

The vast majority of crises confronting the world
today are essentially political in nature, notwithstanding
their dramatic humanitarian implications. When
confronted with emerging crises, the Security Council
must be quick to respond. It must be bold, determined
and imaginative in creating conditions necessary for a
durable solution. This is one of the most important goals
of the Security Council and represents the best support it
can provide to organizations concerned with the
humanitarian dimension of crises. Allowing situations to
fester is harmful to the cause of protection and the well-
being of endangered people, and it complicates the task
of securing a viable and lasting peace.

A basic condition for the effectiveness of any
Security Council-initiated action is that mandates be
appropriate to the task. Half-measures are likely to do
more harm than good. Experience from Bosnia, Rwanda
and Somalia shows that when war strategies are designed
to harm civilians, the issue of protection cannot be
divorced from the dynamics of the crisis and the action
necessary to stop the violence. In order to resolve crises

 

and address the protection needs of innocent civilians, long-
term solutions must be sought, and Security Council-
mandated missions must be given the tools necessary to
deal with conflict situations.

Another fundamental precondition for effective
response is the importance of not operating in a policy
vacuum. It is worth recalling that the chief finding of the
multi-donor study on the response to the crisis in Rwanda
in 1994 is that it is harmful and unhelpful to all when
humanitarian operations become a substitute for political
and other action needed to resolve conflicts.

There must be greater appreciation of the vital but
limited role of humanitarian assistance in alleviating
suffering and, by extension, the effects of war. The
provision of humanitarian assistance in a vacuum is
tantamount to managing only the symptoms of a crisis. In
such circumstances it is difficult, if not impossible, for
humanitarian assistance to be effective, as relief supplies
are often diverted to warring parties. Access to vulnerable
people is denied or obstructed, and relief workers
effectively find themselves in situations where the
international community is unwilling to deploy
peacekeeping troops.

Erosion of and disrespect for fundamental
humanitarian norms are of great concern to the Secretary-
General. We are concerned that in many settings a culture
of impunity prevails, and heinous crimes, however
shocking, are perpetrated with abandon. The Security
Council may wish to be more forceful in getting relevant
authorities to respect the rights of victims to assistance and
protection and initiating action which will hold perpetrators
accountable.

In this connection, it is worth noting that it has on
occasion been possible to get all parties to agree to a set of
principles which ensure access to all populations in need of
assistance. Security Council support for this type of
arrangement could prove useful in many settings. It is also
of great concern that relief workers are often targeted and
killed for the specific purpose of disrupting relief operations
and the lifelines these often represent. There is a danger
that, as these acts become more and more commonplace,
our threshold of tolerance becomes higher. The Security
Council needs to take a clear stand on all such violations of
humanitarian law and use its prestige and authority to hold
relevant parties accountable.

The 1994 international Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel covers a limited
number of United Nations staff on specific peacekeeping
operations. There is a need either to expand it to cover all
relief workers in conflict settings, or to develop additional
international instruments for that purpose.

Effective protection policy and action by the Council
also require that core humanitarian principles be
respected. When humanitarian assistance is perceived or
used as a tool to achieve political objectives, however
worthy, it undermines protection activities and may well
jeopardize the lives of those involved. Experience from
Bosnia and the Great Lakes illustrates the importance of
shielding protection work from political consultations and
operational concerns regarding relief programmes in
conflict settings.

No one will argue against the importance of a
coherent and holistic approach and decisions which reflect
an informed analysis of the crisis. The essential elements
of such an approach include regular and structural
interaction with humanitarian agencies, including United
Nations and non-governmental organization actors.

My office namely - that of the United Nations
Emergency Relief Coordinator - is in a unique position to
organize and facilitate such consultations. My office is
also in a position to ensure that the proposals and
perspectives of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee,
consisting of the executive heads of United Nations
humanitarian agencies, political societies, and the three
major consortiums of non-governmental organizations are
readily available for consultation as appropriate.

Fact-finding by the Security Council in crisis zones
could also prove a useful means of engaging Council
members in low-profile emergencies, while
simultaneously contributing to an improved understanding
of the realities on the ground.

Earlier I referred to the importance of rapid reaction
in emerging crises and the mandates which are
appropriate to that task. If, as also proposed, the Security
Council is familiar with concerns and perspectives
emerging from the humanitarian arena, then the task of
ensuring that Security Council mandates address
protection needs will be that much easier.

Joint contingency planning by the Departments of
Political Affairs, Peacekeeping Operations and
Humanitarian Assistance already takes place, but greater
consultation and interaction with the Security Council will

 

also help ensure better synergy and minimize the risk of
different entities operating in isolation from each other.

In conclusion, I wish to stress the importance of not
taking a selective approach to protection issues. Whenever
children and their parents are abused, it is important that
their protection needs be addressed as a whole.

