Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow
me to add Tunisia's voice to those that have spoken
earlier to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
excellent and instructive briefing on developments in
Kosovo. My delegation pays tribute to him and to his
team for their efforts to keep members regularly
informed on developments on the ground.

Responding, Sir, to your appeal for brevity, I will
limit my statement to a few comments that we feel are
of definite importance in promoting a solution to the
question of Kosovo.

My first comment is that we believe that, since
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) has been
unanimously accepted by all parties to the conflict, its
implementation must be total and swift. According to
paragraph 11 of the resolution, the interim international
civil presence is responsible for "promoting the
establishment, pending a final settlement, of substantial
autonomy and self-government". Clearly, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo is
responsible for defining the future autonomous
institutions of Kosovo. These choices must be the
outcome of broad consultation with all parties
concerned, including the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The participation of all the ethnic
components in Kosovo is the best guarantee of the
success of that process. In this regard, we encourage
Mr. Hans Haekkerup, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, to pursue his work precisely to
define a legal framework prior to the holding of the
general elections and to work to implement the results
of the elections.

Secondly, we have always deemed it important
for any ultimate settlement of the question of Kosovo
to be part of the broader context of a comprehensive
solution to the problem of the Balkans as a whole. The
international community must take into consideration
the regional aspect, which we believe to be a factor for
balance and stability. My delegation welcomes the
spirit of cooperation demonstrated by the Government
of Belgrade since the democratic change that took
place in the country and recent measures to calm the
situation.

Thirdly, we wish to voice our concern at the
persistence of pockets of tension, particularly along the
borders. This tension is conducive neither to the return
of refugees nor to lasting reconciliation among the
inhabitants of Kosovo. Quite to the contrary, it merely
prolongs the crisis and the resort to violence. It is
therefore important to strengthen security, particularly
where minorities reside, and to ensure impartial and
non-discriminatory justice for all inhabitants, as was
quite rightly pointed out by Mr. Guehenno. I would
even say that all forms of extremism should be
banished and a culture of tolerance promoted. We need
to find a negotiated solution to the question of ethnic
Albanian prisoners in Belgrade prisons.
Fourthly, my delegation welcomes the positive
outcome of the meeting of donor organizations and
countries held in Pristina. That important meeting has
allowed the programme launched by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to enjoy broad
support for the stages to come. It will certainly have a
positive effect on the entire economic and social
situation in Kosovo.

Fifthly, we wish to express our satisfaction at the
decision taken by the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to reopen its borders with Kosovo, which
will allow essential goods to be shipped to the
inhabitants of the territory.

In conclusion, I wish to say that the Council's
forthcoming meeting to hear the Albanian Prime
Minister will be of substantial help to the members of
the Security Council and to the Secretariat by
expanding the context of our discussion on the
situation in Kosovo and the Balkan region as a whole.

The priorities cited by Mr. Guehenno seem to us,
for a number of reasons, to be the best available at this
sensitive time. It is my delegation's view that we must
give thought right now to the exit strategy, given the
complexity of the situation in the region as a whole. An
overall strategy is crucial if we truly wish to think
about the future of the region in the long term.

