I would like to thank today's briefers for their valuable input and the French presidency for convening the meeting. The growing number of terrorist attacks against civilians and national and regional security forces in the Sahel region is extremely concerning. More attacks often result in the withdrawal of the State presence from already fragile areas, which in turn negatively affects the humanitarian situation on the ground. We must therefore work even more efficiently together to strengthen the State and security presence in those areas most affected. In this regard, we commend the efforts of regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States, to coordinate and further mobilize joint counter- terrorism operations. It is encouraging that the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) has conducted an increased number of operations over the past six months and strengthened its capabilities. The terrorist threat is often cross-border in nature and therefore needs to be addressed in such a manner. It is positive that the G-5 countries took the decision at the beginning of the year to allow for more flexibility when conducting Joint Force operations across State borders. In order to make counter-terrorism efforts in the Sahel region as effective as possible, we need to strengthen cooperation among the various actors operating in the region. Estonia closely monitors the developments in the Sahel and contributes to restoring security and stability in a number of ways, including by contributing personnel to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the French-led Operation Barkhane, and making financial contributions to the European Union Trust Fund for Africa. Furthermore, we are part of the recently created Task Force Takuba, which will seek specifically to tackle the terrorist threat in the Liptako-Gourma area. Allow me to stress the importance of adhering to human rights principles and the framework of international humanitarian law when conducting counter-terrorism operations. We commend the G-5 States for the steps taken to raise awareness in and train the Joint Force, as well as for the announcements regarding the investigation of alleged human rights violations, and we stand ready to support that process further. Finally, to achieve long-term security in the Sahel, we need to address the root causes of the instability. In this regard, it is necessary to make efforts to reduce poverty and the marginalization of certain groups, and to promote gender equality. It is of the utmost importance to keep those aspects in mind when designing strategies and mandates together with the countries of the region.
