Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening what is obviously a very
important debate. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General and our guest speakers for their very
compelling testimonies, each of which underscored
the indispensable role that journalists play in bearing
witness to conflict, and the extraordinary risks they
take - knowingly - to report to us. I can only hope
that our own comments do not fall too short of the
strength of the imperatives they have identified.

Every year, more journalists are being killed in
bringing news and information to the public. The
majority of these victims are local media workers
covering local stories. In most cases, these killings go
unpunished, and often almost unnoticed.

Journalists in conflict situations face unique risks.
Whereas local populations may flee areas of intense
fighting, journalists are drawn towards them. For
reporters, proximity is necessary to ensure objective,
first-hand reporting of the causes and consequences of
conflict, and to challenge partisan views. Journalists
are often the first to draw attention to Violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights.
History shows that the deliberate targeting of journalists
is a tactic often employed by parties to a conflict who
do not want their actions exposed; it is a precursor to a
situation spiralling out of control.

Journalists bring the humanitarian cost of conflict
into stark relief. News stories and images make the
consequences of our own inaction harder to ignore.
Ideally, they can compel Governments and bodies such
as the Council to take action, although this is not always
the case, as we see today in Syria. But they did, for
instance, help create the environment for the adoption
of the principle of the responsibility to protect civilians
against mass atrocity crimes.

Syria provides a tragic illustration of the impact of
conflict on journalists. It is now the most dangerous
country on Earth for journalists. Forty-one died there in
2012; some were deliberately targeted. Mali registered
the biggest fall in press freedom in 2012 after the
military coup and the takeover of the north by armed
groups.

It is not just traditional journalists who face
threats. As we have heard this morning, those engaged
in new media, citizen reporters and bloggers also
find themselves in danger. The rights of freedom of
expression, opinion and association must be respected
both online and offline. Parties to armed conflict must
uphold all applicable international laws to protect
civilians, including those that apply to journalists.
They must do their utmost to prevent violations of
international humanitarian law against journalists. The
Council acknowledged this in resolution 1738 (2006).
Our recent presidential statement on the protection of
civilians (S/PRST/2013/2) in February reiterated the
Council's resolve in this respect.

We believe the Council can do more to protect
journalists in conflict situations. As the Secretary-
General notes in his most recent report on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2012/376), the Council
has made very few references to attacks against
journalists in situation-specific resolutions. Therefore
we welcome the inclusion in resolution 2102 (2013)
establishing the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia of a reminder to the Government of Somalia
of its obligation to protect journalists. This should be
a template.

The Council can also assist by mandating
peacekeeping missions to address the freedom and
protection of journalists in their support to rule-of-law
institutions and, as the representative of Togo has just
recommended, by ensuring the necessary training for
peacekeepers. Where it emerges that journalists have
been attacked in serious violation of international
humanitarian or human rights law, the Council must
also look at ways to act to end impunity.

We welcome the implementation strategy 2013-
2014 for the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, endorsed in
February, as the Deputy Secretary-General noted, as
a strong mechanism that will help countries promote
the safety ofjournalists in conflict situations. With its
focus on national capacity-building, we encourage its
early implementation.

To conclude, attacks on journalists are, like all
attacks on civilians, attacks on humanity. They are also
attacks on the international community's ability, indeed
on its need, to understand and respond effectively to
conflicts that threaten international peace and security.
Truth need not be the first casualty of war. Journalists
need not be and should not be casualties of conflict.

