Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): First, on behalf of
the delegation of Kazakhstan, may I offer our sincerest
condolences to our Chinese colleagues in connection
with the tragedy in Jiangsu province and extend our
sympathy to the families of the victims.

Kazakhstan expresses its appreciation to the
Bolivian presidency for having convened this
meeting as well as to our briefers, the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador
Chergui; the African Union High Representative for the
Peace Fund, Mr. Kaberuka; and the Chef de Cabinet
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Viotti, for their insights
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU).

My delegation would like to make the following
observations and recommendations.

Kazakhstan, as an observer of the African Union,
is deeply committed to consolidating a comprehensive
United Nations-AU partnership on issues of peace
and security in Africa. The first United Nations-AU
annual conference, on 19 April, with the participation
of Secretary-General Guterres and AU Commission
Chair Mahamat, has been a milestone in enhancing the
United Nations-AU strategic partnership.

Despite the significant progress made, more could
be achieved in terms ofUnited Nations-AU cooperation
through well-formulated common strategic objectives
and a clear division of responsibilities premised on
shared assessments. These would mutually reinforce
and complement the actions of the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council.

Lessons learned and best practices should be
shared regularly through more frequent Secretariat-to-
secretariat exchanges so as to prevent redundancies in
and duplication of their tasks.

The aspirations for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Secretary-General's new agenda for
peace, as well as Africa's Agenda 2063 and the African
Union (AU) project Silencing the Guns by 2020, which
aims to achieve a conflict-free continent by that date,
are significant. They can be achieved through greater
military, diplomatic and development partnerships,
as well as North-South, South-South and triangular
cooperation. That is critical for actions by the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union and
for their respective resolutions.

Early warning signals, timely United Nations-AU
preventive diplomacy, mediation to defuse potential
crisis situations, and rapid response teams will achieve
much. That falls within Kazakhstan's purview and its
proposal for a conflict-free world by the United Nations
centenary, in 2045.

We share the View that regional actors, which
are assuming greater ownership of development in
their respective regions, have a deeper understanding
of the dynamics and root causes of conflict, and
contribute immeasurably to global peace, security
and development.

Without sufficient financial and capacity-building
support to African Union, the ability to deliver will not
match the expected aspirations and determinations.
The new phase of the United Nations-AU partnership
should consider enhanced support for AU peace
support operations, in accordance with the resolution
2320 (2016).

Hybrid missions of the United Nations and the
AU, or local regional forces have proven to be more
effective due to the familiarity of African soldiers with
their own terrain, local conditions and tactics of armed
groups. Good examples include the capacity of the
Multinational Joint Task Force to combat Boko Haram,
and the African Union Mission in Somalia, which is
fighting Al- Shabaab in that country. Funding AU forces
is therefore critical.

We also see fine examples of how, with the best
support of the African Union, several groups of
neighbouring countries play important roles. That
includes the Group of Five Sahel - Burkina Faso,
Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger- member States
of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and countries
of the Economic Community of West African States,
which averted the presidential crisis in The Gambia.

Kazakhstan welcomes the decision of African
Union to extend the mandate of the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord's
Resistance Army for another 12 months, until 22 May
2018, to strengthen coordination mechanisms for cross-
border operations.

Finally, Kazakhstan will do its utmost to strengthen
United Nations-AU cooperation to respond effectively
to emerging threats in the African region and beyond.

