Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Mladenov and Mr. El-
Ad for their informative briefings.

The situation in the Middle East continues to
be a complex one requiring a significant collective
effort, first and foremost by the United Nations and its
Security Council, which is the main guarantor of the
international legal architecture.

In our view, strict adherence to international law
and to the spirit and letter of the Charter of the United
Nations constitutes a firm foundation for developing
a formula for resolving the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. In that regard, we are seriously concerned
about the aggressive re-examination of previously
reached agreements, including some that have been
enshrined in Security Council resolutions. We believe
that any ideas and proposals in this area should be
based on relevant internationally accepted principles
and previously approved resolutions of the Security
Council, along with the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Madrid principles. Any plans or agreements, whatever
they are called, should be subordinate to the main goal
of stabilizing the situation in the region by arriving at a
just, long-term settlement of the Palestinian question as
a key item on the Middle East agenda.

We see that the Palestinian-Israeli situation
is steadily deteriorating. The lack of progress in
the political process has created a vacuum that is
being filled with violence, unilateral measures and
provocative rhetoric. We are not even supposed to
mention the fact that all the long-standing problems,
including settlement activity, are still a long way
from being solved. The gulf of misunderstanding and
mistrust is widening, undermining the prospects for a
resumption of negotiations.

We cannot help feeling alarmed by the escalating
tension around Gaza, the missiles launched at Israeli
settlements and the answering air strikes. We condemn
any displays of terror and urge all the parties to refrain
from confrontational attitudes. We appreciate the
efforts undertaken in accordance with United Nations
policies by Special Coordinator Mladenov and various
regional players to correct the current trends and help
Gazan residents. Needless to say, that assistance should
be carried out in close coordination with the legitimate
Palestinian authorities under President Abbas,
and should be integrated into the task of restoring
Palestinian unity.

We note the need for sustainable funding for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, whose activities for decades
have had an important stabilizing effect in relieving the
burden of Palestinian refugees in Gaza and countries of
the Middle East. We want to point out that the issue of
refugees should be the subject of a bilateral Palestinian-
Israeli dialogue, not the object of arbitrary decisions.

In the current circumstances, we urgently need to
mobilize efforts to revive the political process between
the Palestinians and the Israelis on the international
legal basis that we are all familiar with, which assumes
the implementation of a two-State solution as a result
of direct negotiations. Unilateral steps are not capable
of achieving ajust and lasting peace designed to realize
Palestinians' national aspirations and strengthen
Israel's security. That is why we have kept our proposal
for holding a summit in Russia between the leaders
of Palestine and Israel on the table, with a View to
enabling us to end an extraordinarily dangerous and
prolonged impasse in the efforts to reach a Palestinian-
Israeli settlement. Russia will continue to maintain its
principled position, supporting and developing relations
with all the parties in the framework of a positive
agenda. We support the Middle East Quartet's active
resumption of its work of international mediators,
which is still a unique mediation format approved by
Security Council resolutions.

Progress in the business of resolving the acute
crises in the Middle East and North Africa can be made
only in a framework of broad cooperation and respect
for our obligations under international law. The joint
efforts of the country-guarantors of the Astana process
have proved in practice that developing a common
vision for a settlement in Syria is possible despite our
differences. We are open to collaborating with anyone
who is willing to join this process in a constructive
spirit. We firmly believe that together we can do a great
deal to end the bloodshed in Yemen, stabilize Libya,
support normalization in Iraq and unblock other crises.
The countries of the region have a rich cultural, human
and natural potential from which they can develop and
even flourish, but it is a potential that will be fully
realized only when interference in the region's internal
affairs comes to an end.

The Russian Federation supports the formulation
of a positive and unifying agenda on the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, for the Security
Council and the entire international community.
We believe that the Council's meeting during our
presidency on a comprehensive review of the situation
in the Middle East and North Africa (see S/PV.8293)
made an important contribution to the joint analysis of
the genesis of the conflicts in the region and the quest
for collective tools to resolve them.

The key to our collective work in the region should
be creating conditions conducive to strengthening
a general atmosphere of trust. This is crucial to the
relations between the Arab States, Israel and Iran.
We would like to remind the Council that in its
resolution 598 (1987), the Security Council instructed
the Secretary-General to work with the parties in the
region on measures for enhancing its security and
stability. This is a complicated issue, but we have to
begin working on it, and we are ready to provide every
possible assistance for it through our contacts with our
regional partners.

The ultimate goal should be establishing a regional
security architecture that is genuinely inclusive and is
intended to involve every State in that part of the world.
Our concept of strengthening security in the Persian
Gulf under international guarantees, which we could
begin to implement through a conference in which the
States of the subregion participate, is still relevant, and
in future could be expanded to other Middle Eastern
countries. In all these and other aspects, Russia is
ready to work with interested partners on an open,
impartial basis.

