The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

My delegation thanks all of today's briefers,
especially Ambassador Adom, as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic.
According to the Secretary-General's most recent
report (S/2018/922), the situation in the Central
African Republic remains unstable due to the ongoing
violence and insecurity perpetrated by armed groups.
That instability hampers the country's development,
capacity-building and State presence, despite progress
in protecting civilians, fostering inter-institutional
cooperation and training the Central African Armed
Forces, among other achievements.

My delegation commends the work of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, which fosters dialogue and addresses
the root causes of instability and armed violence in
the country. We call on all armed groups to join the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
We also highlight the need for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), together
with the Government, to establish lasting strategic and
operational partnerships with all relevant international
and regional stakeholders. The new mandate must
foster unity among international and regional partners
on the importance of finding political solutions and
inclusive national efforts, as well as strengthening the
role of the International Support Group of the Central
African Republic in bringing together all international
actors in support of the peace process. The mandate
must continue to underscore the importance of national
ownership and take all population groups into account,
including women and young people. It should also
highlight the need for ongoing international support
to the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and
the Government authorities in order to accelerate
the Plan's implementation and the coordination of
peace efforts, particularly with regard to the African
Initiative, the need to implement a national security
policy and national security-sector reform strategy and
the importance of strengthening justice institutions to
combat impunity.

We commend the Mission on its efforts to identify
the regions in which additional capacity is required to
protect civilians and support the Government, to be
provided through peace and reconciliation initiatives
that can serve as frameworks for reducing violence,
building trust among communities and facilitating
the return of displaced persons. We urge MINUSCA
to continue its efforts to advocate for the participation
of women in the African Initiative and its work on
community violence-reduction programmes, which
have been effective in implementing local peace
agreements and encouraging the voluntary disarming
of a large number of young people involved in militia
and armed-group activities.

In conclusion, we commend the active and ongoing
support of regional and subregional organizations and
the participation of the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the African
Initiative's panel of facilitators, whose political
efforts to foster peace and cooperation are key to the
reconciliation process. All efforts must be conducted
with full respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity ofthe Central African Republic. It is
the people of the Central African Republic themselves
who are primarily responsible for achieving peace and
stability in their country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.

