Mr. Kolby (Norway): I welcome you to New
York, Sir, and thank you for presiding over this
meeting. I congratulate Ireland on its achievements
during its presidency of the Security Council.

I would also like to thank Mr. Vieira de Mello
and the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) for their considerable
achievements in East Timor so far. I should also like to
say how pleased we are to see Mari Alkatiri and
members of the Transitional Government attending this
meeting of the Security Council. Norway extends its
full support to the East Timorese Cabinet as it prepares
for independence, as we have heard, on 20 May next
year

In recent months, East Timor has gone through a
period of historic political developments. In addition,
significant progress has been made in the field of social
and economic development and in establishing a
functioning Public Administration. The challenges
ahead are now to protect and build upon these
achievements so that the nation-building project can be
completed. This will require a substantial international
and United Nations presence after independence.

Norway fully endorses the recommendations
regarding the establishment of an integrated United
Nations mission post-UNTAET. We believe that the
exact mandate of the successor mission should allow
for the completion of the mandate entrusted to
UNTAET.

When discussing the downsizing of the military
and civilian police components exceeding the proposals
contained in the report now before us, a great deal of
caution will be required. We must always keep in mind
the need to contribute to national and regional stability.
Needless to say, the military and police presence
should reflect the security situation on the ground at
any given time. Moreover, the downsizing of the
civilian police component should not jeopardize the
crucial task of building capacity within the East Timor
Police Service, aimed at transforming it into a fully
accountable and professional institution.

In order to prevent a gap in resource allocations
and to ensure that key tasks within the civilian
component of the successor mission are undertaken
without delay, my delegation agrees with the Secretary-
General's recommendation concerning assessed
contributions. This is also a way for the Security
Council to demonstrate that peacekeepers and peace-
builders are indeed inseparable partners in efforts to
establish sustainable peace. However, bilateral and
multilateral donors, as well as the international
financial institutions, will also have to contribute their
share to the peace-building efforts.

The prospects for long-term security and stability
are closely linked to the question of accountability and
reconciliation. It is therefore of vital importance that
this Council renew its commitment to the task of
bringing to justice, in a manner consistent with
international standards of fair trial and due process,
those responsible for serious crimes committed in
1999. Moreover, it is crucial that the future State of
East Timor be firmly rooted in the rule of law and
respect for citizens' rights. I would therefore express
Norway's full support for the recommendation of
including a strong human rights presence within the
framework of the successor mission.

Full justice for the people of East Timor can be
achieved only when individuals residing in Indonesia
who are suspected in relation to crimes committed in
East Timor are also brought to justice. In this regard,
we welcome the announcement by the Indonesian
Government that trials are to begin in December this
year. However, to avoid any danger of
institutionalizing impunity for a number of suspects,
we reiterate our call on the Indonesian authorities to
furnish the ad hoc tribunal with the jurisdiction
required to prosecute all serious crimes committed in
East Timor from January through October 1999.

With regard to the establishment of a civil
administration in East Timor, Norway is pleased to
note that the process of "Timorization" has continued
over the last months. By mid-September, UNTAET had
recruited some 9,500 civil servants and the number of
women had increased to 25 of the total staff. While we
welcome the progress made, we urge UNTAET to
continue its efforts to increase the number of women
employed at all levels within the civil administration.
We would also like to underline the need for continued
efforts in the field of training and capacity-building of
civil servants.

It is also of vital importance for the security and
the sustainable environment in the region that strong
and peaceful relations between East Timor and the
Republic of Indonesia continue to be developed.
Reconciliation and enhanced cooperation between the
two countries are fundamental prerequisites. In this
regard, we warmly welcome the contacts which have
already been established at the political level.

In conclusion, as stated in the Secretary-General's
report, East Timor will also be in need of substantial
international assistance after independence. In this
regard, Norway is committed to continue to contribute
its share. As a means to fully assist and complement
the United Nations peace operation, it is of crucial
importance that we move towards a long-term
development assistance framework as quickly as
possible. My delegation valued the in-depth
discussions in this regard during the Canberra donors'
meeting in June, and we hope that these discussions
will continue in a fruitful manner during the December
donors' meeting in Oslo hosted by my Government.

