Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the presence at today's meeting
of Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Burkina Faso, and we thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, and the
other briefers for their reports.

We concur with today's alarming assessments
of the situation in the Sahel. The security threats in
that part of Africa have reached an unprecedented
level. The geographic area for terrorist activity, drug
trafficking and organized crime is expanding, and
extremist ideology continues to win over new recruits.
Sadly, there are tragic reports almost every week
of the deaths of dozens of servicemen or civilians in
one country or another in the region at the hands of
underground groups. As the report of the Secretary-
General notes (S/2019/868), the threat is now looming
over the States along the Gulf of Guinea as well. The
roots of these problems are well known. In the Sahel,
we are reaping the fruit of the collapse of statehood in
Libya that resulted from a violent foreign intervention.
We believe that if the situation in that country is not
normalized - and many of our interlocutors talked to
us about this during the recent Council mission to Mali
and Burkina Faso - it will be virtually impossible to
stabilize the region sustainably.

We support the efforts of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5) to combat terrorism
and organized crime. It appears that they have already
become an important part of achieving regional
stability in a relatively short period of time. We are
pleased with the information on the four Joint Force
operations carried out in all its areas of responsibility
during the reporting period. We are receiving reports on
the success of the Sahel units' latest counter-terrorism
operation, which ended on 17 November. We welcome
the agreement on the legal status of the presence of
the Joint Forces on the territory of member States of
the Group of Five and the protocol on cooperation in
the area of intelligence. Needless to say, there is still
a great deal to be done. It is particularly worrying that
the issue of selecting a permanent location for the Joint
Force's headquarters has not yet been resolved. It will
be vital to ramp up the provision of technical and other
equipment for its units and the level of training of its
military personnel as quickly as possible.

Of course, the full operationalization of the Joint
Force depends on ensuring that it receives stable and
predictable funding. We have seen that the funds
pledged by foreign donors are gradually reaching the
region. However, far from all of the commitments in
that regard have been fulfilled. We support the help
that the Joint Force is getting from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and through the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

We believe firmly in the importance of further
coordinated steps on the part both of Africans and the
international community to combat terrorism in the
Sahel-Saharan region. It is clear that military measures
alone cannot eradicate this evil. It is essential to work to
effectively counter the expansion of extremist ideology,

solve acute socioeconomic problems, strengthen State
institutions and foster a culture of respect for human
rights. In that regard, we support the decision adopted in
Niamey at the Extraordinary Summit of the Economic
Community ofWest African States to allocate $1 billion
towards those goals.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that Russia is
closely following the development of the situation in the
region. We are already providing a number of countries
with relevant military and technical assistance and
training for military and police personnel. In general,
we hope that the armed forces of the States of the Group
of Five for the Sahel will become an effective tool for
restoring and maintaining peace in West Africa in the
near future.

