Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to begin my statement by reading
out a sentence from the statement made by the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs at the beginning
of the meeting this morning. Mr. Pascoe said,

(spoke in English)

"Achieving a full and sustained cessation of
violence and seeking a peaceful resolution of the
crisis in Syria is at the centre of our efforts in the
Middle East."

(spoke in Arabic)

That statement contains substantive and
procedural inaccuracies that highlight the fact that the
Secretariat's representative does not fully understand
the very essence of the item on today's agenda, namely,
"The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question". When, only two days following
the adoption of resolution 2043 (2012), the
representative of the Secretary-General takes the view
that putting an end to the violence in Syria is the
priority under the agenda item, Mr. Pascoe has
declared his intention. This is a very dangerous issue
about which we cannot afford to remain silent.
There is a way to alter the truth and the nature of
the agenda item. It should be recalled that the
international community has agreed to address the need
to put an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory and on the establishment of a Palestinian State
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

My delegation remains concerned by the
deliberate attempts that have been made by a number
of delegations to divert the general discussion of the
situation in the Middle East away from the original
aims for which the agenda item was first established. It
is regrettable that the Under-Secretary-General has
chosen to follow that path - as it is that the Secretary-
General has also chosen to do so - as seen in
Mr. Pascoe's decision to begin his briefing by referring
to the situation in Syria and focusing priority on
internal developments there while ignoring the actual
agenda item - "The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question" - which is
intended to put an end to the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian and Arab territories and to resolve the
Arab-Israeli conflict in keeping with the well-known
peace plan.

The situation has become highly dangerous as a
result of Israeli inflexibility, its systematic violation of
the rights of Arab citizens living under its occupation,
the country's refusal to implement hundreds of United
Nations resolutions, and the crimes that have been
perpetrated against Arabs in Syria and Palestine.
Furthermore, the issue is an integral component of the
very responsibilities of the Security Council to
maintain international peace and security. Moreover, it
is why the item was established and included in the
agenda in the first place, where it has remained for
decades without a solution. Some are trying to bury
significant issues and conceal the failure of past
attempts at finding solutions by including irrelevant
internal problems in Security Council deliberations.

In that context, the aim of today's debate is to
undermine the referential framework for the issue and
its relationship with putting an end to the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory and the
establishment of a Palestinian State on the basis of the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

It is regrettable that a number of Arab delegations
have also undermined that framework and fallen into
the trap of addressing issues that have nothing
whatsoever to do with finding a solution to the Arab-
Israeli conflict and putting an end to the Israeli
occupation of Arab territory. Those Arabs have thereby
participated unwittingly in the altering and
undermining of the agenda item.

What is strangest of all in that context is that a
number of States have demonstrated false enthusiasm
for the rights of peoples and the protection of civil and
human rights, shamefully and worryingly ignoring the
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and the need to put an end to the Israeli occupation.
The subject at hand is the Israeli occupation, which has
expanded and divided Palestinian territory into Areas A,
B, C, D, E, F, G, H - all the way up to the letter T.
Palestinian territories have become areas listed from A
to Z, all of which are under occupation. Those same
States see no wrong in the Israeli occupation stepping
up its systematic campaign to kill Palestinian civilians,
including women and children, in encouraging the
fanatical settlement campaign - which is undermining
attempts to establish a Palestinian State and achieve
peace in the region - or in encouraging the
destruction of holy sites.

As part of the same Israeli policy that flouts all
relevant resolutions of international legitimacy, in
particular resolution 497 (1981), which provides that
the Israeli decision to annex the Syrian Golan is null
and void and has no legal effect, Israel is continuing to
refuse to return the occupied Syrian Golan to its
motherland, Syria, and is pursuing its settlement
policies, terrorist actions, acts of racial discrimination,
attempts to humiliate Syrian citizens, divide the
occupied Syrian Golan and build a separation wall in
the Golan east of the village of Majdal Shams.

Moreover, this month, Israeli policy has
prevented apple farmers from transporting their harvest
to cities in Syria, even though the International
Committee of the Red Cross sought to intervene in
order to get permission for the trucks carrying the crop
to enter Syria. The trucks waited for three months to
obtain Israeli authorization, but the permits never came
through. We attempted to convey our complaint to the
Secretary-General and to the members of the Security
Council through formal letters. However, those
complaints have fallen on deaf ears.

The representatives of the Secretary-General have
not contented themselves simply with ignoring Israel's
violations. As Mr. Pascoe did today, they have simply
ignored the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan
during their monthly briefings to the Security Council
under this agenda item. They are clearly shirking their
responsibilities and their duty under resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).

This demonstrates a dreadful lack of a sense of
duty on the part of the Secretariat to inform the
Security Council of the latest developments in the
occupied Syrian Golan. Failure to do so will encourage
Israel to pursue its aggressive policies and its flagrant
violations of all relevant resolutions of the United
Nations.

Even the customary phrases voiced by a number
of the representatives of the Secretary-General, to the
effect that there were no new developments in the
occupied Golan, were not to be heard today in the
statement of Mr. Pascoe, the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs. The Syrian Golan must fully
returned within the borders of 4 June 1967. This is a
non-negotiable right. We ask Israel not for concessions,
as has been stated here, but to fully restored rights and
lands to their owners.

Resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) call on
all countries to respect their provisions. What is
surprising is that only two days following the adoption
of resolution 2042 (2012), the Emir of Qatar made a
public statement violating the letter and spirit of that
resolution. This clearly revealed the hidden intentions
of the Qatari authorities, who are opposed to any
peaceful settlement to the crisis in Syria. Indeed, the
Emir of Qatar had already made his judgements and
appraisals prior to the arrival of the United Nations
monitors. He said,

"The likelihood of the successful outcome of
Annan's mission is no higher than 3 per cent. The
Syrian people do not need peaceful support. What
they need is military support through arms."

These remarks were made by the Emir of Qatar
just one day after the Council adopted resolution 2042
(2012). The Qatari authorities continued to use such
destructive language before and following the adoption
of the resolution in New York and participated in the
Istanbul meetings, as well as those in Tunis and Paris.
In that regard, we wish to recall that it was Qatar that,
in cooperation with Saudi Arabia, terminated the
mission of the League of Arab States to Syria. Having
been relieved of its responsibilities and duties, the
mission unmasked the policies of Saudi Arabia and
Qatar, which continue to support and finance armed
terrorist groups and to promote terrorism and the
shedding of Syrian blood.

The Saudi authorities do not hesitate periodically
to kill peaceful demonstrators in Al-Qatif and
Al-Awamiya or to cordon off areas where there are
demonstrations in an attempt to intimidate and cow
civilians. More than 30,000 political detainees
currently crowd Saudi prisons. In addition to carrying
out arbitrary arrests and violating the freedoms of
movement and peaceful expression, some Saudi
sheikhs have issued religious edicts authorizing those
who participate in such peaceful demonstrations to be
killed.

I do not wish to go into greater detail because I
would thereby fall into the very trap that the
representatives of a number of other Member States
have fallen into. As to the Western countries that have
criticized the human rights situation in my country, it is
they that are to blame for the deterioration of that
situation, as it is their Governments that have imposed
unjust economic measures that have had a devastating
impact on the daily lives and livelihoods of Syrian
citizens.

Instead, they choose to criticize and blame the
Syrian Government for the lack of commodities and
essential foodstuffs for its citizens. It is regrettable that
the Governments of Saudi Arabia and Qatar have
participated enthusiastically in the imposition of these
shameful measures, and that their tireless efforts have
exacerbated the situation of some of the poorest and
weakest sectors in Syria. With regard to the
humanitarian situation, contrary to international public
opinion, the activities of terrorist groups financed and
protected by Qatar and Saudi Arabia persist, as
highlighted by their own media.

