Mr. Braun (Germany): Mindful of your request for
brevity, Sir,I would like to briefly make the following
three points:

First, we welcome the Council's efforts to increase
its transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency. We
appreciate Japan's initiative to consolidate and
streamline note 507 on the Council's working methods.
We welcome the note S/2016/619, on the preparation
of newly elected members of the Council and the
selection of chairs of the Council's subsidiary bodies.
We support the practice of holding more frequent open
debates, as well as Arria Formula meetings and wrap-
up sessions. We encourage the Security Council to
further engage in substantive and detailed briefings on
its ongoing activities, as well as in the documentation
and publication of decisions and other relevant matters.

Secondly, Germany reiterates its support for the
French-Mexican initiative on voluntary veto restraint
and the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group on Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.

Thirdly, we consider the International Criminal
Court as a crucial institution in fighting impunity and
pursuing justice. We therefore stress the importance
of increased cooperation and information-sharing
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court in order to enable them to work together
effectively and fulfil their mandates.

In conclusion, we consider it to be very important
to improve the Council's working methods, but we also
urgently need a comprehensive, structural reform of the
Security Council. We were encouraged to see points
of convergence emerge among Member States during
this year's intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform with regard to all five reform pillars.
However, that convergence has not been consolidated
in an updated framework document comprising the
original positions of Member States. It is crucial to
continue to find common ground on all five key issues
during the next negotiations and to move straight into
text-based negotiations.

