Mr. Richardson (United States of America): Nuclear
tests conducted by India and Pakistan in recent weeks
represent a profound blow not only to the stability and
security of their region but also to the international non-
proliferation regime on which we all depend. In a few
minutes, this Council will vote on a draft resolution that
condemns those tests. No other response by the
international community is possible in the face of such acts.

The draft resolution however does more than
condemn. It also makes clear the path India and Pakistan
should follow to restore their standing before all nations.
It calls upon India and Pakistan to refrain from
weaponization or deployment of nuclear weapons to avoid
a ballistic missiles arms race and to avoid further
proliferation by exporting this technology. It also urges
India and Pakistan to resume the diplomatic dialogue
between them, which is the path to true peace.

This draft resolution endorses, in full, the Joint
Communique of the Foreign Ministers of China, France,
the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the
United States in Geneva on 4 June. At the conclusion of
the meeting in Geneva, Secretary of State Albright noted
that in the coming weeks China, France, Russia, the
United Kingdom and the United States will be engaging
additional concerned States in our shared effort to bring
peace and stability in South Asia. Council adoption of this
draft resolution is an important step along that path.

The Geneva meeting was part of what we expect to
be a continuing process that will include numerous
participants in various forums and will address the entire
range of South Asia security issues, nuclear and non-
nuclear. Through that meeting and those scheduled in the
future, we hope to reach out to India and Pakistan. Our
intent is not to make them pariah States, but to engage
and to convince them it is in their own national security
interests to do what the international community is urging
them to do.

We have called upon India and Pakistan, and
continue to do so, to take steps to avert an arms race and
reduce tensions. Both nations should sign and ratify the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty immediately and
without conditions. They should also refrain from
deploying missiles of all types. They should cease
production of fissile material and should enter into
negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty in the
Conference on Disarmament, and do so in good faith.
They should also formalize their pledge not to export
dangerous weapons and technologies. They should refrain
from missile testing of any sort, since any such test is a
provocative action.

They should do all of these things not only because
the Security Council or the nuclear-weapon States
proclaim the importance of immediate steps to halt a
dangerous arms race in South Asia. They should do so
because it is in their own best interests to take these
steps. The path they have started down does not add to

 

their security but diminishes it. We call upon them to turn
back now.

India and Pakistan must also understand in no
uncertain terms that their tests and subsequent declarations
do not make them nuclear-weapon States. We will not
support amendment of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to permit their accession as
nuclear-weapon States, because to do so would completely
undermine the very purpose of the NPT and the
international non-proliferation regime.

We also call upon Pakistan and India to work towards
a reduction of tensions between them. Each has legitimate
security concerns. We have already extended our hand to
the parties to offer our assistance to help improve their
confidence and thus their security. I repeat the offer again
on behalf of my Government.

The Kashmir region has the potential to be the spark
that ignites a conflict no one may be able to stop. We urge
both India and Pakistan to work to avoid striking the match.
We believe there are a number of steps they can take to
reduce the chances that a miscalculation or
misunderstanding leads to a situation neither side can truly
want. They should avoid threatening movements near the
line of control, any crossing of the line by military or
security forces, cross-border infiltrations, or other
provocative acts in the area.
The United States calls upon India and Pakistan to
take heed of both the Communique issued by the five
permanent members on 4 June in Geneva and the message
contained within the draft resolution we are about to adopt.
They are not calls for punishment or penalty. They are
instead a call by the international community for restraint,
for caution and for good sense. We strongly and sincerely
urge the leaders of both nations to resist the temptation to
act rashly today so that their children will have the
opportunity to live in a stable and peaceful South Asia
tomorrow.

