Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): My delegation is
delighted to see Colombia serving as the President of
the Security Council for the month of August. I am also
happy to see the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia chairing the meeting today.

It is gratifying to see the Council holding this
open debate on the question of small arms shortly after
the successful conclusion of the United Nations the
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New York
last month. We wish to commend Ambassador Reyes of
Colombia on his well-deserved election as President of
this United Nations Conference devoted to finding
solutions to the pressing problems of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects.

This meeting could not have taken place at a
more opportune moment. The fact that it is on the
agenda of the Security Council, we believe, is an
affirmation of the desire of the international
community to deal with the problem of the growing
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.

While it is acknowledged that these weapons, in
and of themselves, do not start or lead to conflicts,
their ready availability has, nonetheless, frequently
caused the escalation of these conflicts and aided the
perpetration of criminal activities in many countries.
Clearly their proliferation and the illicit trade in
them -which is estimated to amount to 40 to 50 per
cent of the global trade in small arms - pose real
threats to the economic and social development of
many developing countries, especially in Africa.

Without doubt Africa is the most affected region
if one considers the devastation that conflicts involving
small arms have wreaked on communities and States.
We would recall the gory details of the Rwanda
pogrom and the untold hardships visited upon the
innocent civilians in Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Liberia, just to mention a few.
The Secretary-General has highlighted the nexus
between illicit trade in arms, the illegal smuggling of
natural resources such as diamonds, timber and so
forth, and the perpetration of conflicts in Angola,
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of Congo.

The impact of the devastation caused by small
arms and light weapons in Africa cannot be
underestimated. In many instances, economies have
been totally destroyed and reduced to shambles,
infrastructures laid waste and millions of people killed
and wounded while thousands have been internally
displaced and many more turned into refugees. In the
face of this development, responsible members of the
international community cannot stand by and allow it
to continue.

Even though African States lack the capacity to
manufacture small arms and light weapons, the
continent unfortunately is the recipient of large
quantities of these weapons. It is estimated that in
Africa alone there are some 7 million illicit arms and
light weapons in circulation. The incessant conflicts
and wars in the continent have provided an
environment in which trade in light arms is carried out
in exchange for the natural resources of the continent.
The lucrative barter of arms for natural resources such
as "blood diamonds" has provided an opportunity for
arms dealers to thrive in the continent. It has also
helped rebel leaders to sustain conflicts.

In recognition of the enormous suffering that
Africa has experienced as a result of conflicts induced
by small arms, leaders of the West African countries
have tried, for example, to tackle the problems of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons at the
subregional level. In October 1998 the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
adopted a moratorium on the importation and
exportation of light weapons in ECOWAS States.
African Ministers also adopted in Bamako on 30
November 2000 a declaration on a common African
position on small arms and light weapons.

At the national level, my country, Nigeria, has put
in place practical measures to tackle the problem
through the establishment of the National Committee
on Small Arms and Light Weapons. Also Nigeria
declared Thursday, 5 July 2001 "small arms destruction
day" in conformity with the decision reached at the
preparatory committee to declare the first day of the
United Nations Conference on Small Arms and Light
Weapons as such.

Nigeria and Africa have taken these initiatives to
underscore their awareness of the danger posed by
small arms and light weapons. It is our hope that
members of the international community and indeed
members of the Security Council will take decisions to
complement these efforts.

In view of the global nature of the problem and
the urgent need to deal with it, my delegation would
like to say to the members of the Council that the time
has now come for us to take far-reaching decisions to
complement the decisions already reached at the recent
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. To this end, Nigeria
would like to urge members of the international
community to render technical and financial assistance
where needed to regional and national efforts to
eradicate illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Nigeria also wishes to support the call for the creation
of a small arms fund to assist States. Furthermore, we
urge Member States to share information on a
voluntary basis on their national marking systems for
small arms and light weapons.

As a follow-up to the Conference on Small Arms
and Light Weapons we wish to call for a review
conference to take place not later than 2006 to review
the progress made in the implementation of the
Programme of Action. My delegation also supports the
recommendation in the outcome document that further
study be undertaken, within existing resources, for
examining the feasibility of developing an international
instrument to enable States identify and trace in a
timely and reliable manner illicit small arms and light
weapons.

In conclusion, we would like to commend the
Secretary-General for his report contained in document
S/2000/ 1092, in which he provided a reference manual
for safe methods of weapons destruction for use in
missions areas. We hope that members of the various
United Nations peacekeeping missions will find this
useful during the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.

Surely a world free of arms would be a peaceful
world, but since this for now is a utopian vision, we
can only strive to limit the proliferation of illicit small
arms and to ensure that they do not find their way into
the wrong hands. Our concerted efforts to address the
issues of conflict prevention, peace-building and the
protection of civilians and children in armed conflicts
will depend on how effectively we are able to tackle
the issue of the proliferation of illicit small arms and
light weapons.

