Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): I too would like to thank the Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Timor-Leste, for her detailed presentation on the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/32) on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT). I would like to take this
opportunity to recognize His Excellency Mr. Kay Rala
Xanana Gusmao, Prime Minister and Minister of
Defence of Timor-Leste, and thank him for his
important statement.

In my statement, I will focus mainly on the
progress made in the construction process in Timor-
Leste, the remaining challenges and the outlook for the
future.

With regard to progress, the report under
consideration takes stock of, among other things, the
advances made in the security and justice sectors.
There have been encouraging developments in the
economic sector. With regard to security, my
delegation is pleased that the overall situation
remained calm and that in many areas and districts the
Timorese State, in particular the national police, is
reassuming its prerogatives and its State functions of
maintaining public order. We further note the
continuing coordination and cooperation between the
international security forces and Timorese forces.

Indeed, the civilian police component of UNMIT
has continued its efforts to strengthen the capacity of
the Timorese police and to foster institutional
development through logistical support, targeted
training, administrative skills development, ongoing
inquiries into cases of sexual violence, combating
human trafficking and through community policing.
We can only welcome this.

We further commend UNMIT for its efforts to
train Timorese national civilian police officers so as to
enable them to serve in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Gabon has always advocated building the
capacity of Member States for peacekeeping.

We remain convinced that the development plan
for the police for 2010-2012, intended to strengthen the
operational capacity of the national police, provides a
unique framework for cooperation between the police
and UNMIT.

With regard to the justice system, my delegation
welcomes the support provided by UNMIT, the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the United Nations Development
Fund for Women to strengthen the Timorese judicial
apparatus, in particular through staff training
programmes and the development of the legislative
framework. They are also providing assistance in
conducting some of the more complex inquiries, such
as those involving the serious crimes committed in
1999. The increased number of cases prepared for
judgment and the extension of justice administration to
rural areas are also satisfying developments.

Regarding the economic sector, we welcome the
progress made in achieving the 2010 national priorities
targets in the framework of the international compact
for Timor-Leste. In spite of the serious food crisis,
which unfortunately does not exclude any developing
country, we should be pleased that the State has
provided food assistance to the most vulnerable
persons. We also welcome the progress made towards
the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals, particularly in terms of the infant mortality rate,
which decreased from 83 to 64 deaths per 1,000 live
births.

My delegation shares the Secretary-General's
satisfaction with the remarkable recovery of the
economy of Timor-Leste, which posted a growth rate
of close to 10 per cent, with a reduction in poverty and
an improvement in human development indicators. We
hope that the revenues generated by hydrocarbons,
which enabled the progress, will continue to benefit
from good governance, in order to stay the course of
growth and to attain sustainable and comprehensive
development in the country.

Regarding the challenges, we must continue to
fight impunity and corruption, which are sources of
potential conflict. Responsibly addressing those issues
will undeniably help not only to build public trust in
institutions but also to preserve the gains made in
national reconciliation, in reinforcing the rule of law
and, by extension, stability and durable peace in
Timor-Leste. Similarly, the presidential and
parliamentary elections to be held in 2012 will test the
entire peace process in Timor-Leste.

My delegation believes that the outlook for peace
and development in Timor-Leste remains reassuring.
The Government and its various bilateral and
multilateral partners seem to be solidly committed to
establishing peace and building the economy. The
country's assets in terms of development are not
insignificant, either. We must therefore continue to
encourage the Timorese people to derive maximum
benefit from the support of the international
community and from the revenue generated by the oil
sector to establish national unity and build a
prosperous nation.

To contribute to the achievement of those
objectives, my delegation supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend the mandate of
UNMIT for an additional 12 months.

My country once again congratulates the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste for their
laudable efforts for peace and stability in their country.
I reiterate my delegation's firm support for the
remarkable work of UNMIT. I commend the leadership
of Ms. Ameerah Haq and the professionalism that she
and her staff have shown on the ground. They can
count on my delegation's ongoing support.

