Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States deeply appreciates the efforts of Special
Envoy Gambari and his team and welcomes his report
to the Security Council. We have carefully tracked
Mr. Gambari's efforts since we last met to fulfil the
objectives unanimously laid down by this Council in
our presidential statement of 11 October (S/PRST/ 2007/37), principally our call upon the Burmese regime

"to create the necessary conditions for a genuine
dialogue with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and all
concerned parties and ethnic groups in order to
achieve an inclusive national reconciliation with
the direct support of the United Nations".

In that regard, the United States particularly
welcomes the statement by Daw Aung San Suu Kyi
that was released by Mr. Gambari on 8 November. We
fully support her willingness to engage in what she
described as "a meaningful and time-bound dialogue
with the SPDC (State Peace and Development Council)" and underscore her expectation that such a
dialogue should begin as early as possible. We are
heartened by that message, and by the decision of the
military regime to permit Daw Aung San Suu Kyi to
communicate her views to the Special Envoy.

But those steps, however welcome, are not
enough and do not yet constitute a fundamental shift.
We believe that the Security Council, like Burma's
neighbours and the countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), must sustain its
engagement and make clear the regime's outstanding
obligations with respect to progress in the areas of
concern to the international community.

First, the regime should fulfil its obligation to
this body and begin a substantive national dialogue as
early as possible, with no preconditions. In a

12 November statement, the Secretary-General stated
that a process has been launched that will hopefully
lead to a meaningful and substantive dialogue with
concrete outcomes within an agreed time frame.
Although the regime has permitted a Government
liaison to meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, to date
that process is merely - in her words - preliminary
consultations and does not yet constitute a dialogue. In
addition, the SPDC announced through the State media
on 6 November that tripartite talks involving the
SPDC, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and Mr. Gambari
would be premature.

We believe, however, that the United Nations role
could facilitate dialogue and would ensure that any
dialogue is credible. That is why the Security Council
and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi herself have welcomed the
good-offices role of the United Nations. Whatever
form the dialogue may take, inclusive talks are long
overdue and have been called for repeatedly by
Burma's neighbours, by the broader international
community and, most recently, by this Council.

Secondly, there should be a stop to the ongoing
arrests and detentions and an immediate and
unconditional release of all political prisoners and
detainees, including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. If
General Than Shwe and other members of the SPDC
are committed to cooperation with the United Nations,
as they have stated, then they should release all
political prisoners and detainees. Moreover, they
should put a stop to the ongoing arrests and detentions
of democracy activists. As was mentioned by my
colleague from the United Kingdom just this past
week, key activists such as Su Su Nway and U
Gambira and members of the All-Burma Monks
Alliance were arrested.

Thirdly, it is critical that Daw Aung San Suu Kyi
be free to consult broadly so that she can engage in
meaningful dialogue with the SPDC. In her statement,
she announced that it is her duty to consider "the
interests and opinions of as broad a range of political
organizations and forces as possible", including
Burma's ethnic minorities. It is unreasonable to expect
that she will be able to engage in a meaningful
dialogue with the Burmese generals and all concerned
political parties and ethnic groups while she is under
house arrest and her movements and consultations are
tightly controlled. While the United States is pleased
that Daw Aung San Suu Kyi was finally permitted to
meet with her fellow members of the National League

for Democracy on 9 November, we believe that that
positive development must be both extended and
expanded.

Fourthly, the Burmese regime needs to allow
Mr. Gambari to control his own itinerary and to meet
with any individual group he deems relevant to his
efforts. While we welcome the prospect of future and
regular visits by Mr. Gambari to Burma, the regime
must meet the demands of the Council and cooperate
fully with them in order for his engagement to bear
fruit. We define full cooperation as unrestricted access
to all persons and parties in Burma. General Than
Shwe's decision not to meet with Mr. Gambari on this
most recent trip, as he has in the past, indicates a
troubling lack of commitment on the part of the SPDC
to working with the United Nations to promote the
process of dialogue and national reconciliation.
Another troubling indicator was the fact that the
regime, not Mr. Gambari, arranged his meetings and
dictated his schedule.

Our expectations are clear: the military regime's
so-called road map to democracy, which excludes
Burma's democratic and ethnic minority groups from
meaningful participation, is demonstrably inadequate.
A legitimate transition to democracy will require a
process that is shaped by, includes and is supported by
all of the people of Burma.

We acknowledge and appreciate the role of those
countries in the region with influence over Burma,
particularly its immediate neighbours and countries of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and call on
them to reinvigorate their efforts to persuade Burma's
ruling generals to accelerate steps to begin the
inclusive dialogue on the peaceful transition to
democracy that Aung San Suu Kyi and the Burmese
people seek and that the United Nations is prepared to
facilitate.

The United States fully supports the good offices
mission and believes that this mechanism can facilitate
the outcome that we all seek: a peaceful transition to a
representative and responsible government in Burma.
We greatly appreciate the role undertaken by Special
Adviser Gambari, and fully support his efforts to
sustain, consolidate and expand the modest progress
made so far and the process that is under way now. The
Secretary-General is clearly committed to the process,
as is Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. We look to the Secretary-
General and his team to build the capacity required for
the Special Adviser to successfully engage with the
parties on a sustained basis.

We echo the Secretary-General's statement that
all relevant parties must redouble their efforts towards
achieving national reconciliation, democracy and full
respect for human rights. It is now time for General
Than Shwe and the SPDC to demonstrate that they are
equally committed to transition and national
reconciliation by releasing Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and
other political prisoners and heeding her call to begin a
meaningful and time bound dialogue. We also believe
that the SPDC should avail itself of the United Nations
good offices mission.

Through the efforts of the Special Adviser, the
international community has offered the ruling generals
a constructive means of engagement. In our view, it
should be clear that in order to retain the support of the
international community, this engagement must gain
momentum and show real resolve. A process for
process's sake will not be acceptable. The United
States will continue to closely monitor events in
Burma. We believe the Security Council should
continue to balance engagement with appropriate
pressure and calibrate both levels according to progress
on the ground.

