Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for having convened
this meeting. I also thank the Ambassadors of Israel
and Palestine for their respective statements. I further
thank Special Coordinator Serry for his consistently
comprehensive and balanced reports.

Panama has stated on various occasions and
reiterates today that even though a solution to the
conflict in the Middle East, in particular the conflict
between Israel and Palestine, may not necessarily lead
to the resolution of all other conflicts in the world, it is
nevertheless true that unless that conflict is resolved
with agreement among the parties, the conflicts in the
rest of the world are unlikely to be solved.
Likewise, we have said and we repeat today that
the framework of a peace agreement between Israel
and Palestine is generally well known and supported by
a large part of the international community, as reflected
at the Annapolis conference. That framework includes
the existence of Israel and Palestine as two
economically and politically viable States living side
by side and with their neighbours in peace and
security; the return to the borders of 1967, except in
the case of a specific agreement between the parties;
and West Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and East
Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State.
Furthermore, it will be necessary to reach agreement
on the future of Palestinian refugees and the use and
exploitation of natural resources in the region, in
particular water.

However, if that agreement is to be successful,
the parties must achieve the following as soon as
possible, if not immediately. The Palestinians must
reach a political agreement among themselves that
would make it possible to consolidate a single and
sustainable Government structure for the whole
Palestinian territory. The Israelis must suspend the
construction of illegal settlements in the occupied
territories and begin removing those settlements,
whose existence is unjustifiable and clearly violates
international law. Extremist Palestinian groups must
stop their acts of violence against innocent Israeli
civilians. The Palestinians and the Arab countries must
give Israel the necessary and reliable guarantees of its
security as a State. Until those conditions are met, the
peace efforts in the Middle East are bound to fail.

In that regard, Panama reiterates once again its
deep concern at and condemnation of the situation of
the people of Gaza under the Israeli blockade of that
territory. We condemn equally strongly the terrorist
attacks on the Jewish people by extremists based in the
Gaza Strip. We recognize the State of Israel's inherent
right to self-defence in accordance with the Charter
and international law, in proportion to the threat and in
full respect of the human rights of the innocent civilian
population.

In conclusion, we trust that those who believe
that neither the Palestinians nor the Israelis wish or are
able to reach a peace agreement are wrong.

