Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Envoy Djinnit for his briefing today,
for the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/229)
and for all his very diligent work and strong personal
dedication to these issues since 2014. We appreciate
all that he has done, and we wish him every success
for the future. It was particularly welcome today both
to hear about his recent successes and to be reminded
of all that he has achieved over that past five years.
We particularly welcome his success in securing the
voluntary repatriation of fighters from Rwanda and
combatants ofthe Mouvement du 23 mars from Uganda.
That is an important achievement. As Mr. Djinnit said,
it shows that we can make progress on these very
difficult issues.
In setting out today the six areas on which he has
focused over the past five years, I think that he helped
set the agenda for his successor when he takes over. I
would like to highlight three ofthose areas in particular.

First, we warmly welcome the emphasis that the
Special Envoy placed on promoting the participation of
women in political life and peace processes. We strongly
agree with the call that he made just now to support the
region's efforts to achieve a minimum quota of 30 per
cent representation of women in political processes
by 2020 in time for the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

Secondly, we very much agree with the Special
Envoy about the importance of the rule of law and
human rights. In that regard, we strongly support his
plans for a high-level conference on justice and good
governance in May. The Special Envoy will have our
full support for that conference.

Thirdly, and this is a point that my colleague from
the United States also touched on, we very much agree
about the importance of tackling the exploitation of
natural resources, in particular by armed groups in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is very
good that Mr. Djinnit initiated political discussions with
the countries in the region on that issue. I think that
it will be very important that that dialogue continues
under his successor.

Let me just touch very briefly on three of the
country-specific issues that are mentioned in the
report. First, with regard to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we of course join the Special Envoy in our
commendation of the Congolese people for exercising
their democratic right to vote in a peaceful manner in
the recent elections. But we all know that democracy
is a process, not an event, and that it is vital that all
stakeholders in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remain focused on supporting a more stable and
inclusive physical environment in the country. We fully
agree with the conclusions in the Secretary-General's
report regarding the importance of resolving the issue
of foreign armed groups and their dependents in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and regional issues
involving refugee populations. Regional dialogue
will be vital to finding solutions that respect the
fundamental human rights of all those involved in or
affected by conflict.

Secondly, turning to the Central African Republic,
we attach great importance to ongoing efforts by the
parties to implement the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation and would encourage all
stakeholders to consider What role the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region may be able to
play in supporting that process.

Finally, with respect to Burundi, we think that an
inclusive dialogue will be a vital precursor to credible
and inclusive elections. We welcome all the work that the
Special Envoy has done on that issue. All international
partners should continue to support the East African
Community in its efforts to end the political crisis in
Burundi and preserve the Arusha accords. Again, we
encourage all stakeholders to consider whether the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework could play
an enhanced role in promoting dialogue in Burundi
and to coordinate their efforts with the Framework in
that regard.

In conclusion, we look forward to hearing the
plans of Mr. Djinnit's successor to further engage with
regional Heads of State and Government, picking up
on the six themes that he outlined, but in particular the
three on which I focused on. As he has shown during his
tenure, the role of Special Envoy has an invaluable part
to play in supporting and strengthening the partnerships
that will underpin greater regional stability. I thank
him for all that he has done.

