Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for the
opportunity the Security Council has had to listen to
President Chiluba. We are particularly pleased that this
discussion is taking place in an open meeting of the
Council. It is important that the broader community of
members of the United Nations should be able to hear the
opinions of key participants on important questions on the
Council's agenda.

We join our colleagues in praising all of those who
contributed to the attainment of the ceasefire agreement.
President Chiluba and the Government of Zambia deserve
special recognition for their efforts.

For several years now, Zambia and President
Chiluba in particular have been playing a very important
and laudable role in the southern African peace process.

(spoke in English)
The peace accord is enormously good news for the

people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and, of
course, was warmly received as such within the Security

 

Council. It is of vital importance for the achievement of
stability in Central and southern Africa. The peace accord
must now be translated into fact, and the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will, of course, have the
key role to play. Canada strongly encourages all Congolese
to participate fully in the national dialogue.

The international community, including the United
Nations and the Security Council, also have an important
contribution to make. Indeed, the Agreement calls for a
substantial peacekeeping role. We encourage the Secretary-
General to keep the Council closely apprised of the
progress of his contingency planning and, indeed, of his
thoughts on possible options for United Nations support in
the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. Among the
early challenges the international community will need to
address is how to assist with the return and reintegration of
nearly 700,000 people internally displaced, and the return
home of an estimated 300,000 who have sought refuge in
neighbouring countries.

Right now it is critical that safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian personnel be guaranteed so that it might
be possible to begin to meet the needs of affected
populations. It will also be important for the international
community to focus attention on the promotion of human
rights, including through the efforts of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and
the demobilization of soldiers, particularly the many
children among them.

I would very much welcome President Chiluba's
further views as to the time-frame for the deployment of a
peacekeeping operation. That is, when does President
Chiluba believe that the deployment of peacekeepers will
become both feasible and necessary?

