Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Let me begin by thanking Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his informative
briefing on the progress made in recent months in
Kosovo. I would also like to extend my thanks to
Mr. Ivica Daeie, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and Ms. Vlora Citaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the
United States, for their statements.

The delegation of Equatorial Guinea notes with
great concern the political impasse in the resumption
of talks between Belgrade and Pristina, as reflected in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/797) and
Mr. Tanin's briefing. In addition to the lack of progress
in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, we
deeply regret the inflammatory rhetoric and provocative
actions of the parties, which is having a negative effect
on the situation on the ground and hampering initiatives
aimed at resuming a productive dialogue between the
parties. By the same token, we regret that no high-level
meetings were held between the parties during the
reporting period within the framework of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. Likewise, we regret that the
meeting scheduled to take place in Paris at the beginning
of July was cancelled. In this regard, we wish to remind
both parties that ensuring security and stability in
Kosovo requires the commitment of both in order for
the dialogue to continue. We therefore encourage them
to continue their efforts with the aim of achieving
stability on the ground, respecting the implementation
of the agreements reached. We also encourage them to
take advantage of the European Union-facilitated talks
with a View to normalizing relations.

In conclusion, we believe that all parties must
continue to act in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and
the existing agreements, so that through dialogue they
may find a peaceful and lasting solution for the benefit
of all. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea once again
reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia
and appreciates its continued efforts to facilitate an
inclusive, peaceful and political solution to the situation.

We encourage UNMIK to continue to fulfil its
objectives and priorities in promoting security, stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo. Similarly, we
commend the support it provides to all communities
in Kosovo and to all regional and international
stakeholders, and above all its efforts to empower
women in Kosovo in various areas of development.

