Ms. Wronecka (Poland): We are very pleased to see
the strong support from all the members of the Security
Council for the first-ever resolution on this important,
yet often overlooked, issue (resolution 2475 (2019)).
The promotion of the rights of persons with disabilities
has been a long-standing priority of Poland's. We are
proud to have brought this issue to the attention of the
Council for the first time. We would like to express our
gratitude to our co-penholder, the Permanent Mission
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, for its excellent cooperation on this important
topic. As well, we would like to thank all the other
members of the Security Council for their constructive
engagement and support. We also thank all the sponsors
of the resolution.

Since the beginning of our work on the resolution,
we set ourselves three goals we wanted to achieve: first,
strengthening data collection and reporting on persons
with disabilities; secondly, building capacity and
knowledge on the needs and rights with persons with
disabilities, as well as awareness among peacekeepers
and peacebuilders; and, last but not least, we sought
to empower and engage persons with disabilities
in the areas of conflict prevention and resolution,
reconciliation, reconstruction and peacebuilding. We
want to make sure that persons with disabilities and
their organizations are not the subject of the discussions
of the Security Council, but our partners instead.

Just last week, the twelfth Conference of the States
Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities took place. In his opening statement,
the Secretary-General reminded us of the very wise
words of Nujeen Mustafa, a brave young woman with
a disability who recently shared her story with the
Security Council (see S/PV.8515). On that occasion
she told us that "no one left behind" should not just be
words that members say, but that

"Council members can and should do more to
ensure that people with disabilities are included
in all aspects of their work. We cannot wait any
longer." (S/PV85I5, p. 5)

She also reminded us that persons with disabilities
are often forgotten during times of peace as well, and
even more forgotten during times of war. We sincerely
hope that this landmark resolution will bring about
change for Nujeen and the millions of other persons
with disabilities. Poland stands ready to continue our
efforts to make sure persons with disabilities are not
left behind.

Finally, allow me to thank our partners in the
negotiations, namely, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Special Rapporteur on persons with disabilities,
the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
International Disability Alliance and other civil
society organizations. Without their strong support and
expertise, we would not have been able to adopt such
a strong text. Finally, I thank the Kuwaiti presidency
for allowing us to adopt the resolution early in the
morning today.

