Mr. Oshima (Japan): The Japanese delegation
expresses its appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
your timely initiative to organize this important open
debate. This meeting, together with the forthcoming
General Assembly debate on the same subject
scheduled for 6 February, will mark the first significant
step towards setting the peacebuilding agenda in the
broader United Nations system-wide context, which
will, in turn, certainly contribute to improving the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission itself.

The Peacebuilding Commission has been
established as an intergovernmental advisory body to
address issues which encompass the mandates of the
principal organs, including the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, as well as of numerous other bodies within
the United Nations system. This means, obviously, that
there must be ways to ensure meaningful interface and
interaction between the Commission on the one hand
and those relevant principal organs and bodies on the
other, if the work of the Commission is to be useful
and effective. As a sitting member of the Commission
and a past member of the Security Council through the
end of last year, Japan has emphasized that point,
advocating the importance of improving the
cooperation among United Nations organs -
especially between the Commission and the Security
Council - and presenting some practical suggestions
to that end.

That said, the core task of the Peacebuilding
Commission is to bring together, under one roof, a
post-conflict country under consideration and its
international partners to discuss and bring into being an
integrated peacebuilding strategy, appropriate to that
country, that is sensible, coherent and workable.
Through that process, the Commission is expected to
contribute to effective peace consolidation in the
country in question by bridging the gap between the
post-conflict recovery phase and the development
phase.

When it comes to matters related to the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council bears primary responsibility in
supporting peace consolidation through actions falling
under its purview - for example, by deploying United
Nations peacekeeping operations and integrated
offices. In that process, it is important to ensure that
there are ways in which both the substantive and the
procedural aspects of cooperation between the

Commission and the Council can be developed. In
more specific terms, here are some ideas for
consideration.

First of all, the Peacebuilding Commission has
done some good work in identifying the specific needs
for peacebuilding in Sierra Leone and Burundi. It has
established the priority areas that are essential to
sustain peace in those two post-conflict countries, and
further efforts in that area of work will need to be
strengthened. However, the key task of formulating an
integrated peacebuilding strategy for the two countries
has yet to be tackled. The Commission should
accelerate its work on developing an integrated
strategy, in consultation with the host Governments and
involving all the relevant stakeholders, such as
bilateral donors, the United Nations country team, the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and civil
society.

Secondly, any peacebuilding strategy to be
developed will be useful only if it is implemented and
delivered effectively on the ground. To that end, the
establishment of an on-site coordination and
monitoring mechanism would contribute significantly
to the implementation of the strategy and should be
considered.

In that regard, although Afghanistan has not been
selected as a target country for the purposes of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board (JCMB) in Afghanistan offers an
interesting model. The JCMB consists of 28 members
and is co-chaired at a high level by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and a special
adviser of President Karzai. The members include the
major financial and military contributors, neighbouring
countries and international organizations, as well as
key ministers of the Afghan Government. The J CMB is
also a political body that provides strategic advice and
coordinates international and national efforts aimed at
the effective implementation of the Afghanistan
Compact, which is, in effect, the living comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy for Afghanistan. During the
visit by the Security Council mission to Afghanistan
last November, which I had the honour to lead, we had
the opportunity to observe the functioning of that body.
I believe that the replication of this model in other
country situations, as appropriate, will serve a very
useful coordination and monitoring function on the
ground, involving all players in the peacebuilding
effort.
Thirdly, if the integrated peacebuilding strategy is
to contribute to promoting a transition from conflict to
stability, it will have to ensure the seamless transfer of
responsibilities from the post-conflict phase to the
reconstruction and development phase. One of the
model processes may be the transition from a
peacekeeping operation to an integrated office and
eventually to a United Nations country team, as we
foresee in the cases of Sierra Leone and Burundi. In
other words, we believe that the peacebuilding strategy
of the Peacebuilding Commission, if it is properly
formulated, should incorporate the exit strategies of
peacekeeping operations and integrated offices. It is
the Council's mandate to decide on the timing of the
withdrawal of such missions. My delegation hopes
that, through the consideration and implementation of
an integrated strategy, the Peacebuilding Commission
will provide valuable advice to the Council on when
and how to exit these missions and hand over the tasks
to the follow-up United Nations teams.

Before concluding, I wish to touch upon some
procedural aspects. It is important to find ways to
enhance synergy between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council by
systematically streamlining the flow of information
between them. Several steps will need to be considered
for that purpose. First, the Chairs of the Commission's
Organizational Committee and/or those of its country-
specific meetings should make a timely report to the
Council on their deliberations, in the form of a letter or
a briefing. Secondly, the President of the Council and
the Chairs of the Commission should have regular
meetings. Thirdly, the Chair of the Organizational
Committee or of the country-specific meeting should
be invited to the public meeting of the Council on the
situation in the country under consideration. Fourthly,
the Council, after receiving reports from the
Commission, should consider issuing its reaction in the
form of a presidential statement or other statements, as
appropriate, to encourage synergy and interaction in
the process of formulating and implementing an
integrated strategy.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Japan's
strong commitment, as a member of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
contribute to the work of Commission and to the
relevant discussions in the Security Council. I am also
happy to announce Japan's intention to hold a
peacebuilding seminar on Timor-Leste in Tokyo this

March. I hope that the Commission and the Council
will further advance the deliberations on the issue that
we have discussed today.

