Mr. Davutoglu (Turkey): First, I would like to
thank the Russian Federation and Minister Lavrov for
convening this timely meeting, which has provided us
with the opportunity to exchange views on recent
developments in the Middle East. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
statement regarding the current situation on the ground.

The dynamism of events and the pace of
developments in the Middle East require the
international community to be alert and active at all
times. Despite all the frustrating problems in the
region, we believe that there is no room for pessimism.
On the contrary, recent diplomatic activities and the
determination of the international community to attain
the ultimate objective of establishing peace and
stability in the region have raised our hopes for the
future.

As the problems in the region have become
interrelated, it is no longer feasible to address them in
isolation. We therefore need a comprehensive approach
and believe that the peace process should be
reinvigorated on all tracks without further delay.

The Palestinian problem and the Arab-Israeli
conflict are at the top of our agenda. The rift among
Palestinians has to come to an end. Palestinian groups
have to find common ground so as to tackle
outstanding issues, thus leading to a national unity
Government and paving the way for the holding of
presidential and legislative elections. The
establishment of a strong Palestinian Administration
with popular support is essential. Turkey hopes that
national reconciliation talks between Palestinian
groups will succeed, and we continue to support
Egypt's efforts to that end.
We need to engage every Palestinian group that
has the support of the Palestinian people and to ensure

that they all adhere to the principles of peace. In that
context, we welcome the cessation of the launching of
rockets as a positive and encouraging sign.

We hope that the new Government in Israel will
adopt a policy that will restore hopes for the peace
process and renew commitment to the two-State
solution. On the other hand, we are concerned by
certain policies that could seriously hamper peace
efforts. Among them are Jewish settlement activities,
restrictions on the movement of Palestinian people and
goods, and actions and measures that could alter the
character and status of Jerusalem and further isolate
East Jerusalem from the rest of the Palestinian
territory. All of these run counter to the parties'
obligations under the Road Map, as well as to the spirit
of Annapolis, and should be stopped. I would also like
to emphasize that the Arab Peace Initiative provides a
very sound basis for peace between Arab States and
Israel, and that Israel should give the Initiative the
attention that it deserves.

The presidential statement that we are going to
adopt at the end of this meeting could have been more
inclusive and precise. Nevertheless, we will join the
consensus. However, I would like to clarify our
interpretation and understanding of the text before us.

First, it must be emphasized that the objective of
comprehensive peace can be achieved only through the
reinvigoration of the peace process on all its tracks.
Secondly, we cannot turn a blind eye to the
humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories,
particularly in Gaza. In that context, it is good to refer
to resolution 1860 (2009), but that is not enough. It is
incumbent on us to call for the full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009) and to address the humanitarian
situation in Gaza through the unimpeded provision and
distribution of humanitarian assistance throughout the
region.

One priority of Turkish foreign policy towards
the region is to keep open the channels of dialogue
with all parties and to pursue an active policy of
engagement. We welcome the fact that a growing
number of countries have come to realize the merits of
that policy and have adopted similar approaches.

We are committed to continuing to contribute to
efforts aimed at a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East based on the vision of a
region in which two democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, live side by side in peace within secure and
recognized borders.

If hopes for peace are exhausted, that will only
lead to further suffering of the peoples in the region
and provide a fertile breeding ground for extremism
and terrorism, which constitute a grave threat to all of
us. From that perspective, it is my earnest hope that we
will all be engaged in active diplomatic activities in the
coming days. In that context, I look forward to the
convening of an international conference on the Middle
East peace process in Moscow in 2009.

Before concluding, I wish to emphasize the fact
that the Israelis and the Palestinians are destined to live
and work together. They can choose either to remain
enemies and suffer together or to become good
neighbours and friends and prosper together. It is high
time that the right choice be made.

