Mr. Jegermanis (Latvia): Latvia has aligned
itself with the statement of the European Union;
however, we deem it is necessary to express our views
on this critical issue. The situation has completely
changed since we last addressed this issue in the
Security Council's open debate.

Twelve years of prolonged effort by the
international community to disarm the regime of
Saddam Hussain by peaceful means have not been
successful and diplomatic resources have been
exhausted. Latvia regrets that Saddam Hussain has
managed to polarize the international community,
making any further diplomatic efforts to resolve the
situation impossible. The Iraqi regime is solely and
exclusively responsible for the consequences of its
actions.

On 20 March 2003, the Parliament of the
Republic of Latvia took a decision on the support of
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1441
(2002), pledging its support and readiness to join the
efforts of the international coalition aimed at the
disarmament of Iraq.

Latvia believes that everything possible must be
done to avoid civilian casualties in the course of
military operations. Latvia will offer humanitarian
assistance to the Iraqi people, take part in the
rebuilding of the country and work to eliminate the
legacy of totalitarianism.

In order to swiftly handle the humanitarian needs
of the Iraqi people, we support the Secretary General's
proposal to exploit the oil for food programme by
adjusting it to the new situation. The international
community in general, and the Security Council in
particular, have to act in unity at this critical moment in
order to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe in Iraq.

Latvia will support the involvement of the United
Nations in the process of rebuilding and the
establishment of a democratic Iraq that is at peace with
its neighbours and not in possession of weapons of
mass destruction. We are convinced that active
involvement of the United Nations during and after the
current crisis in Iraq will secure the authority of the
United Nations in the international community.
