Mr. Brammertz: today is his first appearance before the
Security Council as Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).

My delegation fully endorses the statement to be
made by the Permanent Representative of Slovenia on
behalf of the European Union. I wish to comment also
on a number of other major points.

We have carefully studied the reports of the two
Tribunals, and we continue to believe - as we said in
the statements we made in June and December 2007
(see S/PV.5697 and S/PV.5796) - that the Tribunals
have made considerable efforts to implement their
completion strategies. To be sure, it is regrettable to
have to note that, as indicated by the evaluations of the
Tribunals, the appeals proceedings cannot be
completed until 2011. My delegation appeals to the
Tribunals to continue to do everything necessary to
comply with the 2010 deadline, as far as possible. We
cannot reproach the Tribunals for certain delays for
which they are not responsible, in particular those
caused by the late arrest and transfer by States of
certain accused, as has recently been the case for the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

In that regard, I would recall that, in our View, the
completion dates set in resolution 1503 (2003) and
reaffirmed in resolution 1534 (2004), are indicative
and should be adapted in the light of developments.
Those resolutions, which were adopted more than four
years ago, called on the Tribunals to "take all possible
measures to complete all trial activities at first
instance by the end of 2008, and to complete all work
in 2010" (resolution 1503 (2003), para. 7, and
resolution 1534 (2004), para. 3). In the View of my
delegation, this means that the dates should be
considered in the light of circumstances and in the light
of what the Tribunals are actually able to do.

The referral of indictments to certain national
jurisdictions, in accordance with the provisions of rule
11 bis of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence of the
two Tribunals, is an essential element of the
completion strategies. But it is important to emphasize
that the decision whether or not to refer a particular
case is strictly judicial in nature.

The legacy of the Tribunals - and thus that of
the Security Council, which established them - will
be tarnished if fugitive accused are not brought to trial.
That is especially true of fugitives accused of the most
serious crimes. We appeal to all the States concerned to
cooperate fully with the Tribunals in arresting those
individuals and transferring them to The Hague or to
Arusha. Belgium notes with regret Prosecutor
Brammertz's mixed assessment of Serbia's cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, and we encourage the Serbian Government
to do its utmost to cooperate fully with the ICTY.
Similarly, in the light of the information provided by
Prosecutor Jallow, we urge the authorities in Kenya
and other countries of the region to cooperate fully
with the ICTR.

Let me conclude with a few words about the
residual functions that will need to be carried out after
the closure of the Tribunals. Since the beginning of this
year, the Belgian delegation has been chairing the
informal working group on this matter, and I can bear
witness to the substantial progress that has been
achieved. As other delegations have noted, Ambassador
Verbeke briefed the Council on this progress during its
consultations in mid-May. Over the past months, the
working group has methodically studied the list of
residual functions identified by the Tribunals and has
engaged in a dynamic dialogue with both Tribunals, in
the form of written questions and answers. Indeed, this
afternoon the working group will be meeting with the
Tribunal Presidents, Prosecutors and Registrars to
continue that dialogue.

Over the past months, the initial elements of
agreement have emerged in a way that should enable us
to move forward on residual matters. My delegation is
now preparing a document setting out the options, on
the basis of which discussions in the working group
could continue during the second half of 2008.

Still on the subject of residual functions - and
beyond the issue of trying fugitives not yet captured at
the time of the closure of the Tribunals - I would like,
in my national capacity, to emphasize the importance
of issues related to the protection of victims and
witnesses and to the enforcement of sentences. Those
questions go to the very heart of the basic rights of the
individual. As concerns the enforcement of sentences, 1
would add that the number of agreements concluded
with the Tribunals remains insufficient, and we appeal
to States to consider concluding further such
agreements.

