Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): We would like to
warmly welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Head of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), Ambassador
Adeniji, and thank him for a very comprehensive
briefing in presenting the Secretary-General's report.
We also welcome the Force Commander.

We would like to note that the recent positive
developments, including the progress in the peace
process and the improvement in the security situation
in Sierra Leone, provide a unique opportunity for the
Government of Sierra Leone and the international
community to resolutely pursue their efforts for the
restoration of durable peace and stability in that
country. The progress in the Sierra Leone peace
process testifies to the fact that the two-track approach
of the international community's strategy has started to
yield positive results.

However, there are a number of challenges of
which we should remain aware if we are to maintain
and move forward the momentum achieved. I would
like to briefly address some of these challenges.
First is the importance of the progressive
establishment of security throughout the country. We
are encouraged by UNAMSIL's successful
implementation of the first stages of its concept of
operation, and we look forward to its further important
deployment across the country within the next stages.

Second is the successful implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, which remains a key element in the overall
peace process. The Secretary-General's report outlines
the existing problems in this area, including those of
reintegration, and underlines the need for increased
assistance from the international community. At
today's meeting, we had Mr. Adeniji and members of
the Council clearly speaking about the importance of a
quick and adequate response to the problem of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

The restoration of State authority throughout the
country is yet another critical element of stabilization
in Sierra Leone. While important steps have already
been taken by the Government, with the assistance of
UNAMSIL, to restore State administration and public
services in some parts of the country, there is much to
be done for further extension of State authority, law
and order, promoting reconciliation, ensuring long-
term recovery and rehabilitation.

Success in addressing these challenges is vitally
important for creating an environment conducive to the
holding of free and fair elections, which constitutes a
major goal of the peace process. In the context of the
current electoral preparations by the National Electoral
Commission, we welcome the increased involvement
of the United Nations in support ofthis process.

The Secretary-General's report addresses the
regional dimension of the situation in Sierra Leone,
particularly the conflicts in the Mano River Union and
the issues of the safe return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, which remain the source of grave
concern. The continued subregional political and
humanitarian crisis once again underlines the urgency
of restoring security and stability in the subregion
through the establishment of political dialogue between
the countries of the Mano River Union.

We highly commend the UNAMSIL military and
civilian personnel for their contribution to the progress
achieved so far in Sierra Leone, especially the areas of
establishing security, promoting disarmament and
demobilization, assisting the Government in the
restoration of legitimate authority and law throughout
the country and supporting the spheres of public
information and human rights. There is no area where
UNAMSIL would not play a role. My country is
particularly proud to be among the contributors to this
important peacekeeping mission.

The United Nations and the international
community have invested considerable effort and
resources to see to it that peace and stability prevail.
Today it is absolutely indispensable that the
international community continue its strong support for
the emerging signs of peace and stability in the
country.

