Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): First of all, Madam
President, I Wish to express my appreciation to you for
convening this timely public meeting on Timor-Leste,
as the Council is currently considering the best
available options to address the situation in the country
and the problems underlying it. We listened with great
interest to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ian Martin, and we thank him for his assessment
and his observations. My delegation also welcomes the
diplomatic efforts of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Timor-Leste, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, which are aimed at helping the country out
of its current political and humanitarian crisis.

The Permanent Representative of Austria will
shortly make a statement on behalf of the European

S/l'V.5457

 

Union, and Slovakia fully associates itself with that
statement. I will thus limit myself to the following
additional remarks.

The United Nations has sought to create a viable
nation-State in Timor-Leste since the original United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) was set up in 1999 following the country's
vote for independence.

After many years of suffering, the country was
just beginning to show signs of progress and was
portrayed as a success story for United Nations
peacekeeping and humanitarian activities. Now, in
recent weeks, ethnic and regional grievances and
political rifts have been unravelling much of that
effort. Foreign troops returned to Timor-Leste last
month as the worst violence since the formal
independence four years ago threatened to tip Asia's
youngest nation into chaos, resulting in numerous
deaths and thousands of internally displaced persons.

My Government is very concerned over the
deteriorating situation in Timor-Leste and the resulting
casualties. We call on all sides in Timor-Leste to act in
the interests of the Timorese people, the region and the
international community. We call upon the Government
to undertake intense efforts to surmount the political
and institutional problems, to rectify the underlying
defects and to ensure the protection of civilians, in
cooperation with the United Nations and international
troops.

The peacekeepers are gradually restoring order in
the capital, Dili, consistent with the arrangements
already in place between the Government of Timor-
Leste and the Governments of Australia, Malaysia,
New Zealand and Portugal, whose troops and police
have been deployed to help restore security there.
When the immediate crisis is over, the Timorese
leadership still has to face the problems that underlie
the situation. The challenges that remain are
formidable, but the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste must never be deflected from their efforts
to move towards full-fledged democracy and
sustainable economic and social development.

Timor-Leste's combination of weak governance,
continuing grinding poverty and a fragile democracy
means that it will struggle to function on its own for
years to come. With the upcoming parliamentary and
presidential elections in 2007, the country is rapidly
approaching yet another crucial crossroads in its
history. The elections will be of utmost importance for
Timor-Leste's future stability and democratic
development and must be conducted through
procedures that are fair.

We are therefore convinced of the continuing
need for strong United Nations involvement in
consolidating peace and democracy in Timor-Leste
before the country can function independently. My
delegation is ready to engage constructively in the
deliberations that will take place in the Security
Council on the conditions and design of the future
United Nations mission in Timor-Leste.

