Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the Government of Benin, I would like at the outset
to congratulate you, Madam President, and, through
you, your country on your accession to the presidency
of the Security Council. We wish you every possible
success during your term at the head of this institution.
I also convey my gratitude to the Ambassador of
Mexico, who presided so outstandingly over the
Council's work during the month of June 2010. The
presence in New York for this debate of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of your country, Madam, clearly
demonstrates Nigeria's commitment to peace and
international security, especially on the African
continent. Your country has paid a very heavy price for
peace in Africa, which is a priority of its foreign

policy.
While sovereign responsibilities place the

primary responsibility for the prevention of conflicts
on United Nations Member States, it is equally true
that the eruption of conflict in any country whatsoever
illustrates the failure not only of its political class, but
also of the international community. The thematic
outline that was provided by your delegation to guide
our consideration of this topic appropriately frames
this issue in all its aspects. It raises critical questions
that require responses commensurate with the
challenges facing the African continent.

That outline reintroduces on our agenda the issue
of the establishment of a cohesive conflict prevention
strategy for the entire United Nations. This question
was highlighted by resolution 1625 (2005), which was
presented and negotiated by the African States that
were then members of the Council, on the basis of the
work of the Institute for Peace and Conflict Resolution
of Nigeria.

Such a strategy should be based on the following
main points: State capacity-building aimed at enabling
countries to settle their internal disputes peacefully,
without resort to armed violence; the establishment of
staggered early warning and rapid response mechanisms
that could include the preventive deployment of United
Nations forces; the strengthening of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter - the African
Union provides optimal conditions for such cooperation
in the spirit of partnership for peace; the mobilization
of adequate financial resources for the implementation
of structural and operational preventive measures; and
the strengthening of systemic measures to reduce the
level of violence in the international system.

In terms of internal capacity-building, Benin's
journey on the road to democracy over the past 20 years
has passed through social and economic reforms in
various sectors and the establishment of support
programmes negotiated and implemented in cooperation
with development partners. We should not underestimate
the role played by opposition and mediation institutions,
which have energized our national and local dialogues
and thus contributed to ensuring political and social
stability in the country over the years.

More recently created institutions include the
offices of the Mediator of the Republic and the High
Commissioner for Concerted Governance, which seek
to improve and strengthen national governance, not to
mention the independent reflection commissions.

With respect to the establishment of early
warning and rapid response mechanisms, preventive
diplomacy should be aimed at recognizing crisis and
conflict warning signs, contribute to re-launching
dialogue between stakeholders when dialogue has
broken down or become bogged down, and promote
conciliation or reconciliation in order to strengthen the
national consensus that is so crucial to preserving
lasting peace and stability.

I must here underscore the importance of the
regular reports that are submitted to the Security
Council on the challenges facing some regions of our
continent. The extraordinary monitoring work carried
out by the United Nations Office for West Africa, in
liaison with the Economic Community of West African
States, enables us to keep an eye on critical situations
at the level of individual countries and in the subregion
as a whole. Fortunately, the effectiveness of the United
Nations peacebuilding mechanism very successfully
bridges the institutional gaps in this field. The
usefulness of the catalyst subsidies provided to the
Peacebuilding Fund has been clearly demonstrated.
The international community should increase the
resources available to the Fund by maintaining these
two rapid response channels.

My delegation advocates an increase in the
number of visits by the Secretary-General to countries
in precarious situations, as he represents the collective
conscience of the international community. The
exchange of bilateral visits between countries in
difficult situations and the heads of State or ministers
for foreign affairs of countries sitting on the Security
Council can also promote intensive political dialogue
with their leaders and help to identify the constraints
they are facing, the path to follow and the resources
that can be brought to bear to contribute to an
improvement in their situation.

Given the recent eruption of post-electoral
Violence, special attention must be paid in preventive
diplomacy efforts to guaranteeing the transparency of
elections, remedying the lack of trust in conventional
bodies for settling electoral disputes, increasing the
credibility of the electoral process as a whole as a way
to transfer power, and consolidating the legitimacy of
elected officials in order to avoid situations in which
their democratic process could be blocked and
undermined.

The extremely high costs of popular elections
prevent low-income countries from taking appropriate
precautionary measures. This situation is fraught with a
great many risks for peace and stability in the countries
concerned. The international community should offer
countries in that situation appropriate assistance to
organize credible and peaceful elections.

Manual voter registries, compiled anew for every
election, make the conduct of elections very costly for
low-income countries. The creation of a permanent
electronic voter registry, impervious to partisan
manipulation but easily updated and reusable, could
guarantee transparency. Furthermore, such a permanent
electronic registry, once established, could also provide
a mine of statistical data to promote economic and
social development and balanced land-use planning in
all countries, including in the context of the
Millennium Development Goals, in order to guarantee
to all citizens the benefits of common minimum social
services as a means of combating the various forms of
social exclusion.

Development assistance should be implemented
in such a way as to contribute to the prevention of
conflicts by fully incorporating measures aimed at
tackling their underlying causes. Large-scale youth
unemployment is one such cause, and in this regard
decent work for youth is equal to peace.

Finally, resolution 1625 (2005) calls for a
strategic assessment of the risks of conflicts in
countries showing signs of fragility. In this respect, the
United Nations should fully utilize the synergies
offered through support to regional mechanisms for
conflict prevention. The support of the international
community for the implementation of the
recommendations arising from the African Peer Review
Mechanism in the framework of the New Partnership
for Africa's Development should lead to good results.

