Mr. Aljarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our thanks and
appreciation to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her comprehensive and valuable briefing
on the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/934) on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I would also
like to thank both the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the
Head of the Delegation of the European Union, who
spoke on behalf of the Joint Commission, for their
briefings to the Council.

The agenda item for this meeting is
"Non-proliferation", and I would like to reiterate the
principled position of the State of Kuwait on all issues
relating to nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament.
We condemn the use ofnuclear weapons and all weapons
of mass destruction, anywhere, at any time and by any
party, since any such use constitutes a grave violation of
international law. Peace, security and stability cannot
be established in the world while such weapons exist.
Five years ago, on the basis of on those principles and
fundamental parameters, we welcomed the Security
Council's adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), because
we believe strongly in multilateralism and are fully
committed to all United Nations resolutions, as we
are to efforts to achieve security and stability in the
Middle East, which continues to suffer from unstable
security conditions.

We have read the Secretary-General's eighth
report on the annex B provisions of resolution 2231
(2015), which contains a comprehensive summary of
the implementation of the resolution's nuclear- and
ballistic-missile-related provisions, as well as measures
to strengthen it. We took note of the report on Iran's
implementation of its commitments relating to its
nuclear programme, as verified by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We also noted with
concern the Secretary-General's report on the steps
taken by Iran since July to reduce its compliance
with its nuclear-related commitments under the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. We would like to stress
how important it is for Iran to continue implementing
all its obligations pursuant to the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and its Safeguards Agreement with
the IAEA, as well as to ratify the Additional Protocol
to its Agreement so as to ensure its continued status as
a non-nuclear-weapon State.

Based on the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015),
the Secretary-General's report is not limited to the
nuclear component but also covers the implementation
of controls on activities related to ballistic-missile
technology and the transfer of conventional weapons.
We would like to express our concern about some
elements in the report, including information and
specifications on the origin of the ballistic missiles
and unmanned aerial vehicles used to target Saudi
Arabia and of the weapons seized in international
waters. Although the Secretariat has not yet finished
its investigations, this remains a very serious issue that
poses a threat international peace and security. Based
on our position condemning the use of ballistic missiles
and drones in September to sabotage and attack
Saudi Arabian facilities supplying oil to international
markets, we emphasize our firm position on the need
to maintain the region's security and stability as well as
the safety of its peoples. We further stress the need to
refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of States
and to respect their sovereignty, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law as well as the principles of good-neighbourliness,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, the non-use or
threat of use of force, and the rejection of all forms
of sectarianism.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reiterates once
again how important it is to ensure that the Security
Council continues to uphold its responsibilities in
pursuing the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
in a comprehensive manner, in order to ensure that Iran
and other States comply with their obligations not only
with regard to nuclear non-proliferation but also in
other areas covered by the resolution.

