Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are very pleased to see you presiding
over the Council today, Sir. We are grateful to Kuwait
for convening today's meeting and for initiating
presidential statement, on cooperation with the League
of Arab States, which we support. We consider it
essential to strengthen our cooperation with the League,
considering the continued potential for conflict in the
Middle East. We believe that just as there should be
African solutions to African problems, there must be
Arab solutions to Arab problems. We thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and Mr. Ahmed Aboul
Gheit, the Secretary-General of the League, for their
detailed briefings. We share many of the views they
expressed. For our part, we would like to focus on the
following points.

Our colleagues around this table can affirm that the
Security Council attaches a high priority to the issues
of the Middle East and North Africa, almost as much
as to those of the African continent as a whole. That is
not accidental. The region is going through a difficult,
tense period that began with some ill-considered steps
aimed at interfering in the affairs of sovereign States of
the region.

There are ongoing active conflicts in Syria, Libya
and Yemen. We are seeing potential for an escalation
of the protests in the Sudan. There is still much to be
done to strengthen stability in Iraq. The problem of
Western Sahara is awaiting resolution. The Israeli-
Palestinian settlement is at the epicentre of this
turbulence, and its international legal framework has
recently been eroded by the unilateral steps taken by
key players in the Middle East peace process. Terrorism
and extremism continue to escalate, and social and
economic problems are becoming more acute. All of
that undoubtedly increases the relevance of the League
of Arab States as a mechanism for multilateral dialogue
and the coordination of the collective efforts of regional
stakeholders, as well as for limiting destructive outside
interference in the region's affairs.

We want to see a strong, united and effective
League of Arab States that can raise the profile of
the Arab world in preventing conflicts, overcoming
deadlocked situations and providing a collective rebuff
to the challenges facing the region that I have just
described. We must unite in order to achieve one of
the most important goals facing us right now, which
is launching a regional dialogue aimed at establishing
a security architecture in the Persian Gulf, where we
believe tensions are being artificially ratcheted up with
regard to Iran. There is a Russian concept for this issue
whose scope we believe could eventually be expanded
to cover the entire region of the Middle East and
North Africa and serve as a basis for this dialogue. We
know that Secretary-General Guterres has frequently
expressed similar ideas.

We support developing the cooperation between
the League of Arab States and the United Nations
to its full potential. We would therefore like to see a
regular synchronization of watches between our two
organizations on current regional issues that are on the
Security Council's agenda, as well as the exchange of
experiences in resolving crises and other problems that
are obstacles to the maintenance of international and
regional peace and security. In our View, cooperation
between the Security Council and the League can
help to develop balanced international approaches to
addressing Arab problems, as well as new mechanisms
for cooperation in settling regional crises. Specific
areas for such cooperation could include anti-crisis
mediation efforts; aligning positions on serious
conflict situations, particularly in Syria, including
specific measures to assist post-conflict recovery in the
Syrian Arab Republic; working together to resolve the
Palestinian question on an internationally recognized
legal basis; humanitarian activity; tackling the problem
of sustainable development in the Arab world and
developing a strategy capable of countering new and
emerging challenges in the region, including the growth
of terrorism and illicit cross-border migration.

Russia will continue strengthening its partnership
with the League on a mutually beneficial basis. We
hold regular consultations on current international and
regional issues. The fifth ministerial session of the
Russian-Arab Cooperation Forum, held in Moscow on
16 April, and its outcomes - an action plan for the period
from 2019 to 2021 and ajoint communique - reaffirmed
our converging positions on a broad spectrum ofissues,
including the Israeli-Palestinian settlement, Syria, Iraq,
Libya, Yemen, the Sudan, Somalia, counter-terrorism,
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East and dialogue among civilizations.

Speaking of dialogue among civilizations, I should
not omit to mention the situation of the Christians and
other religious and ethnic minorities who have fallen
victim to destabilization and have become hostages
to extremist rhetoric throughout the Middle East and
North Africa. In our view the League could play a
positive role in helping to spread a culture of interfaith
and inter-ethnic peace, and we are ready to share our
experience in that area.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore that
Russia will remain an honest and unbiased partner that
our Arab friends can depend on.

