The Deputy Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I am especially pleased to welcome the new
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Argentine Republic on
his first visit to the United Nations.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Argentina for the invaluable and constant support it has
given to the Organization. I would particularly like to
express my deep appreciation for the important
contributions it has made to peacekeeping operations
throughout the world. Today's initiative illustrates the fact
that Argentina continues to be as committed as ever to
supporting our work in the world's most dangerous
regions.

(spoke in English)

I want to thank you, Mr. President, and your
country for bringing us together to discuss a vital issue
that is often overlooked: the protection of United Nations
and associated personnel. There could be no finer way to
use your presidency than to focus attention on those brave
men and women who risk their lives bringing peace to the
world and relief to the victims of conflict. It is not just
United Nations personnel, but the international community
as a whole that stands to benefit from this initiative and
from the stronger sense of urgency that I hope it will
generate. For whenever a Blue Helmet, a relief worker or
a local interpreter falls victim to hatred and violence, their
families, friends and colleagues are not alone in mourning
their loss. It is felt also by those who depend on their
help: sick and hungry children, refugees and displaced
persons and civilians threatened by armed conflicts.

We are faced with a dramatic increase in the
number of killings, assaults and kidnappings of United
Nations staff since the early 1990s; and I might add that
our colleagues from the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) and our non-governmental-organization
partners in the field have suffered in equal measure. We
cannot just wring our hands and go on with our business.
Nor do we have the option of simply walking away from
dangerous situations. Often the United Nations has to stay
because it represents the last ray of hope for suffering
populations. If we leave, there may be no one else to take
our place. We cannot, therefore, let threats intimidate us,
and we cannot let violence drive us out. We have too
great a responsibility towards the people we promised to
help.

But this in no way reduces our responsibility
towards those who deliver that help in high-risk

 

environments. The least we can do is to make sure that they
are not exposed to unnecessary danger. Let me, at this
point, clarify one very important point. When I speak of
United Nations personnel, I mean not only military and
police staff, but also the thousands of civilians who serve
in peacekeeping, peacemaking and humanitarian missions;
and not only international staff, but also the locally
recruited men and women without whom we simply could
not fulfil the mandates that the Member States give us. Our
responsibility extends to them all.

I am grateful to the President for inviting
Ms. Catherine Bertini, Executive Director of the World
Food Programme (WFP), and the representative of the
ICRC, to join us today. They are very well placed to brief
the Council on the special difficulties encountered by
humanitarian workers in the hostile environments where
they now most often serve.

When I say "we" are responsible, that includes us in
the Secretariat, and it also includes you, the Member States.
The people who venture into peril are our colleagues, but
they are also your citizens. We in the Secretariat firmly
believe there is much we ourselves can do to better
safeguard the security of our United Nations colleagues. In
recent months I have held consultations with the major
United Nations operational agencies working in conflict
situations, and we are considering a number of concrete
steps to improve our security procedure.

The first is to strengthen the capacity of the Office
of the United Nations Security Coordinator (UNSECOORD)
to perform its responsibilities as overall security manager
of the United Nations system. This is not, by any standard,
a small task. To do a good job, UNSECOORD needs to be
able not only to carry out security assessment missions,
training and investigations. It should also be able, for
instance, to send short-term security personnel to the field
in crisis situations or provide stress counselling. It should
also have at its disposal adequate computer programmes to
enhance its management capacity. To meet all these
requirements, we need a larger team with adequate
resources, headed by an experienced individual able to
make the tough decisions the job entails.

That is why we welcomed the recent resolution in
which the General Assembly recognized the need to
strengthen the Office of the United Nations Security
Coordinator and the need for a full-time Security
Coordinator. I am pleased to inform the Council that the
Secretary-General intends to act on this resolution by
appointing a full-time Security Coordinator as soon as
possible.

A second goal is to ensure that field missions are
adequately staffed with security professionals and
adequately provided with essential equipment, such as
radios, satellite telephones, flak jackets and so on. An
urgent review has been initiated to establish the exact
requirements, country by country.

A third and essential objective is to place much
greater emphasis on security training. Troops normally
receive extensive security training; a constant awareness
of potential danger is instilled in them. But many
non-military staff - police officers, relief workers,
human rights observers and others - serve in conditions
that are just as difficult. They must become as security-
conscious as their military colleagues and be thoroughly
prepared to cope with the dangers they may face.

One way this could be done could be to establish
training centres where all international staff, whatever the
mandate they are to fulfil, would receive intensive
security training before being deployed. Member States
may also wish to consider inviting non-military staff to
attend the security segment of their training programmes
for peacekeepers. Your country, Sir, has an excellent
programme in this respect and, during a recent training
session for United Nations volunteers, a one-day
orientation was organized for them by your Government.

Another good example has been that of the United
Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) and the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). A pre-deployment base of operations was
established outside the immediate mission area, in
Darwin, Australia, to train security and other staff before
deployment to East Timor.

Finally, we want to ensure much better
coordination of security arrangements among the many
United Nations actors often present in one location, as
well as with other humanitarian organizations which
might be present. Better coordination has been a key part
of our reform efforts in other areas. In this case, it could
literally be a question of life or death. Available
information should be shared more widely and more
systemically; clear procedures should be in place and
respected; and security equipment should be pooled when
feasible.

 

To achieve all this, the Secretariat needs the support
of the Member States on several levels.

First of all, we need all to recognize that good
security costs money. Personnel costs money. Equipment
costs money. Resources have to be sufficient and they have
to be predictable. At present, they are not. The financing of
security management and training remains piecemeal -
with funds coming from a great many different sources -
and, I am afraid it say, it also remains inadequate. One
innovation we have introduced this year is that most Inter-
Agency Consolidated Appeals launched for 2000 include
requests from humanitarian agencies to cover country-
specific security requirements. I sincerely hope these
appeals will be heard.

Another source of financing has been the Trust Fund
for Security of personnel of the United Nations, established
in the summer of 1998. Unfortunately, the level of
contributions so far has been frankly disappointing.
Contributions received amount to a little more than
$1.2 million. This has not even allowed us to provide
training for those assigned to the 20 most precarious
countries and regions. I take this opportunity to thank the
Governments of Finland, Japan, Monaco, Norway and
Senegal for their contributions to the Fund so far and I
appeal to all Member States to demonstrate their
commitment to the security of personnel by contributing as
generously as they can.

As I have said, resources for security must not only
be increased; they must also be more predictable. In the
longer run, we must move away from the ad hoc approach
we have been taking. There should be nothing discretionary
about financing staff security. It is a core responsibility of
Member States and budgetary arrangements should reflect
this. Together, we must start exploring ways in which this
could be achieved.

But there is much more Member States can do. Let
me suggest a series of concrete actions they could take
directly.

First, those who have not yet done so can sign and
ratify the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel, which finally entered into force
last year, but as yet has only 29 States parties. Sadly, this
is the exact same number I quoted when I addressed the
General Assembly on the same subject four months ago.

Secondly, the Convention currently covers United
Nations and associated personnel providing support to a
United Nations operation authorized by the Security
Council or the General Assembly. Member States may
wish to consider extending its scope to cover categories
of personnel who at present fall outside the Convention's
protection regime.

Thirdly, Member States should take steps to speed
up ratification of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court, which defines intentional attacks on personnel
involved in humanitarian assistance and peacekeeping
operations as war crimes.
And fourthly, Member States should assist in
investigating and bringing to justice those who have
harmed or murdered people serving the United Nations
and, indeed, other organizations working to foster peace
or bring relief in conflict areas. Since January 1992, 184
staff members have lost their lives in the service of the
United Nations. Of these, 98 were murdered. And yet, to
date, only two perpetrators have been brought to justice
and convicted. What does this tell the world? That it is all
right to kill United Nations personnel? That those who do
so are guaranteed impunity? I trust not. But that is, in
effect, the impression we will give until Governments
take the necessary measures to end impunity.

For example, this Council has recently received
reports identifying those allegedly responsible for the
shooting down of two United Nations planes in Angola in
December 1998 and January 1999, in which a total of 23
people were killed. In this case, as in the many others still
unresolved, it is my sincere hope that Member States will
do all they can to ensure that a serious investigation is
completed and that the culprits are brought to justice. This
Council itself has a special responsibility to see that
justice is done when our colleagues are the victims of
deliberate acts of violence, and it has a crucial role to
play in other respects, too.

The mandates given to United Nations operations
have an enormous impact upon the security of our
personnel in the field. That is why I urge Council
members to bear in mind two issues when they formulate
those mandates. First, the size and configuration of the
force must be commensurate with the risk it is likely to
face. If it is not, the parties will be tempted to test its
will, which will in turn endanger the lives of our
personnel. Secondly, mandates should not create
unrealistic expectations among the local population. Too
often, United Nations personnel become the targets of
desperate people's anger and frustrations when it turns out
they cannot fulfil those expectations.

 

I believe I have clearly expressed my conviction that
we must change the way we think about the security of
United Nations personnel. Security is not a luxury. It is not
a perk. It is not a favour to be granted. Security is
something we owe the troops and civilians who volunteer
to serve in faraway places under the most challenging of
circumstances and to the local staff who help us fulfil our
mandates. Security is also indispensable to the success of
our work and that of the other organizations that collaborate
with us in the field. It is, in a word, part and parcel of any
peacekeeping, humanitarian or other mission we undertake
anywhere in the world. We must stop acting as if it were
anything less than that.

