Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his
presentation of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/284) on the situation in Iraq and, as he is
completing his post as the Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), to pay tribute to
him for his valuable contribution to the settlement of
the Iraq issue. I also thank the representative of Iraq for
his statement.

Not long ago, we congratulated the Iraqi people
and Government for the achievements made in the
democratization process, in particular the successful
provincial elections and the progressive recovery of
control of their country and destiny. Today, we
encourage the Iraqi Government, whatever difficulties
remain, to persevere in its efforts to preserve that
progress, in particular in national reconstruction and in
the strengthening of its authority throughout its
territory.

In that regard, we are pleased to note that the
Iraqis are sincerely committed to the national
reconciliation process, which, as we know, is the
precondition for the success of all other actions, in
particular the settlement of disputes over internal
boundaries, the sharing of natural resources and the
issue of federalism.

We also welcome the successful elections in the
governorates and their fine organization by the
Independent High Electoral Commission. We hope that
the electoral preparations coming in 2009 and 2010
will, like previous ones, be crowned with success.

However, Iraq continues to face numerous
challenges. For that reason, good coordination and
cooperation among UNAMI, the multinational force
and the Iraqi Security Forces are essential to ensure the
stability of the country. However, it is primarily up to
the Iraqis themselves to work towards strengthening
peace and ensuring a harmonious development of their
country.

Different factors point to that legitimate
aspiration for peace, hence the recent analytical reports
on the disputes over the internal boundaries in north
Iraq and the technical and logical assistance provided
to the relevant parliamentary committee in order to
work out a consensus on the status of Kirkuk.
Furthermore, we hope that the lessons learned by the
members of the committee from the experience of
Northern Ireland will contribute to better
understanding and resolving the issues of power-
sharing, political reform and reform of the province's
constitutional status.

The successful unfolding of the national
development strategy is also a very encouraging
indication of efforts for Iraq's recovery, and, in that
context, no one doubts that the adoption in February
2009 in Naples of a new approach towards
international assistance will bolster that strategy, as
will the decisions of the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes to establish a United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for Iraq from
2011 to 2014 and the planned future review of the Iraq
Compact with the help of the Special Adviser,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari.

In the area of human rights, we welcome the
initiatives taken by the United Nations and the Iraqi
Government to promote gender equality and parity and
to ensure implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Finally, it seems essential to us to stress that
strengthening regional cooperation remains an
important element in the post-conflict strategy in Iraq.
While congratulating the regional actors for their
foresight, we are grateful to UNAMI and the Special
Representative for the efforts made to strengthen
confidence and cooperation among the countries of the
region.

Peace and stability in Iraq are essential to calm in
the region and the world as a whole. No effort must
thus be spared so that lasting security is quickly
restored in that country.
