The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.

Let me begin by saying that the number of speakers
who have spoken or will speak this evening is a genuine
testimony to the international community's attention to
the situation in Angola and its developments.

I take this opportunity to address my heartfelt thanks
to the Secretary-General and his special representative,
Mr. Blondin Beye, whose unwavering commitment and
diplomatic skills have enabled him to play a crucial and
successful role. The troika of observers of the peace
process, the countries contributing troops to the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) and
the countries of the region have all joined in the search
for a political settlement in Angola. I wish also to pay
tribute to the Permanent Representative of Angola,
Ambassador Afonso van Dunem "Mbinda", who from
New York has acted untiringly for the cause of peace and
national reconciliation in his country.

 

As the Deputy Foreign Minister of Italy, Senator Rino
Serri, observed on his very recent mission to Angola, the
peace process has indeed reached a turning point. The
implementation of the military dimension of the Lusaka
Protocol is nearing completion. Today, UNITA issued a
formal declaration confirming the termination of the
quartering of its troops - except for a limited number of
policemen, who will soon also be quartered - and the
handing over of its weapons to the United Nations.

The next step is the integration of selected UNITA
troops into the Angolan Armed Forces. We welcome the
acceleration of this very delicate operation. Today, the
Luanda Government has taken another major step by
announcing the incorporation into the Angolan Armed
Forces of the nine UNITA generals residing in Luanda, a
decision widely expected by the international community.

Now, priority is shifting towards the demobilization
and social reintegration of combatants. I would like to
recall here that, to this end, my Government has provided
a financial contribution of approximately $4 million to the
Humanitarian Assistance Coordination Unit for Angola.
Italian instructors also participate in training the demining
teams that will fight what is not only a scourge of war, but
a continuous threat to the lives of innocent people,
including children, and to the reconstruction of Angola for
years to come.

The Angolan parties should now focus on the speedy
implementation of the political aspects of the Lusaka
Protocol. The draft resolution before the Council clearly
outlines what needs to be done. The steps to be taken have
so far been postponed, pending a settlement of the military
issues. Now there can be no more procrastination and they
have to be put into effect quickly.

The Italian Government fully supports the paragraphs
of the draft resolution that provide for the drawdown of the
military units of UNAVEM. III on the basis of the proposal
made by the Secretary-General. They strike a delicate
balance between the need to ensure the successful
conclusion of the peace process and to avoid prolonging
excessively this most expensive peacekeeping operation.

I conclude by recalling the concern of the Italian
Government and people at the hardship endured by the
innocent Angolan civilians throughout this endless civil
war. In the past five years, Italy has provided
approximately $110 million in assistance. Now that the
prospects for peace are brighter, we will remain steadfast in
our commitment.

For all these reasons, I will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before the Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/ 1996/ 1026.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1087 (1996).

The Council has thus concluded its voting procedure
and shall hear further statements under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure.

The next speaker is the Permanent Representative of
Zimbabwe. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.


