We are grateful to Mr. Khan for his detailed report (see S/2020/1107) and his professionalism in carrying out the work of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and we reiterate our strong support for his mandate pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017). I take this opportunity to wish him every success in his future undertakings. First of all, we welcome the significant progress made to date and the highly creative way in which the Team has adapted its investigatory work in response to the restrictions put in place and the work disruptions in the wake of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We greatly appreciate their efforts in undertaking their challenging task. We acknowledge the fact that the Team has maintained harmonious cooperation with the authorities of Iraq, the Kurdistan Region and the local communities, which has been key to achieving the current results. In that regard, we welcome the agreement between the Investigative Team and the Supreme Judicial Council of Iraq to provide technical assistance and training to investigating judges so as to facilitate domestic legal proceedings. We hope that this spirit of collaboration will be strengthened over time. We also underscore the strong commitment of the Iraqi Government to combating terrorism and facilitating processes that ensure accountability for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide committed by the Islamic State on its territory, as well as the willingness shown by other States to conduct prosecutions, in particular European States. Accordingly, we welcome the progress made on the draft legislation establishing the legal basis for the prosecution of members of the Islamic State for international crimes, which is an important first step towards accountability. We hope that the needs and concerns of the victims will be addressed via a thorough process of consultation with the various communities of survivors, as we understand that their participation in the judicial process cannot be omitted. With regard to the initial priorities - Sinjar, Mosul and Tikrit - we welcome the progress made in the excavations, evidence collection and approaches by the Team to the various survivor communities and their religious representatives. We therefore encourage the Team to continue its efforts, while demonstrating full respect for religious norms, customs and practices. Developments in new priority areas are also satisfactory, including the strategy of paying greater attention to cases of sexual and gender-based violence and crimes against children perpetrated in Christian communities. We would like to highlight the technical and financial cooperation, as well as the new tools provided by some States and organizations, with a view to directing and expanding the new investigation units. Similarly, we would like to highlight the active collaboration between the Sexual and Gender-Based Crimes and Crimes against Children Unit and the victims, which has led to the identification of the alleged perpetrators of such crimes. We deem those to be important steps in investigations. In that regard, we view the development of a digital platform to be an excellent initiative, as it will allow victims and witnesses to provide information and documentation related to crimes and their identity to be protected. In conclusion, in the short time since the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant was established and began its investigations, we acknowledge the fact that considerable efforts have been made, which have allowed it to make significant progress in fulfilling its mandate. These joint efforts must not be diminished, as they ensure that crimes perpetrated by the Islamic State do not go unpunished, thereby answering the call for justice of survivors and the relatives of deceased victims, as well as the call of an entire population longing for peace.
