Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I would like to join
previous speakers in commending the Secretary-General's
report and the update given by Mr. Annabi, which have
provided us with a clear and objective view of the situation
in the areas of responsibility of the expanded United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). The analysis
presents a broad panorama of both successes and failures
on the road to peace in Sierra Leone. We are also thankful
to Ambassador Greenstock for the very important firsthand
information he has provided us.
There has been encouraging progress in the
establishment and functioning of several implementation
organs under the terms of the Lorne Agreement. We
welcome the measures taken to this end by the parties
concerned, and we call upon them to demonstrate their
readiness to continue constructive and forward-looking
dialogue, bearing in mind that the prospects for stability in
the country will depend on their firm determination and
political will.

While some progress has been made, the peace
process in Sierra Leone continues to face serious
challenges. The security situation, as indicated in the
Secretary-General's report, remains tense and precarious.
The reports of obstruction of the peacekeeping operation -
including arms seizures, refusal to allow UNAMSIL to
deploy, detainment of peacekeepers and exchange of fire -
give rise to the gravest concerns.

The lack of compliance with the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme
constitutes yet another serious source of concern. It is
imperative that all aspects of the DDR mechanism be
implemented in an effective and timely manner through
the National Commission on Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration, with the assistance of
UNAMSIL.

The humanitarian and human security challenges in
Sierra Leone were addressed previously by the members
of the Security Council, and the Council issued a strong
and uncompromising response. We reiterate our firm
judgment that those responsible for atrocities should be
held accountable for their actions as soon as possible.

We fully associate ourselves with the point made by
the Secretary-General in his report that the main task for
the United Nations in Sierra Leone remains the
establishment of a credible peacekeeping presence in the
country, with the aim of ensuring the security conditions
for the advancement of the peace process. We commend
the tireless efforts of the United Nations peacekeeping
personnel in Sierra Leone, and in particular of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, in performing
their crucial tasks, and we call upon the Sierra Leonean
parties to maintain a cooperative and credible association
with UNAMSIL.

The signing of the Peace Agreement between the
Government of Sierra Leone and rebel forces in July 1999
had seemed to infuse new life into the prospects for a
lasting settlement of the brutal eight-year civil war in that
country. With the establishment and eventual expansion
of the United Nations peacekeeping Mission in Sierra
Leone, the international community demonstrated its
commitment to ensuring that these hopes would not
founder.

We must make clear to the leaders of the Sierra
Leonean parties that we expect concrete and urgent action
confirming their non-confrontational and constructive
approach to the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
We must call upon them to honour the agreed promises
which have been made, above all to their own people.

In conclusion, we fully support the proposal by the
United Kingdom to issue a statement to the press in this
regard.

