Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): In August, many
of us on the Council had an opportunity to visit the
memorial at Schiphol International Airport dedicated to
the victims of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. No one
can forget the haunting, powerful emotions expressed
of love, loss and longing for those who perished, as
Under-Secretary-General Feltman said, in somebody
else's war. I would like to take this opportunity to once
again express my country's heartfelt condolences to
the families in the Netherlands, Malaysia, Australia,
Indonesia, the United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium,
the Philippines, New Zealand and Canada who lost
their loved ones in the downing of MH-17. As the Prime
Minister of the Netherlands said,

"we owe it to the victims' next of kin to do
everything in our power to achieve clarity about
the circumstances of this tragedy, and to bring
those responsible to justice".

Resolution 2166 (2014), adopted by the Council
in response to the tragedy, demands a full, thorough
and independent international investigation. It also
demands that those responsible for the incident be
held to account. We must ensure that the resolution is
fully implemented. There can be no impunity for the
perpetrators of this horrific crime.

Lithuania welcomes the preliminary findings of
the independent investigation under the leadership of
the Dutch Safety Board, with the participation of a
dozen countries and agencies. The International Civil
Aviation Organization was consulted to ensure that
the investigation strictly complied with international
standards and practices. As we know, the purpose of
the investigation is to establish the facts, with the goal
of ensuring the prevention of such accidents in future.
It was not meant to assign blame or liability to any
party, and it is still ongoing. We fully agree that any
attempt to interfere with, influence or put pressure
on the investigation are inappropriate and totally
unacceptable. The international experts must be able
to carry out their work free of political pressures or
attempts to sway the results of the investigation.

We find it incomprehensible that there should be
claims of a lack of transparency or of selectivity and
bias in the investigation. The democratically elected
Governments of the countries affected have a special
responsibility to their citizens and the victims' families
to establish the truth. We have full confidence in their
assessment of the investigation and their determination
to proceed until justice is done. The Foreign Minister
of the Netherlands and the representative of Australia
could not have been clearer on this matter.

We reiterate our concern about the lack of access
to the crash site, which is in the hands of pro-Russian
insurgents. Time is running out. These illegal armed
groups bear full responsibility for the successful
completion of this investigation, and for providing
full, unhindered, immediate access to the evidence and
remains that are still in the field.

While Russia is trying to cast doubt on the integrity
of the investigation, the creeping invasion of Ukraine
continues. Nearly 400 incidents of violation by the
insurgents of the ceasefire regime have been registered
since it came into effect. How could investigators
return to the site? Reports of lawlessness, extrajudicial
executions and systematic human rights violations in
the rebel-held areas abound. Russian aid convoys come
and go as they please across a sovereign country's
borders. We have become so inured to such violations of
Ukraine's borders, sovereignty and territorial integrity
that they barely make it into the news. Russian soldiers
fight against Ukraine on Ukraine's soil, while those who
investigate their deaths are attacked and intimidated.
Their mothers deny the truth about the circumstances
of their death.
The situation of Crimean Tartars, for whom Crimea
is the only place they can call their homeland, continues
to deteriorate. They are being increasingly prosecuted,
their homes raided, documents seized, their leaders
banned from returning home, their Mejlis impounded,
offices closed down, property confiscated. While
Ukraine's Government is offering amnesty to the rebels
and extensive autonomy to its eastern regions, self-
proclaimed leaders of the illegal armed groups insist on
fighting to the end.

Those are only some of the inconvenient truths that
should be gleaned through the smokescreen of Russia's
concerns about the investigation.

An undeclared war against the sovereign State of
Ukraine is at the root of the tragedy of Flight MH-17.
The ultimate responsibility for the tragic loss of
nearly 300 passenger lives as well as for the massive
destruction, death and displacement of the population
in eastern Ukraine lies with those who, driven by the
dangerous ambition to redraw the borders of modern
Europe, continue to fuel that war in spite ofthe ceasefire
and the various agreements achieved.

The people of Ukraine, whose unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity are non-negotiable, have the
right to determine their future without any foreign
interference. The people of Ukraine have made their
choice, and Russia's continued aggression will only
reinforce that choice.

