The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.

Currently, the overall political situation in Central
Africa is stable. Economic development has achieved
results and countries of the region are continuing with
the integration process. China finds that gratifying.

We note, at the same time, that efforts to achieve
lasting peace and sustainable development in Central
Africa still face many challenges, with the region's
weak economic foundation and rampant transnational
organized crime, which seriously undermine social
stability. In particular, the Libyan crisis caused the
proliferation of arms in the Sahel region as a result
of arms smuggling, which threatens the peace and
security of some countries in the region. China is very
concerned about that.

China hopes that the international community
will pay more attention to central Africa and provide
effective help. We are willing to continue to play an
active and constructive role in that regard.

China strongly condemns the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA,) which continues to move around in
many countries, causing instability and damage. We
are seriously concerned by the humanitarian problems
caused by LRA activities. We support the countries of
the region in their efforts to combat the LRA, welcome
the relevant African Union cooperation initiative and
appreciate the regional strategy formulated by the
United Nations to combat the LRA. We hope that various
actors in the international community will enhance
communication, coordinate action and guarantee the
provision of sufficient resources to ensure the effective
implementation of both the initiative and the strategy.

China appreciates the efforts made by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
to maintain regional peace and security in that area and
will continue to support the work of UNOCA and the
Special Representative Moussa.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Council has before it the text of a draft
presidential statement on behalf of the Council on the
subject oftoday's meeting. I thank the Council members
for their valuable contributions to the draft statement.

In accordance with understanding reached among
the members of the Council, I shall take it that the
members of the Security Council agree to the statement,
which will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/18.

It is so decided.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.

