Ms. Arale: I thank you, Madam President, for
the invitation to provide an update on the situation
of women and girls. My name is Amina Arale. I am a
young human rights defender and peace advocate. I was
born and raised in Somalia, and I have witnessed human
right violations in my country for 30 years. I join my
voice with those of my fellow human rights defenders
who have tirelessly fought for peace and justice in my
country and who have lost their lives or loved ones in
the process.

Today I speak in my capacity as the Executive
Director of the Somali Women Development Centre.
My organization strives to combat gender-based
violence against women and girls by enhancing their
participation in all spheres of public life. The Somali
Women Development Center established the first free
hotlines for victims of sexual and gender-based violence
and provides medical, psychosocial, material and
legal support, in addition to safe spaces for survivors
through one-stop centres. My organization is also one
of the largest providers of legal aid and access to justice
programmes in many parts of Somalia. We support

thousands of survivors of gender-based Violence
every year.

My statement today will address four key points:
the impact of the conflict on women and girls in
Somalia, the challenges related to access to justice,
women's participation in the peace and security sector
and women's meaningful participation in economic and
political life.

The culture of violence bred by 30 years of war
and political instability has devastated Somali society,
from State institutions to ordinary households. Somalia
is today deeply unequal, and gender discrimination
affects the majority of women across social and
economic status. Somalia ranks at 0.77 on the Gender
Inequality Index, according to which 1 represents
complete inequality. Sexual and gender-based violence
is persistent and shrouded in silence. Minority groups,
for example, remain quiet on how it affects their
communities, in order to avoid stigmatization and
social exclusion.

We welcome some of the concrete steps taken by
the Government to address sexual and gender-based
violence, including the drafting of the sexual offences
bill and efforts to hold perpetrators to account. The
consultative process surrounding the drafting of the bill,
which included input from civil society, was a positive
example of inclusive policymaking that is responsive
to the needs of survivors of, and organizations working
on, sexual and gender-based Violence.

However, much remains that must be urgently done,
including the implementation of the sexual offences
bill. To date, Somalia has not signed, adopted or
implemented the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women. The Somali
Government committed to developing a national action
plan in line with resolution 1325 (2000) but has yet
to do so. The Security Council must urge the Federal
Government of Somalia to ratify and implement all
regional and international legislation to protect the
rights of women and girls and ensure that all national
legislation, including the sexual offences bill and
the female genital mutilation bill, meet international
standards and are rigorously enacted and implemented.
The Somali Government must also accelerate the
establishment of the national human rights commission
and ensure respect for international human rights laws.

The Federal Government of Somalia and the
regional authorities must also ensure that impunity will
not be tolerated and that all reported cases of sexual
and gender-based violence, including those against
security personnel, are swiftly investigated, as well
as respect the rights, safety, and privacy of survivors
in any process. The Government should support the
creation of specialized courts for addressing cases of
sexual and gender-based violence against women and
girls and juvenile courts for children.

It is critical that the Government undertake
efforts to sensitize various stakeholders, including
religious and traditional leaders, local authorities, law
enforcement and the judiciary, to sexual and gender-
based violence. Talking about sexual and gender-based
violence is the first step towards eliminating it.

In the fragile context of Somalia, women's
access to justice is especially challenging owing to
discriminatory laws and the lack of gender-responsive
programmes. Women are therefore left with rights in
name, but without any actual remedies, while men
remain the providers of justice.

The participation of women in the judiciary and the
legal profession has also met with resistance in Somalia.
Despite many years of advocacy, there are few female
prosecutors and no femalejudges in the country. For 19
years, my organization has been working on increasing
women's participation in the justice sector. We have
found that women's inclusion in that sector not only
improves justice for women, but for society as a whole.

The inclusion of women as judges, prosecutors,
lawyers and court officials ensures that the judiciary
is more representative of Somali society and that it is
better able to respond to the needs of diverse groups,
including women. Access to justice must be about more
than prosecuting crimes; it must also empower women
and transform underlying gender inequalities that
render women vulnerable to Violence.

Women have actively contributed to peace and
ending the civil war in Somalia. However, 14 of the
peace agreements that have been reached over the past
three decades have failed owing to the exclusion of
women. The most recent peace agreement, in 2000, was
signed after women were included. Yet their role as key
contributors to peace remains largely unrecognized.
The Somali Government has to date also failed to
implement the gender provisions in peace, security and
State-building agreements.

The Government must ensure that women's rights
are central to peace and security decisions at all levels.
In order to achieve that goal, we need to address all
barriers and protection risks that limit women's full
participation in building peace in Somalia. Women
make up 11 per cent ofthe police force, making Somalia
the country with the third-highest number of female
officers in Africa. However, only one female brigadier
general is in a top decision-making role in the police
force. Therefore, the Government must do more to
ensure that women are not only reflected in the ranks,
but also in senior roles.

Somali women have been excluded from the
negotiating table, decision-making and leadership roles,
and in the economy and politics, despite the fact that
women are the main breadwinners in about 80 per cent
of Somali households today. Politically active women
also face retaliation to discourage them from engaging
in future activities. The Security Council should urge
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia to
work with the Government to develop a mechanism
to protect aspiring women and provide updates on
progress made in engaging with women's civil society
in all activities.

The Council must also explicitly call on the
Government of Somalia to protect the rights of women
and all human rights defenders. It was the result of the
advocacy of local and international women's groups
that a 30 per cent quota for women was included in the
Garowe Principles, although it was not mentioned in the
peace road maps or bylaws of the country. The Security
Council must now call on the Somali Government and
State authorities to ensure that a quota of a minimum
of 30 per cent for women is enshrined in the Federal
Constitution and in the electoral laws, which are
currently under review.

A 30 per cent quota for women must be secured
in the upcoming 2020 elections, which will offer a
historic opportunity for women to participate in the
first universal suffrage elections that the country has
held in 50 years. Somali women and girls deserve the
same rights, opportunities and protection in all spheres
of life as Somali men and boys.

