Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): Ijoin other speakers in
commending the President for convening this important
debate.

The Sri Lanka delegation associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Finding a just and durable solution to the
situation in the Middle East has been a priority for
the international community since 1948. As long as
the question of Palestine continues to be unresolved,
the Middle East will never achieve the peace desired.
A just and lasting solution to the question of Palestine
and an end to the suffering of the Palestinian people
can be achieved only through negotiations and a
political process that delivers real results and hope. The
international community has repeatedly encouraged
concrete, credible steps, including a freeze on illegal
settlement building, so as to jump-start meaningful
negotiations. The parties must refrain from unilateral
measures, which undermine the peace in the region.
The ongoing settlement activities, which are illegal
under international humanitarian law, need to end at
the earliest, which would enable a sustainable peace.
All sides should refrain from confrontational actions,
which lead to a spiral of violence. The parties should
build upon existing agreements, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

The blockade of the Gaza Strip is another obstacle
to the peace process. Those restrictions need to be
lifted within the framework of resolution 1860 (2009).
That would contribute significantly to the economic
advancement of Gaza and the well-being of the people.
We note with concern that the United Nations is hard-
pressed to keep the vast majority of the people of Gaza
supplied with the minimum necessities. More than
one year after the widespread destruction in Gaza
last year, thousands of families continue to live in
their damaged homes, with winter approaching. As of
August 2015, only one third of the $4 billion pledged by
the international community in Cairo in October 2014
has been disbursed. Non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) have noted that up to 100,000 Palestinians
remain displaced and live in precarious conditions,
struggling to gain access to basic services such as
electricity, water, sanitation and medical services.

We also strongly support the work of the United
Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, which play key roles in serving Palestinians
in the areas of their operations. Those areas include
Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. Recently, UNRWA experienced a financial crisis
that nearly affected the operations of hundreds of
schools run by the Agency. It is critical to avoid such
situations in the future, as they aggravate the already
difficult conditions faced by Palestinian children,
which may, in turn, also encourage them to engage in
acts of violence through desperation.

The situation of Palestinian detainees, including
women and children, remains a serious concern.
Palestinians are being held under administrative
detention without charge or trial for an indefinite
period of time. Administrative detention is permitted
under international law only exceptionally and
for short periods of time, but, regrettably, in the
occupied Palestinian territories it remains the norm.
Indiscriminate attacks against civilians will only
enhance feelings of desperation and insecurity and
widen the gap between the parties. The security needs
ofthe people ofIsrael must also be respected. A climate
conducive to peace will be encouraged if each side takes
an approach sensitive to the other's concerns. We hope
that all parties will engage constructively and sincerely
to end the conflict and enable lasting peace.

Terrorism originating from the Middle East region

has the potential to pose a serious threat to the security
and stability ofmany countries. In today's interconnected
world, it is very easy for agents of extremism to spread
their ideologies across national borders. In that regard,
the lingering question of Palestine is one of the main
factors driving the recruitment of terrorists in the
region, as well as worldwide. We also call for respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria,
which is essential for the preservation of overall peace
in the Middle East.

In conclusion, Sri Lanka wishes to reiterate its
support for Palestine's application for admission to full
membership of the United Nations.

We also support the implementation of United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 242 (1967),
regarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to statehood, and the achievement of the two-
State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.

