Mr. Osman (Somalia): Allow me to begin by commending the Permanent Representative of the Republic of Indonesia and the Permanent Mission of Indonesia for their leadership as President of the Council for this month of August. I would also like to welcome Ambassador Kridelka of Belgium to New York and to the Security Council and to being a member of the United Nations family. It is an honour to address the Security Council at this gathering of Somalia's partners at the Security Council. I want to reiterate that the Somali Government is strongly committed to its ambitious peace and State-building agenda. We are making very clear strides towards achieving inclusive politics, strengthening democracy and constructing the very rights-based institutions that are the pillars of strong societies. I am happy to report that we have held successful regional elections in some federal member states in the build-up to the planned one-person-one-vote national parliamentary election. We are determined to facilitate the success of that process through the electoral law recently adopted by the legislature. The challenge for Somalia has been the monopolization of legitimate power by a few at the expense of the Somali people. Our Government, led by His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Farmajo, is determined to bring the people of Somalia to the centre of their democracy by giving them a historic opportunity to vote on their future path. That is a noble endeavour, which will strengthen the civic engagement and public trust in policy, while firmly instilling accountability within the Somali policy. Today President Mohamed Abdullahi Farmajo is sitting in Dhuusamarreeb, a city in central Somalia, with key leaders of federal member states to discuss the modalities and strategies for making the ambition of universal suffrage a genuine possibility. The President also addressed the House of the People immediately before the Dhuusamarreeb meeting and promised to respect its constitutional mandate to legislate for the Somali people by bringing all electoral decisions back to it to deliberate and vote on to move forward from the Dhuusamarreeb meeting. For democracy and stability to thrive in Somalia, it is a must that we respect the key roles of Parliament, the Upper House and other mandatory electoral bodies, most specifically the National Independent Electoral Commission and the intergovernmental committee established to address the outcomes of the Dhuusamarreeb process. Accordingly, we are determined to move Somalia away from the exclusive and exclusionary processes that determined our politics and shackled our people to voicelessness, especially our young people, our women and our minorities. Of course, we in Somalia understand the need for negotiations and consensus-building to achieve our democratic goals, and through the Federal Government's commitment to the Dhuusamarreeb process, we have proved this. A stable, democratic and prosperous Somalia is in the interest of each and every Somali, and the achievement of this will be the best way to celebrate our joint effort with our valuable international partners in delivering a better tomorrow for Somalia and the world. However, I am very sad that there are those who seek to derail the democratic processes that our Government envisages for Somalia with a narrow focus on old, broken, exclusive politics. Our Government will continue the engagement with all stakeholders openly and fairly but will not and cannot tolerate spoilers at this critical time in Somalia's history. The international community should continue to support and encourage the Government's programmes of inclusive politics and democratization, and it must not give in to the unjust pressures of spoilers. Security has been our Government's focus and its greatest public expenditure since it took office, because achieving other endeavours, including poverty eradication, quality education, climate action and inclusion depend on security. Today we are building a well-trained armed force, rights-based security and accountable security institutions to take over the responsibility of securing Somalia. Our Government, in partnership with AMISOM and other key international supporters, is working hard to achieve this through the transition plan in line with the national security architecture. These comprehensive reforms are not easy, but thanks to the commitment and absolute determination of the Federal Government of Somalia and its partners, I am convinced that Somalia's successful security-sector reforms will provide us with the best possible security apparatuses to safeguard the well-being and progress of the Somali people. The Government of Somalia is working hard with its people to build a more sustainable future free from poverty, with strong social protections. Our approach to eradicating poverty is to create economic opportunities for our people, especially young people, and, to do so, we are engaged in an ambitious and successful fiscal and economic reform programme guided by the International Monetary Fund Staff-Monitored Program. We are proud of the fact that throughout the reform- focused benchmarks, we managed to achieve debt relief in the first quarter of this year, and we are working to further strengthen our economy to make it work for all our people. A key benefit of debt relief has been renewed confidence in Somalia's ability to change and the access to grant resources that have proved valuable through the coronavirus disease pandemic. In conclusion, the Somali Federal Government is absolutely committed to socioeconomic and political reforms to improve the lives of the Somali people. It is our mandate and duty to do the heavy lifting to deliver stability, inclusive politics and opportunities for our people by working closely with our international partners. That is a commitment that we will continue to deliver on, God permitting. I thank all present for their partnership and friendship.
