Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We express appreciation to
the Egyptian presidency for organizing today's briefing
on enhancing the effectiveness of sanctions, building
on the Arria-formula meeting held last month.

We thank the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, for his very useful briefing.

As defined in the Charter of the United Nations and
as colleagues have indicated, sanctions are one of the
important tools at the disposal of the Security Council
for the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security. As Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun stated and as is also self-evident, sanctions
are not an end in themselves. They are and should be
part ofa broader political strategy, aimed at preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts. Without them, they
cannot achieve the desired results.

We recognize that sanctions have evolved
significantly over time. The way that the Security
Council uses sanctions has changed from its earlier
practice of imposing comprehensive sanctions to its
contemporary practice of applying targeted measures.
That is an important development, which would make the
sanctions regime more effective and, most importantly,
provide a mechanism to address the unintended and
adverse effects of comprehensive sanctions. If used
appropriately and in a targeted manner, we believe
that sanctions have the potential to exert pressure on
specific individuals or entities whose behaviour the
Council is seeking to influence.

We understand that important work has been done
in the past to review the efficacy of sanctions, following
the Council's willingness, as shown in practice, to make
use of targeted sanctions more often and apply them to
a broader range of activities and more diverse kinds of
threats to international peace and security. We thank
the presidency for taking up this subject matter and its
effort to build on this important work. We agree that
sanctions should be carefully designed and implemented
to include clear objectives, as well as a defined scope
and to periodically review the progress made against
their objectives. More often than not, discussions tend
to be polarized with arguments in favour of or against
the application of sanctions in general terms. We do not
believe that that will help to make progress in enhancing
the effectiveness of sanctions.

In our opinion, perhaps a better approach to
achieving the desired objective would be to look at

the merit of each case and its specific context. We
recognize that sanctions are not meant to stay in place
forever. If the situation warrants the modification or
lifting of a sanction, the Council should not hesitate
to take appropriate measures accordingly. However,
specific situations may also require that sanctions be
strengthened, and the Council should not shy away
from that. Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun
mentioned instances where that has happened. What
really matters is the reality on the ground, and the
importance of ensuring that the Council uses its tools
effectively so as to induce changes in behaviour. That
underscores the need for realism and pragmatism in
dealing with various situations. We are opposed to
politicizing sanctions and allowing double standards
in their design and implementation. Nonetheless,
we do not think that that should lead us to reject
the use of sanctions as a tool. Rather, we should
avoid politicization and double standards and apply
sanctions judiciously, when appropriate, and based
on the merits of the case. Moreover, the Council and
Member States' level of enthusiasm and determination
for implementing sanctions should not differ from one
sanction regime to another. That is another reason why
we should continually review the way the Council uses
and implements this tool, and draw valuable lessons for
improving sanctions' application and implementation.

Lastly, the important role that regional and
subregional organizations play in improving the design
and effective implementation of sanctions regimes
cannotbe overlooked. Coordinating efforts with regional
and subregional organizations and mechanisms is very
important for the effectiveness of sanctions regimes. If
we look at the Constitutive Act of the African Union,
it has a much more progressive stance on the issue, and
it is one reason why we urge the Council to further
enhance its cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, including on the issue under discussion.

