Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and we thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened it. This debate is
taking place at a time when the world, in particular
Africa and the Middle East, is in a state of upheaval as
a result of crises whose humanitarian and human rights
consequences are of major concern to the Council.

We would like to thank Ms. Valerie Amos,
Mr. Alain Le Roy and Mr. Ivan Simonovic' for their
respective contributions to our debate. We wish also to
express our deep appreciation and full support for the
work that they and their teams are carrying out on the
ground.

During the most recent debate on this issue (see S/PV.6427), the Council emphasized the need to
strengthen the aspect of the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations. Today we have an
opportunity to deal with the question in a
comprehensive manner, focusing on two key aspects:
in the framework of peacekeeping operations and in
emergency situations.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in Cote d'Ivoire and in Libya, as well as other
crises, has shown that the vulnerability of civilians in
crises continues to be marked by violence of increasing
intensity as a result of clashes and confrontations
between armed groups. Be it continuing, unpunished
violence and sexual abuse, violence related to the
exploitation of natural resources or violence resulting
from terrorist acts, Gabon has consistently condemned
all violence against civilians as well as all acts whose
victims are civilians. Such acts must not go
unpunished.

With respect to the protection of civilians in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, one of the
longstanding problems in that respect has been
insufficient funding and a lack of means of
communication, which has hindered the effectiveness
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) on the ground. We welcome the progress
made recently in that area, which has enabled
MONUSCO to ensure better protection for vulnerable
peoples.

With respect to the systematic violence carried
out against women and girls, we welcome the
investigations that are under way in the country, which
reflect the determination of MONUSCO and of the
Congolese Government to combat impunity.
The Ivorian crisis raised legitimate concerns
given the heavy price paid by civilians during the post-
electoral situation. The implementation by the United
Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI) of
resolution 1975 (2011) made it possible to reduce the
scale of the massacres and to avert a widespread civil
war.

In the case of Libya, beyond Gabon's support for
resolution 1973 (2011), we would like to reaffirm that
the objective of setting up a no-fly zone in the country
was the protection of the civilian population. We
remain concerned at the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, which has an impact on
civilians. We remain convinced that the establishment
of a ceasefire and the initiation of a concerted political
solution are important prerequisites for improving the
humanitarian situation and for more effectively
protecting civilians on the ground.

Recent crises make clear that we must continue to
seek effective solutions so as to face the immediate
challenges involved in ensuring the security and
physical protection of the most vulnerable civilians:
the need to ensure that the most vulnerable have access
to humanitarian aid, and the need to induce armed
groups to spare civilian populations. I should like here
to highlight our concern as to the increasing use of
explosive munitions in heavily populated areas.

I should like also to highlight two key elements,
which have already been mentioned by other
delegations.

First, there is a need to reaffirm the norms of
responsibility. It must be reiterated that the protection
of civilians in conflict is the responsibility of the States
and parties to the conflict, even if other actors are also
involved. Law alone cannot put an end to a crisis,
make it possible to emerge from such crisis or even
ensure the protection of civilians. It is first and
foremost our determination to enforce the law that will
make a difference. That where our responsibility as
members of the Security Council comes in, as was the
case recently with respect to Libya and Cote d'Ivoire.

The second element is the need to maintain the
impartiality and neutrality of humanitarian action. The
implementation of resolution 1973 (2011) shows how
difficult it is to carry out humanitarian work at a time
when a military operation aimed at protecting civilians
is under way. In such a context, it is important that
humanitarian actions remain neutral and impartial.

As we have highlighted in the course of previous
debates on this issue, the protection of civilians
requires new approaches that focus on awareness-
raising and prevention. It is important to make agreed
norms and principles widely known and to ensure that
everyone is aware of the consequences of failing to
respect such norms and principles.

In conclusion, we cannot address the issue of the
protection of civilians without linking it to the causes
of conflict, which are often connected to issues related
to the democratization of States, good governance and
the establishment of the rule of law. Prevention of
conflict and mediation are the peaceful solutions to
which we should accord priority in our actions, so as to
create an environment that, in the end, will reduce the
risk of armed conflict and its disastrous consequences
for civilian populations.

Finally, I should like to stress the need to adapt
the mandates of peacekeeping operations to the
realities on the ground, and, above all, to ensure that
commensurate resources are made available for their
implementation.

