Mr. Nishida (Japan): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Foreign Minister of Afghanistan
and I thank Special Representative Mr. Staffan de
Mistura for his very comprehensive briefing. I also
express my gratitude to the men and women of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) who have demonstrated their deep
commitment to a very difficult mission.

The Government of Japan expresses its
appreciation that the polling process for the election on
18 September to the Wolesi Jirga, or the Lower House
of the National Assembly, has so far and generally been
conducted as planned, though some polling stations
were inaccessible because of the security situation. We
express our deep regret that some people became the
victims of violent acts by anti-Government forces and
strongly condemn such violence.

Japan dispatched an observer mission to
Afghanistan for the election in addition to financial
assistance for the United Nations Development
Programme electoral assistance activities. We pay
tribute to the Afghan authorities concerned, including
the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC), which
participated in the election process, and also the
international community which supported it.

UNAMA played a major role in providing
significant support to the Afghan Government and
other related parties in, for example, its support of the
IEC so that it could publish the list of polling centres
one month before the election date. This was a great
contribution to enhancing the transparency of the
election. It is essential that the electoral process and
investigation of complaints should proceed
transparently until the final results of the election are
certified.

We praise the Afghans' participation in the
election, especially the high turnout of women and
young people, in spite of the security risks, so that they
themselves could decide their own future. Japan
expects that reconciliation and development in
Afghanistan will proceed smoothly with a new,
democratically elected Parliament.

At the successful Kabul Conference in July this
year, important progress was made towards the
stabilization and reconciliation of Afghanistan with the
Afghan leadership's presentation of their national
priority programme, to which the international
community committed to aligning its assistance. At the
same time, as was reaffirmed in the Kabul Conference
communique, it is essential that the Afghan
Government make necessary reforms to strengthen its
financial management capabilities and to reduce
corruption.

Together with its partners in the international
community, including the United Nations, Japan
continues to assist the Afghan Government to improve
this capacity. The coordination and monitoring of aid
through the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
(JCMB) is important for proper progress in the Kabul
process. In this context, we appreciate the role of
UNAMA as Joint President of the JCMB.
As we stated during the Kabul Conference, Japan
has been actively providing assistance to Afghanistan,
focusing on the three priority areas, namely, security,
reintegration and development, given our
determination to prevent Afghanistan from slipping
back into a safe haven for terrorists.

As pointed out in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/463), the security situation has continued to
deteriorate in some parts of the country. Improving
security in Afghanistan is an essential prerequisite for
its reconstruction. In order to strengthen Afghan
security forces so that Afghanistan can take over
responsibility for its own security, Japan has been
providing and will continue to provide assistance for
the salaries and equipment of the Afghan National
Police. We also recently decided to provide funding
and instructors for the training in Turkey of Afghan
police officers.

We appreciate the announcement by the Afghan
Government of the Afghanistan peace and reintegration
programme and of the launching of the peace and
reintegration trust fund, to which Japan recently
disbursed a $50 million contribution. Japan calls for
the swift implementation of the Afghanistan peace and
reintegration programme through the effective use of
this trust fund.

As for development, Japan believes in the
importance of showing results through quick-impact
projects, while also maintaining a mid- to long-term
perspective. We are providing assistance for human
resource development, infrastructure, development and
the rebuilding of the agricultural sector and rural
communities.

Last week, in his address to the General
Assembly, the Japanese Prime Minister, Mr. Naoto
Kan, emphasized that Japan's assistance will be
provided in such a way that the people of Afghanistan
will be able to perceive tangible improvements in their
livelihoods.

The Foreign Minister of Japan, Mr. Seiji
Maehara, also explained Japan's assistance policies to
Afghan Foreign Minister Zalmai Rassoul, present with
us today. Japan's contribution has taken into
consideration the priority areas of the Government, as I
have mentioned, with approximately $5 billion to be
disbursed over five years.
10-55499

Stability and reconstruction in Afghanistan
cannot be achieved without the cooperation of those
neighbouring countries that have close ties with it. In
this context, Japan's has actively maintained a dialogue
with Afghanistan's neighbours. In addition, it is our
hope that stability in Afghanistan will be realized
through close cooperation with a number of regional
institutions. We welcome the participation of UNAMA
in a series of meetings between Afghanistan and
regional agencies.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Japan's continued
support of UNAMA and, in particular, of the Special
Representative to the Secretary-General, and reaffirm
our commitment to assist in Afghanistan.

