Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): I thank you, Madame,
for organizing this debate on a theme that is very
important to us. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, and the Special
Representative of the World Bank for their statements
this morning. We also welcome the participation of
several Ministers of Foreign Affairs in this debate.

Uganda welcomes the increasing attention that
the Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole, as well as regional organizations and the wider
international community, are paying to the
interdependence between security and development.
This has, of course, been a gradual process, beginning
with the United Nations agendas for peace and
development in the 1990s, which recognized the need
to address peace, security and development through
integrated approaches.
As has already been emphasized by many
speakers before me, there is no doubt that security is a
prerequisite for development; without peace
development is not possible. Without development,
peace and security are not sustainable; the two are
therefore mutually reinforcing. The World
Development Report 201]: Conflict, Security and
Development highlights the fact that conflict and
insecurity are major challenges and impediments to
economic development. The World Bank's focus on
this theme is pertinent. Evidence abounds that fragile
countries and those in conflict or in post-conflict
situations lag behind in almost all development
indicators, including the attainment of the Millennium
Development Goals.

Durable peace, security and development can be
achieved only through a comprehensive approach that
integrates the security, economic, social and
humanitarian dimensions. It is essential to take into
account a people-centred view of security, which is
necessary for national, regional and global stability.
The United Nations and the wider international
community should intensify their efforts towards a
more effective and coherent approach to peacekeeping,
peacemaking and peacebuilding. In this regard, the
Peacebuilding Commission is already playing a very
important role in supporting countries emerging from
conflict. More emphasis should be placed on delivering
tangible dividends, including the provision of basic
services, employment opportunities, and the
improvement of the people's standard of living.

Finally, fundamental reform of the current
international architecture for peace, security and
development is urgent and necessary to ensure greater
representation and participation, especially on the part
of developing countries.

