Mr. Sardenberg: Following the military coup of
May 1997, the Security Council determined that the
situation in Sierra Leone constituted a threat to
international peace and security. In October 1997, by
resolution 1132 (1997), it imposed an embargo on the
supply of arms, petroleum and related products to
Sierra Leone. A travel ban was also imposed on
members of the military junta and their relatives.

In March 1998, by resolution 1156 (1998), the
Council lifted the oil embargo and by resolution 1171
(1998) of June 1998, it confirmed the removal of
sanctions on the Government and reimposed the
embargo on arms to Sierra Leone other than to the
Government, as well as a travel ban on leading
members of the Revolutionary United Front and the
former military junta.

In July 2000, by resolution 1306 (2000), the
Security Council imposed an embargo on rough
diamonds from Sierra Leone for 18 months, except
those controlled by the Government of Sierra Leone,
through the Certificate of Origin regime. In 2001, the
Council's measures regarding the import of rough
diamonds from Sierra Leone were extended for 11
months by resolution 1385 (2001) and for a further six
months in 2002 by resolution 1446 (2002).

Subsequently, in the light of Sierra Leone's full
participation in the Kimberley Process, the Council
decided that the Government was able to ensure proper
control over diamond-mining areas and signalled its
intention not to renew the embargo against the import
of rough diamonds from the country. This was done
through a press statement on 5 June 2003 (press release SC/7778).

This is a very intricate story. That is why I
decided to preface my remarks with it.

I was appointed Chairman of the 1132 sanctions
Committee for Sierra Leone for 2004 and 2005. Only
the arms embargo and travel restrictions remain in
force. Following consultations within the Committee
on two occasions, the names of some 18 individuals
affected by sanctions were removed from the list, and
the latest revised version was published in September
2004. During Brazil's two-year term, we have
consulted with members of the Committee and of the
Security Council on the need to streamline the legal
basis for sanctions in Sierra Leone. This has not been
discussed in detail within the Committee, as it is
primarily a matter for the Security Council, and the
Committee has also recognized the need to safeguard
the sensitive work of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone.

In our View, the expertise of the sanctions
Committee should feed into the Council's decision-
making process in appropriate ways. There are often
overlaps in the responsibilities of sanctions committees
and the Council, and they should be handled with some
degree of flexibility, while recognizing that it is solely
the Council that is responsible for decisions related to
the actual scope and design of sanctions.

In his twenty-seventh report on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), which
the Council will consider tomorrow, the Secretary-
General indicates that over its six years of operation
the Mission has forged effective partnerships and has
placed Sierra Leone "on a firm path to post-conflict
recovery" (S/2005/777, para. 59).

The Government has made further progress
towards consolidating constitutional order and
assuming full responsibility for the maintenance of
security in the country. In spite of the challenges still
presented by many root causes of the conflict in Sierra
Leone, and in spite of the fragile socio-economic
situation, we trust that the prevailing stable
environment will allow for increasing international
involvement and long-term sustainable peace
dividends. The presence of the United Nations
Integrated Office for Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL) from
1 January 2006 will greatly contribute to that result.

In that context, it is my view that as UNAMSIL
completes its drawdown the Security Council might
soon start reviewing the Sierra Leone sanctions regime,
with a View to updating its legal basis and streamlining
and updating the measures currently in place, as well
as the Committee's mandate. Consultations within the
sanctions Committee and with the Government of
Sierra Leone will contribute to that end.

As Brazil approaches the end of its tenure on the
Security Council and its chairmanship of the 1132
sanctions Committee, may I thank, through the
President, the Permanent Representative of Algeria,
who served as a Vice-Chairman of the Committee for
2004 and 2995, the Permanent Representative of
Argentina, who served in that capacity this year, and
the Permanent Representative of Pakistan who did so
in 2004.

I cannot conclude without extending my
appreciation to the members of the Secretariat who
have assisted us in this task, in particular the Secretary
of the Committee, Mr. James Sutterlin, whose
readiness to assist and experience in the subject matter
have been an essential asset in the work of the
Committee.

