The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009).

I am honoured to have convened today's Security
Council briefing on the activities of the Somalia and
Eritrea Sanctions Committee. My statement today will
focus on recent developments and the latest findings
of the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group. Today's
briefing is being conducted in accordance with
sub-paragraph 11 (g) of resolution 1844 (2008).

With respect to the arms embargo imposed on
Somalia, since the beginning ofthis year, the Committee
has received one notification under paragraph 10 (g) of
resolution 2111 (2013). The Committee has also received
two notifications in accordance with paragraph 11 (a) of
resolution 2011 (2013).

At its informal consultations on 9 October 2015, the
Committee reviewed the final reports of the Somalia
and Eritrea Monitoring Group, and discussed their
recommendations. The Monitoring Group reported
that international interest in the rich marine resources
and minerals of Somalia had grown. That interest,
however, had not yet been accompanied by adequate
efforts to manage these resources. The Monitoring
Group considered that this constituted a potential
threat to peace, security and stability in Somalia. With
respect to the mineral resources sector in Somalia, the
Monitoring Group said that tensions between the Federal
Government of Somalia and regional administrations
were on the rise as both continued to sign agreements
with international oil and gas companies.

With regard to the threat posed by Al-Shabaab
to Somalia and the region, the Group reported that it
persisted despite the fact that several of its leaders had
been killed. Al-Shabaab took advantage of the fact that
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the
Somali National Army and allied forces are at the limit
of their capacities, making their bases increasingly
vulnerable to possible attacks. The Monitoring Group
also found that Al-Shabaab is seeking to maintain
communications with Yemen and Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula. The Monitoring Group reported
that the Federal Government of Somalia and provisional
regional administrations had trouble controlling the
territories liberated from Al-Shabaab, which has led
to the resurgence of tensions and conflicts among
communities.

With regard to humanitarian access, the Monitoring
Group reported that it remained extremely fragile,
especially in areas where Al-Shabaab had established
blockades of humanitarian supplies and trade by
arresting and killing civilians and destroying their
property. Foreign and domestic forces active in Somalia
continued to attack civilians, either as a deliberate tactic
of war or through the disproportionate use of force.

With respect to charcoal, the Monitoring Group
reported that the implementation of its ban had improved
since Al-Shabaab was displaced from locations where
it is shipped for export. However, because the use
of forged documents is widespread among carriers,
Somali charcoal continued to be exported. In that
regard, the Monitoring Group suggested that the Somali
authorities, Member States, AMISOM. and troop-
contributing countries seek to better coordinate their
efforts to ensure the existence of a comprehensive and
efficient mechanism against the illegal trade in Somali
charcoal.

The Monitoring Group noted the substantive
progress made by the Federal Government with regard
to the quality and timeliness of its notifications to
the Committee concerning imported weapons. At the
same time, the Group expressed concern about the
lack of precision of the information provided on the
composition and arrangement of the security forces. In
this regard, the Committee decided to address a note
verbale to all Member States, asking them to support
the comprehensive security sector reform programme
announced by the Office of the President of the Federal
Government of Somalia on 9 September 2015, in order
to ensure the timely delivery of technical and financial
assistance to the security sector.

Let me now turn to the Monitoring Group's
report on Eritrea. The Group found no evidence that
the Government of Eritrea had provided support to
Al-Shabaab. However, it reported that Eritrea was
supporting armed groups in Ethiopia, in contravention
of paragraph 16 of resolution 1907 (2009). The Group
reported that it had spoken with the Eritrean Government
on several occasions, but that the authorities of that
country had shown little willingness to cooperate.
The Group also noted the lack of progress in resolving
the border dispute between Djibouti and Eritrea. The
Committee hopes that the Qatari mediation efforts will
contribute to resolving this matter.

The outbreak of the crisis in Yemen was a new
development. The Group received unconfirmed reports
of the presence of Eritrean soldiers in Yemen, fighting
alongside the Arab coalition. If these reports are
confirmed, the Group has said that this participation
could constitute a violation of paragraph 6 of the
same resolution. After the Council adopted resolution
2244 (2015), the Secretary-General appointed to the
Monitoring Group eight experts knowledgeable in
weapons, armed groups, finance, humanitarian affairs,
maritime affairs and transportation, natural resources
and regional issues.

Between 11 and 15 January, eight experts of the
Monitoring Group, visiting New York to participate
in an orientation programme and the planning of its
mandate, held bilateral meetings with key delegations,
including myself as Chairman of the Sanctions
Committee on Somalia and Eritrea, as well as the
Permanent Representative of Eritrea. In the first update
in writing that the Committee received this year, the
Monitoring Group stated that it continued to work with
the diplomatic community, the United Nations system
in Nairobi and key stakeholders in the Horn of Africa
in order to actively identify new areas of research and
to expand the network of contacts in order to fulfil
its new mandate. It is expected that, on 22 April, the
coordinator of the Monitoring Group shall provide the
Committee with the mid-term update on the Group's
investigations and activities that the Council has
requested with a view to having the final report ready
on 15 October 2016.

The Committee is currently considering a draft
guidance note for implementing resolutions in order
to provide guidance and operational recommendations
to Member States, the Somali Government and other
relevant institutions to implement the measures of the
arms embargo more efficiently. The draft guidance
note summarizes existing restrictions imposed by
the arms embargo on Somalia and Eritrea, describes
exemptions to the measures, and clarifies problems
that have been encountered by Member States and the
Somali Government, in particular in applying the arms
embargo. The Committee is expected to approve the
draft guidance note and make it public in early March.
The Committee has expressed its interest in assessing
the changes in the security situation in the Horn of
Africa with a View to increasing the effectiveness of
the current sanctions regime in Somalia and Eritrea.

Finally, I would like to thank Council members
for entrusting me again with the chairmanship of this
important Committee. I will continue doing everything
in my power to guide the work of the Committee in a
balanced and fair manner. I am confident that, through
its work, the Committee will make a significant
contribution to the Council's efforts to achieve lasting
peace and stability in Somalia, Eritrea and the Horn of
Africa.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I now give the floor to the other members of the
Security Council.

