Mr. Wetland (Norway): Thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing us to speak. Nine weeks
ago, the fighting in Gaza came to an end, after the
parties each declared unilateral ceasefires. But for the
battle-scarred civilian population of Gaza, there has
been little improvement. The fragile ceasefires are
frequently violated by both sides, and the Israeli
embargo remains largely intact. A political solution to
the conflict - as opposed to military containment -
seems as elusive as ever.

Israeli military operations brought massive
suffering and large-scale destruction to the civilian
infrastructure in Gaza. But thus far very little has been
rebuilt, and the humanitarian situation remains grave.
Many families are still homeless and exposed to the
cold and the rain. Israel severely restricts the import of
basic building materials, such as cement, wood and
glass. Food, medicine and fuel are still in short supply.
We are concerned that Israel's restrictions on cash
transfers to Gaza will impede the essential work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), such as its
school programme that feeds 200,000 children.

We recognize Israel's security concerns, but
Israel must honour its obligation under international
humanitarian law and open its border crossings to
Gaza. We welcome the recent Israeli cabinet decision
to allow all food items into Gaza, and we look forward
to the full implementation of this decision.

The Sharm el-Sheikh conference brought the
international community together in a show of support
for the Palestinian people. Norway stands by its
pledges and is contributing 760 million Norwegian
kroner, which is equivalent to $120 million, towards
the Palestinian people this year. Without continued
budget support to the Palestinian Authority, 77,000
public servants providing basic social services will not
receive their salaries. We, the international community,
must set aside our differences. Financial and political
support for the Palestinians must be directed through
existing mechanisms and towards the Palestinian

Authority. The Security Council has given the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians, which Norway
chairs, a central role in alleviating the situation in
Gaza. Norway will in the near future convene a
meeting of the Committee, in close consultation with
the parties.

The division among Palestinians is a tragedy. The
civilian population of Gaza has paid a high price for
this division. We support Egypt's efforts to facilitate
Palestinian reconciliation and pave the way for an
interim Government. The Palestinian people, both in
Gaza and the West Bank, deserve a democratic and
peaceful Government. At the same time, we warn
against placing impossible hurdles to political
progress. We must not let the perfect become the
enemy of the good. Concerted efforts by the countries
in the region and the international community as a
whole are necessary to bring the peace process
forward.

While the situation in Gaza remains grave, we
must not lose sight of the situation in the rest of the
Palestinian territory. In violation of the commitments it
made, Israel has continued to expand settlements in the
West Bank. We are equally concerned by the continued
destruction of Palestinian houses and evictions of
Palestinian families. Settlements have become an all-
too-familiar theme in this Council, but it must be said
again that Israeli settlements and closures strangle the
Palestinian economy and undermine the prospects for a
viable Palestinian State.

Every day that passes without improvement in the
lives of the civilian population of Gaza adds to the
failure of the parties and, I regret to say, to our
collective failure to end the conflict and bring peace to
the region.

