Mr. Lamani (Organization of the Islamic Conference) (spoke in French): I would like to begin
my remarks by extending my sincere congratulations to
you, Madam President, on presiding over this meeting.
My congratulations and gratitude also go out to Ms.
Louise Frechette, the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms.
Carol Bellamy, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and to Mr. Olara
Otunnu for their inspiring interventions this morning.

Armed conflicts always cause suffering, above all
for children and women. The adverse and lasting
effects of such conflicts directly affect the possibilities
for creating an environment of peace and stability. It
goes without saying that the ultimate solution is to deal
with the underlying causes of conflict, be they socio-
economic, racial, religious or otherwise.

The report of the Secretary-General points out
that children have increasingly become the victims of
internal conflicts in which they are both protagonists
and targets. While these children - who are the future
of the international community - are covered by an
array of legal instruments established by the
international community to protect them, unfortunately
the numerous conflicts that have broken out in various
regions throughout the world in recent years have been
characterized by continued violations of the
fundamental rights of children and of international
humanitarian law generally.
The holding of this debate today illustrates that
the awareness that began to make itself felt at the
beginning of the 1990s, after the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, has become a
genuine factor in the management of international
affairs, thereby giving rise to a considerable number of
measures designed to save children from the kinds of
violence to which they are often subjected. New ways
and means must be found, and efforts must be further
intensified to avoid the worst kinds of brutality. This is
why we think that the recommendations and measures
designed to encourage respect for the obligations and
commitments contained in the report of the Secretary-
General currently before the Council must be the
subject of special attention. The Security Council is the
body competent to take an explicit stand to promote
law and the respect for law.

Section VI of the report of the Secretary-General
deals with regional initiatives on behalf of children
affected by armed conflict and with the role of regional
organizations. I would like in this connection first to
welcome the tireless efforts of Mr. Olara Otunnu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Secondly, I would like to stress that it is critical for
regional organizations to continue to devote intensive
attention to the question of children.

In this connection, the twenty-seventh Islamic
Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs, which met
from 27 to 30 June 2000 at Kuala Lumpur, recalled the
firm positions of the members of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference to take necessary measures to
ensure that accepted norms of conduct be better
respected.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the firm and sincere
desire of the Organization of the Islamic Conference to
work together with other international institutions,
UNICEF in particular, as well as with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to share
experiences so that those experiences can be of the
greatest benefit to children affected by conflict.

