Mrs. Juul (Norway): Norway welcomes the
agreement reached in Mecca on the formation of a
Palestinian unity government. We commend President
Abbas for his tireless efforts to establish a broad
national unity government on a political platform that
reflects the Quartet principles of non-violence,
recognition of Israel and acceptance of previous
agreements and obligations.

Norway would also like to acknowledge the
particularly important role that Saudi Arabia -
together with Egypt, Jordan, Syria and the League of
Arab States - have played in making this possible.
This shows that concerned countries are taking
responsibility for dealing with the major political
challenges in their own region.

The Mecca agreement is an important step
forward. The formation of a unity government will give
President Abbas a broad basis for conducting
negotiations with Israel. It is essential that the
international community continue to build on what has
been achieved. We firmly believe that this positive
development needs international encouragement.

Norway welcomes the recent statements by the
Quartet, in which it promises to remain closely
engaged in the renewed political dialogue between
Israeli and Palestinian leaders, and to monitor
developments and actions taken by the parties.

Norway would also like to express its full support
for the upcoming tripartite meeting between President
Abbas, Prime Minister Olmert and Secretary of State
Rice. We hope that it will encourage the resumption of
a peace process leading to a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace, within
secure and recognized borders.

To underpin the political process, the two parties
should make every effort to build confidence. Norway
urges the parties to implement fully what was agreed
upon at the 23 December meeting between the Israeli
and Palestinian leaders and to meet their obligations
under the Agreement on Movement and Access, the
Sharm el-Sheikh understanding of 2005 and the Road
Map.

The Mecca agreement should also be an
important step towards ending internal violence among
the Palestinians and creating stability in the Palestinian
territory. We expect the new government to reinstate
the rule of law in Gaza and to act decisively against
terrorism and rocket attacks on Israel.

Norway also urges the immediate release of the
captured Israeli soldier and the detained members of
the Palestinian Legislative Council.
Norway has for many years actively promoted a
two-State solution by supporting Palestinian
institution-building. This is crucial in building a viable,
democratic and independent Palestinian State that can
live in peace with Israel.

We welcome the Mecca agreement. It is now our
hope that the agreement can make it possible to
normalize relations between a Palestinian unity
government and the international community.

Let me also, on behalf of my Government,
condemn today's terrorist attack in Lebanon and extend
our condolences to the Government and the people of
Lebanon.

