Monsignor Kassas (Holy See) (spoke in Arabic):
The Holy See commends the presidency of Uruguay for
bringing the topic of the Middle East to the attention
of the international community through this Security
Council open debate.

My delegation wishes to address first the stalled
peace process between the Israelis and the Palestinians.
With the lack of substantive negotiations taking place,
acts of violence continue to spiral, leading many
to doubt seriously the continued validity of the Oslo
accords.

The Holy See believes that the peace process

between the Israelis and Palestinians can move forward
only through direct negotiations between the parties,
with the strong support of the international community.
That will require courageous decisions by both parties
and demands fair mutual concessions. But there is no
alternative, if both Israel and Palestine are to enjoy
security, prosperity and peaceful coexistence side by
side with internationally recognized borders. Both
peoples have suffered too long from the misguided
view that force alone can resolve their differences. Only
sustained negotiations, entered into in good faith, will
resolve their differences and bring peace to the peoples
of Israel and Palestine.

Pope Francis, in his 11 January address to the
diplomatic corps accredited to the Holy See, spoke of
the failure to advance the peace process between the
Israelis and Palestinians. He expressed the hope that
the new year

"can heal the deep wounds dividing Israelis and
Palestinians, and enable the peaceful coexistence
of two peoples who - of this I am sure - in the
depth of their hearts ask only for peace".

Acts of violence and inflammatory rhetoric must be set
aside in favour of the voices of dialogue to give both
peoples the peace to which their hearts aspire.

The Comprehensive Agreement signed between
the Holy See and the State of Palestine on 26 June
2015 entered into force on 2 January 2016. It basically
concerns the life and activity of the Church in Palestine.
In the complex reality of the Middle East, where
Christians have suffered persecution in some countries,
the Holy See hopes that the Agreement will serve as an
example of dialogue and cooperation, in particular for
other Arab and Muslim majority countries.

The nearly five-year conflict in Syria rages
on. It is more than just a conflict between Syrians;
foreign fighters from all over the globe continue to
commit unspeakable acts of horror against the civilian
population in Syria and in parts of Iraq. The influence
of those foreign elements on Syrian territory has led
to sectarian violence and persecutions of religious and
ethnic minorities, in particular the ancient Christian
communities of the region. Pope Francis, calling on the
international community, expressed his conviction that
only joint and agreed political action can impede the
spread of extremism and fundamentalism that spawn
terrorist acts, which reap countless victims not only in
Syria and Libya, but in other countries of the region.

My delegation will not repeat the litany of
horrendous acts of violence against the people of Syria
already outlined by various delegations. We would rather
reiterate our appeal to all those concerned to stop the
flow of arms into the region and intensify humanitarian
action in order to give the desperate refugees and all the
displaced the wherewithal to remain in their country,
or as near as possible to their homeland, with adequate
food, medical supplies, water, electricity, access to
education for the young, and the elements necessary to
a stable and secure life in their own homeland.

We support resolution 2254 (2015), in which
the Security Council calls for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic and for a political settlement to
the conflict in Syria. The Holy See looks forward to the
talks scheduled to begin in Geneva later this week. In
spite of the many strong differences still to be found
among the parties to the talks, the Holy See believes
that the negotiations represent the best chance the
international community has to bring stable and lasting
peace in to Syria and the region. The Holy See also looks
forward to the fourth humanitarian conference on Syria
scheduled for 4 February and hopes that it will ease the
suffering of the peoples of the region and contribute to
a comprehensive settlement of the conflict.

