Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): We,
too, want to join in thanking Ambassador Chowdhury, not
only for his report, but also for his excellent service in
guiding this important mission. We commend him and all
of the members of the mission on a job well done and for

 

helping to improve the Council's understanding of the
challenges that the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) faces in Kosovo.

I also want to thank Ambassadors Levitte and Eldon
for reminding us that the mission observed firsthand that
significant progress has been made in the implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999) in less than one year. There is
lots of work to do, but there is definitely progress
registered. We were also glad to see the mission's
unqualified praise for Special Representative Kouchner,
who has done a truly outstanding job of leading UNMIK in
the most difficult of circumstances.

It was good that members of the Council were able to
walk the ground and see firsthand Mr. Kouchner in action
and the hard tasks and challenges that UNMIK faces. It was
also good that members had a chance to see firsthand the
effects of the violence and devastation inflicted by Belgrade
in Kosovo and to understand more fully the problems which
now exist. We hope that the visit also helps make more
apparent the disingenuousness of speaking of Belgrade's
interest in cooperation in support of UNMIK's mission.

As our Council colleagues witnessed firsthand, the
situation in Kosovo, although improving, continues to be
extremely difficult. The sustained attention and ample
resources of the international community will be needed in
order to implement fully resolution 1244 (1999). It is clear
that UNMIK has set the right goals for the immediate
future: consolidation of the rule of law and further work on
the interim political framework.

There unquestionably continues to be a security gap in
Kosovo. We believe that the report makes important
recommendations in this regard. Additional international
judges and resources for the judicial sector will help make
fair trials and effective criminal prosecution the rule rather
than the exception in all of Kosovo. UNMIK Police has
done an impressive job of balancing its law-and-order
function with its responsibility to create a local Kosovo
Police Service. These efforts must be expedited. We are
encouraged to see that UNMIK has added new training sites
for the Kosovo Police Service and that specialized police
units have finally begun to arrive. We were pleased also to
see the Mission conclude that "UNMIK Police has
significantly enhanced its effectiveness", in part due to
close cooperation with the Kosovo Force (KFOR).

The report also lays out important further steps
UNMIK and Kosovo's leaders must take in order to build
a stable political foundation for the future. Kosovo must
move expeditiously to the autonomous self-government
called for in resolution 1244 (1999) under institutions
designed to protect the interests of everyone. Municipal
elections are an important first step. These elections must
go ahead as scheduled this fall and we were pleased to
see that the mission observed voter registration under way
in Kosovo and pledge our continued support for this
project.

Recent reports that members of the Serb community
in Kosovo are registering for elections, against the wishes
of some of their leaders, suggests that UNMIK should
redouble its efforts to encourage participation by all
groups in these elections.

As High Representative Petritsch noted in Tuesday's
meeting on Bosnia, economic reform is also crucial. It
will support those leaders in Kosovo willing to speak out
against violence and to reject the politics of ethnic hatred.
By clarifying the difficult issue of property ownership and
adopting strong and sustainable macroeconomic policies,
UNMIK will help bring prosperity to Kosovo and
strengthen its own administrative structure. Economic
revitalization will also help reinforce programmes aimed
at promoting the return of refugees and displaced persons,
an understandable priority for the Kosovar Serb
community. I would note my own country's considerable
efforts in this area, to which we have devoted significant
resources.

Finally, we join others in underscoring the
importance of resolving the problem of the detainees and
missing persons. As the mission discovered, this is an
emotional and sensitive issue that is blocking progress on
inter-ethnic reconciliation. It needs to be addressed on an
urgent basis. We have heard Special Representative
Kouchner raise this issue on several occasions and we
strongly support calls for a special envoy to address the
issue.

