Mr. Bolton (United States of America): We, too,
would like to thank High Representative Schwarz-
Schilling for his briefing here today and to welcome
Prime Minister Terzic as well.
The United States appreciates the High
Representative's support for constitutional reform in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Modernizing the Dayton
constitution is essential for creating a government that
can meet the needs of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
citizens and for that country to meet the criteria for
integration into Euro-Atlantic institutions such as the
European Union (EU) and NATO's Partnership for
Peace.

The United States strongly supports the package
of constitutional reforms negotiated by Bosnia and
Herzegovina political parties, currently under
consideration by the parliament. We call on the
parliament to enact those changes so that they can take
effect in time for the October elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

These are only first steps in what will be a
longer-term process, and the United States Government
is committed to helping the country continue with
these reforms. We welcome High Representative
Schwarz-Schilling's efforts to transfer greater
responsibilities and authority to Bosnian Government
institutions with an eye towards transitioning his
Office - the Office of the High Representative - to
an EU Special Representative Office in 2007. We urge
that Office to accelerate transfer of authorities to
Bosnians in advance of the October elections, as
circumstances permit.

While allowing Bosnians to take ownership, we
also urge the Office of the High Representative to
continue to take the steps necessary to advance reform
and complete civilian implementation of the Dayton
Accords, including clarifications and corrections to
previous decisions taken by the Office.

We understand the High Representative and
Prime Minister's interest in resolving issues related to
United Nations decertified police officers. We are
committed to working with other Security Council
members to address and resolve this issue.

