Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
important meeting.

I also thank Ms. Wickramanayake, Ms. Muganda
and Ms. Ramyar for their important updates, moving
testimony and concrete recommendations. They have
brought a very useful perspective into the Security
Council and one, as others have said, that we do not
usually hear, so it is welcome. We should be hearing
directly from people like them more often - young
people who are organizing in their communities,
making their voices heard and helping make the world
a safer and more inclusive place. The United States is
pleased that they have a seat at the table today. It is
something that we hope will happen even more often
in the future.

There are many ways that we could talk about
youth, peace and security. It is tragic that for so many
of the conflicts on the Council's agenda, children and
young adults are often caught in the crosshairs. They
are the most vulnerable victims when schools shut
down, hospitals are targeted and aid is blocked. When
a generation of young people cannot get an education
or start a family because of war, it will take decades
to recover.

One key lesson we must take away from the
discussions on youth and peace and security is that we
must work even harder to stop conflicts before they
begin. We need to listen directly to young people, as
we have today. More often than not, we want nothing
more than for the fighting to stop so that they can have
a chance at a more secure and prosperous future. I want
to focus my remarks today on how we can harness the
power of young people to make positive change.

As diplomats, we spend a great deal oftime meeting
and talking to each other behind closed doors. As my
British colleague noted, those discussions rarely involve
people without at least a grey hair or two. However, let
us consider the reality. All around us, we see examples
of young people setting and driving the political
agenda. Young people are not waiting for change to
happen; they are the change that is happening. In so
many parts of the world, they are the ones demanding
an end to the tyranny and speaking up for human rights
and accountability.

Let us take just one example. Earlier this week, the
Council had its second briefing on the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (see S/PV.8573). The advocacy of the 2018
Nobel Peace Prize laureate, Nadia Murad, who was in
her early twenties when she first briefed the Council
(see S/PV.7585), was instrumental in bringing attention
to the plight of Yazidis and helped spur Council action.
Ms. Murad's courage to come to the Council and give
us a first-hand account of the brutality she encountered
pushed the international community to act. We need
to encourage that kind of leadership and give young
people the tools that they need to succeed.

That is one reason the United States proudly
invests in leadership exchanges and programmes
aimed at partnering with youth around the world. Our
young leader initiatives engage youth in Africa, South-
East Asia, Latin America, the Caribbean and across
the Atlantic to provide business, civic and leadership
development training. These efforts are aimed at
building partnerships with promising leaders around
the world. The United States also supports programmes
that engage youth as partners to foster social cohesion
and tolerance.

Young people have played a critical role in
countering terrorist narratives at home and abroad.
Terrorist groups like the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) have tried to find vulnerable
people to recruit, however young people around the
world have countered these hateful narratives with
innovative tools, apps and approaches. For example,
we have partnered with the Peer-To-Peer: Challenging
Extremism programme, where students develop and
implement online campaigns and content to prevent and
counter violent extremism. Such engagement has been
an important part of our whole-of-society effort, in
line with the United Nations Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism in countering ISIS over the past
few years.

This year, we continue to raise awareness,
build partnerships and generate new ideas on youth
engagement and leadership. As part of the Economic
and Social Council Youth Forum held this past
April, the United States hosted an event for global
youth delegates in order to hear directly from them
about ways to further implement resolution 2250
(2015). A number of youth delegates highlighted the
systematic underrepresentation of youth in politics
and policymaking. They shared their feelings of
being excluded from decisions that affect them and
future generations.

We have made progress in establishing young people
as partners for peace, but this is just the beginning and
we all need to do more. We need to continue building
upon resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), which
establish youth and peace and security on the Council's
agenda. For our part, the United States will continue
to support pathways for young people to get the skills
they need to become active citizens in shaping the
Government and politics of their countries.

As I said at the beginning of my remarks, we
should continue setting an example by inviting briefers
like these young people to brief us in the Council
going forward. We encourage each Council member
to consider the best ways that they can open doors
for the next generation. We cannot afford to ignore
or marginalize 4.5 billion people under the age of 30
around the world. We must all redouble these efforts
to amplify the voices and contributions of young
peacebuilders and youth leaders for a peaceful and
prosperous future.

