The President (spoke in Russian): I would like
to warmly welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers
and other distinguished representatives participating
in today's Security Council meeting. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject under
discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Australia, Austria,
Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Montenegro, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Poland,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, the Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and Uruguay to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: Her Excellency Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy; His Excellency
Mr. Nabil Elaraby, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States; His Excellency Mr. Iyad Ameen Madani,
Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation; and His Excellency Mr. Abdulaziz
Al-Ammar, Permanent Observer of the Cooperation
Council for the Arab States of the Gulf to the United
Nations.

I propose that the Council invite His Grace
Archbishop Paul Richard Gallagher, Secretary for
Relations with States of the Holy See, to participate in
this meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/678, which contains a letter dated
1 September 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

