Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, may I thank Germany for taking the initiative to
convene this open debate, with the participation of
distinguished guests, on the role of the private
sector- understood to mean not only corporations,
but also civil society and non-governmental
organizations - in conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and post-conflict reconstruction. I believe that it will
allow us to reflect on a subject that, historically, has
had an impact, for better or for worse, on the internal
processes of countries.

All are well aware of the commercial motives that
impelled the Powers of the seventeenth, eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries to dominate vast, distant regions
of the world and to impose regimes intended basically
to benefit the colonial centres instead of the local
populations. In the past, many companies operated in
conjunction with their Governments, imposing
production models geared towards the foreign market,
separating and dividing populations and offering
benefits to ethnic minorities. All of this produced a
complex legacy, the effects of which are still being felt
today.

With the passage of time, the situation evolved
from colonial domination to the predominance of big
corporations. Over the past 50 years, many companies
operating in developing countries have been the
principal actors in the destabilization of local
governments and a source of financing and support for
certain sectors in civil conflicts, with the backing of
their respective Governments. That is why I, for
instance, as a Chilean, have never used the services of
a company called ITT. The specific interests of a
famous corporation became identified with the foreign
policy of its home country, a situation that obviously
changed with the dawn of the era of global production.

Examples of the type of conflicts generated by
certain companies have been mentioned in other
statements, including the question of diamonds in West
Africa, which led to the Kimberley Process, and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Congo.
In both situations, such exploitation financed
combatant rebel groups. In addition, the private sector
involved in the trade and traffic of small arms and light
weapons bears considerable responsibility in conflicts.
There is a need to develop codes of conduct and
monitoring standards applicable to the activities of
such companies, in order to avoid the indiscriminate
and even illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons.

To be sure, businesses are neither philanthropic
nor peacekeeping organizations. They are driving
forces for prosperity. How can we reconcile the
legitimate profit-making objectives of the business
sector and the humanitarian and human rights
objectives of civil society and many non-governmental
organizations with the tasks of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction?

The steady growth of the global market economy,
with its processes of privatization and liberalization,
has resulted in a massive transfer of resources to the
private sector and a large increase in investment in
emerging markets - often, however, characterized by
major structural weaknesses in the areas of regulation
and governance with high levels of poverty, serious
human rights violations and significant levels of
corruption.

Furthermore, the nature of contemporary
conflicts, increasingly of an intra-State character, has
changed the approach to conflict prevention and
solution. Their complexity requires multidisciplinary
approaches in which there must also be considerable
room for business, and especially for the largest
transnationals. Various mechanisms have been created
for that purpose. For example, the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has
adopted the Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises.
The Secretary-General recalled today that he proposed
the Global Compact under which corporations are to
apply International Labour Organization, human rights
and environmental principles in their activities,
particularly in developing countries.

How can the private sector, broadly defined, act
in the context of conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
reconstruction? Let me outline a few ideas. In the field
of prevention, there can be no doubt that the private
sector, because it is present on the ground and is
familiar with the environment, can serve as a source of
early warning, seeing the signs of impending conflict.
It can then cooperate through the development of
conflict prevention or mitigation strategies.

Companies need stability; they need clear rules to
follow. Ultimately, conflict harms corporate strategic
interests. This means that partnership can exist between
business and the work of the United Nations. There is a
more specific aspect of prevention that can fall to the
corporate sector if it allocates resources to social
investment, strengthening local civil society and
investing in communities and activities that promote
tolerance, diversity and civic education. Many
visionary and progressive companies are already
working in that direction, but, in my view, much more
needs to be done.

In the field of reconstruction, there are many
measures that multinational corporations could take
together with their local partners in order to rally broad
economic sectors and complement United Nations
reconstruction efforts.

Companies can also offer financial support for
projects that have immediate impact on production, for
example through initiatives to give jobs to ex-
combatants. Often, it is precisely the lack of jobs for
ex-combatants that makes conflicts recur.

From the standpoint of governance, the private
sector can play an important role in reconstruction
through the critical capacity of governmental decisions,
to ensure that these are more realistic and effective on
the ground and that they provide broad benefits to
society. Indeed, there is also the possibility of
exploring the idea of matching funds: co-financing a
reconstruction project in an amount equal to the
contribution of a donor Government, for instance in
areas such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

In the case of the corporate sector, it would
undoubtedly be appropriate to develop a range of
incentives to encourage companies to remain in a
country when conflict approaches, or to adopt relevant
preventive and reconstruction measures, or to be
involved in a country during the reconstruction stage.
How many companies could be prepared, for example,
to provide jobs, prosperity and hope in Haiti, and at the
same time to make money in a country that needs this
assistance: a country near major markets, and where,
through training, a high-quality labour force can be
developed.

Lastly, given the complex interrelationship
between the private sector and conflict, it could be of
interest for the Secretary-General to prepare a report on
this subject and perhaps to make recommendations on
prevention and post-conflict reconstruction that could
be taken up both by the Security Council and by the
Economic and Social Council for implementation in
future peace operations. That would, I believe, be
worthwhile.

