Allow me to congratulate the presidency of the Republic of Germany on convening this meeting. I am confident in the wisdom and able leadership of Germany to lead the Security Council. I would also like to thank the briefers for their valuable insights. This year we mark the twentieth anniversary of the Council's adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, which mobilized global efforts to eliminate the scourge of conflict-related sexual violence, a horrific weapon of war that is a threat to international peace and security. Iraq is developing its second national plan with the assistance of the United Nations and civil society organizations. That plan focuses on new and old challenges that were not fully addressed due to various circumstances. Iraqi women have shown great resilience in their fields of work and are playing an active role in mediation efforts and in the country's response to the coronavirus disease. Although Iraq is still committed to further implementing the joint communique by the Republic of Iraq and the United Nations on the prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence, in partnership with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the United Nations system, we regret that the Office of the Special Representative did not achieve its targets, as stipulated in the joint communique, because the implementation process has been obstructed for over a year. Iraq seeks further engagement from the Office of the Special Representative in order to build the capacity of the respective authorities so as to ensure the provision of services, support livelihoods and secure reparations for survivors, thus helping survivors and guaranteeing them psychosocial support and access to rehabilitation programmes. The Iraqi presidency submitted a draft bill on Yazidi female survivors in April 2019. That draft was later expanded to include all survivors of acts of sexual violence perpetrated by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terrorists. The draft bill calls for holding the perpetrators of such acts accountable in accordance with the applicable national law. The text proposes various reparation measures for survivors of captivity, acknowledges the issue of children born of sexual violence and calls for it to be addressed. Those survivors are considered victims, which is reflected in the title of the draft law. Community and religious leaders are raising awareness of survivors' plight and are promoting tolerance and inclusion so that the victims are not blamed and are not considered or treated in any way as being affiliated with ISIL. Lastly, in March, when sufficient evidence was provided, Iraq held accountable an ISIL terrorist who committed sexual violence against a Yazidi female survivor who was only 14 years old at the time. The perpetrator was found guilty before the court of participating in the rape and abduction of a Yazidi girl. Iraq believes that such a move will encourage other women and girls raped or abducted by ISIL to come forward and seek justice, as the reluctance of victims to testify in public had previously prevented the judicial system from bringing this kind of case. It will also empower women and girls who are survivors of sexual violence and protect their rights.
