China is grateful to the Dominican Republic for its initiative to convene this meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General and his Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, for their briefings. We listened attentively to the remarks of the briefers. We thank them for sharing their thoughts with us. Young people account for 16 per cent of the world population, and they play an important role in promoting sustainable development, maintaining international peace and security and strengthening global solidarity and partnership. China attaches great importance to the youth, peace and security agenda. We are pleased to note the progress made in the implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). Meanwhile, it is also worrisome that young people in a number of countries and regions still suffer from armed conflicts. As a result, they face the hardships of poverty, unemployment and marginalization, et cetera. Some of them even fall prey to terrorism. Currently, the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic also poses great challenges, putting the health, education and employment of young people at risk. The impact should not be overlooked. The international community should fully implement the relevant Security Council resolutions, remain attentive to the development of young people, help them to tackle the challenges arising from the pandemic and support them in playing a bigger role in advancing world peace and development. First, we must step up our efforts to protect young people by preventing conflicts and by shielding them from the harm of terrorism and extremism. To that end, the Security Council should uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, promote the political settlement of hot-spot issues and work towards conflict prevention and resolution through peaceful means. Moreover, the international community should resolutely fight against all forms of terrorism and violent extremism on the basis of unified standards, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. In particular, we need to combat the terrorism and extremism ideologies that corrode the minds of young people, take the necessary de-radicalization measures and crack down on the infiltration of terrorist and radical groups among young people through the Internet. Secondly, we should acknowledge and support the important role of young people in advancing peace and security, and further unleash their potential in that regard. It is important to fully take into consideration youth-related factors in the political settlement of hot-spot issues, ensure the constructive participation of young people in the peace processes of their home countries, draw on young people's strengths and listen to their views. Young people should also be enabled to participate in conflict prevention and resolution, contribute to social stability and development and take an active part in post-conflict reconstruction. The United Nations should enhance exchange and coordination on youth- related agendas and achieve synergy with the African Union, the League of Arab States, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and other regional and subregional organizations. Thirdly, we should promote inclusive development, create a favourable environment for youth development and strive for lasting peace. The international community should make young people a key driver in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and pursue peace through development. As the Secretary-General points out in his report on youth and peace and security (S/2020/167), the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is a cornerstone of long- term prevention. Investing in young people and transforming systems of exclusion into those ofinclusion represent a central component of the 2030 Agenda commitment. Countries also need to invest more in education and vocational training for young people, create more employment opportunities, support entrepreneurship, lift young populations out of poverty and help them to achieve all-round development so as to lay a solid foundation for peace. Given the COVID-19 pandemic, we must take the possible disruption in education, employment and accessibility of health services for young people very seriously and address the risks with concrete measures. Meanwhile, we should also call on young people to join the pandemic response efforts, help the most vulnerable and contribute to social prosperity. China has been actively engaged in international youth programmes. We are carrying out youth exchanges and cooperation with many countries and international organizations, including establishing the China-Africa Innovation Cooperation Centre to promote youth innovation and entrepreneurship, helping the Arab League with the training of young professionals and launching the China-Latin American Young Scientist Exchange Programme, among other things. Besides, we have been providing Government scholarships to young students from all over the world to study in China. We have also deployed excellent young peacekeepers, including female peacekeepers, to various United Nations missions. It is China's sincere hope that, with our joint efforts, we can shape a brighter shared future for all, including our younger generations.
