Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I was
delighted to oblige the Canadian Ambassador, and we
are very grateful to him for speaking before running.

I too would like to thank the Special
Representative for being with us today. We are all
delighted to see him in New York, and that was an
informative and very thought-provoking briefing. I
would like to express my country's warm appreciation
for his, and his team's, efforts, because despite the
difficulties - and he has talked of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
being the "punching bag"- it is responding
impressively to the challenge of building an
Administration from the bottom up. They deserve the
fullest international support.

When we discussed East Timor in March, I
referred to the continuing reports of militia activity as
more serious than the problems of increasing
criminality. Yet disturbing reports of militia incidents
in East and West Timor continue to hit us. Clearly,
UNTAET contingents remain at considerable risk,
despite the improvements that have been noted. The
United Kingdom has urged the Government of
Indonesia to get a grip on the situation. That message
must go out from the whole Council, and any
downsizing of UNTAET must take account of that
continuing risk.

We are equally concerned about the refugee
situation, and I fully endorse what the Ambassadors of
the United States and Canada have said. For all our
support for the Government of Indonesia, it has to do
more to allow those refugees who still wish to return to
East Timor to do so swiftly and speedily. Action has to
be taken both to provide pensions for former civil
servants wishing to return and to curb the malignant
and vicious influence of pro-integration extremists in
the refugee camps.

I put those two points first - the militias and the
refugees- because they are outside United Nations
control, and we have to send a very resounding and
collective message on both of them.

What I am going to say now is more within the
United Nations capability and needs attention. Last
week's East Timor donor conference in Lisbon was an
important milestone in the international community's
efforts in East Timor. It approved the World Bank and
UNTAET Trust Fund work programmes for 2000-2001.
It set up specific output measures for implementation
of sectoral programmes, UNTAET staffing and the
political process over the next six months.

When we discussed East Timor in March, I drew
attention to the slow rate of disbursements from the
United Nations Trust Fund. Much has been achieved
since the Tokyo Conference, six months ago, agreed
that simple, flexible, effective and sensitive procedures
were needed to maximize the impact of international
support for East Timor. But we still do not seem to
have achieved the straightforward disbursement we
were seeking. UNTAET's efforts to simplify
bureaucratic procedures is encouraging. But there are
still problems and bottlenecks. All donors have to work
to create a comprehensive, coherent development effort
rather than a multitude of unconnected bilateral
projects. It would help a great deal if UNTAET and the
World Bank could set out clear, measurable
performance indicators of progress for the coming
months and provide regular progress reports.

In the same vein, the UNTAET mission would
benefit from an even greater level of autonomy. This
would improve efficiency and allow for greater
flexibility in the decision-making process. Clarity
within the donor community about UNTAET's
mandate, both in the field and in New York, and clarity
within UNTAET about its own political and financial
responsibilities, is also essential. In this continuing
search for administrative improvements, we look to the
United Nations Development Programme to take the
lead in developing capacity-building for the East
Timorese public administration, in line with Security
Council resolution 1272 (1999).

The United Kingdom welcomes the proposals for
sharing power between the East Timorese leaders and
UNTAET - what Sergio Vieira de Mello has called
"timorization". These proposals will lay the accent on
sound governance and open communication, bring the
Timorese people closer to the decision-making process
and prepare them for assuming democratic government
after the elections foreshadowed for the second half of
next year. We fully support UNTAET's engagement on
East Timorese strategic defence options and on the
status of Falintil. As the Special Representative has
indicated, an independent study is set to begin on 7
July on this subject. The United Kingdom will take a
detailed view on this once the study is complete. The
final decision on security arrangements for an
independent East Timor is of course for the East
Timorese themselves. In the meantime, we would
encourage UNTAET to address Falintil's immediate
humanitarian needs.

The United Kingdom pays tribute not just to
UNTAET's persistence and fortitude, but also to the
East Timorese people, who have shown remarkable
patience and understanding in facing these continuing
hardships and in suffering conditions that are below the
standard of acceptability. The United Kingdom remains
committed to helping the people of East Timor at a
crucial point in the development of their nation. The
international community must continue to do all in its
power to bring them comprehensive and coherent
support.

