Mr. Manuel (Angola): We fully support the
initiative of the United States presidency and the
co-sponsors to promote this meeting of the Ministers
of Finance in the Security Council, as we believe it
will contribute to the development of new and effective
measures to achieve our common objectives in the fight
against terrorism and money-laundering.

The fight against terrorism is not a new concept.
For some time now, many countries have been
battling terrorism, which has taken the lives of many
innocent men, women and children across the globe,
while breaching fundamental human rights that are
consecrated by the spirit and letter of the Charter of the
United Nations.

As a Member of the United Nations and various
other international and regional organizations, Angola
is still highly concerned about terrorism. Like the United
Nations, we will fight against it, for it is not a matter
that solely concerns a single country or organization,
but in fact affects all of the citizens of the world.

In recent decades, extraordinary advances in
information and technology have facilitated financial
flows and communication among billions of people,
among which are those who breach human rights through
the misuse of social media and other communication
tools.

Angola's action against terrorism became effective
in 1999, when parliamentary resolution 25/99 was
adopted on preventing and fighting terrorism,
which adopted the 1999 Organization of African
Unity Convention on the Prevention and Combating
of Terrorism. In addition, a number of other legal
measures were put in place. I wish to point out that the
Angola National Assembly regulation 38/10, adopted
in 2010, approves the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. An
anti-terrorism and money-laundering bill was adopted
in Angola under law 12/ 10, and was later reinforced by
law 34/11. Law l/l2 allows Angola to immediately apply
resolutions of United Nations sanctions committees in
order to prevent terrorism from benefitting from any
form of financing. Under those regulations, we created
a financial intelligence unit and a national designation
committee, which are in charge of the centralizing
and processing of all information concerning money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism.

Apart from implementing the various laws against
terrorism, money-laundering and illicit financial flows,
as a country, Angola has made tremendous efforts to
empower its institutions to detect and combat terrorism
and its financiers. As a response to the worldwide
appeals against this evil, which affects all of us, the
proliferation of terrorist organizations, such as Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham and Boko Haram, is a
major concern, as they end the lives of thousands and
thousands of citizens across the world. We recognize
that such terrorist organizations originate not only from
erroneous religious ideologies, but they are strongly
correlated with the sources of financing. That is what
makes such organizations powerful and still more
threatening. On that basis, we believe that the best
weapon against terrorism remains the eradication of its
sources of financing.
Getting rid ofthe sources of financing for terrorism
is by far the more effective weapon. But in order to
do so, a massive collective effort is required by all
countries and organizations. Efficient mechanisms
must be created to allow countries to control the origin
and destination of funds that circulate internally and
which, instead of being channelled towards investing
in development, are in danger of being directed towards
disseminating ideologies, extremism and political
objectives that go against human rights under the
democratic rule of law. That primarily affects those
developing countries that have been recently recovering
from the effects of the Cold War.

However, we must extend the fight beyond
institutions, countries and organizations. All citizens
must feel socially responsible and be individually
involved in fighting this phenomenon. In that context, it
is worth strengthening the efforts of developed countries
to approve the restructuring of national financial
systems, as that proposed in the Group of 20 meetings,
modelled after the Volcker Rule and the Dodd-Frank
Act, approved in the United States Congress, designed
to protect financial and non-financial institutions
against the risks of exaggerated self-regulation, which
led to the earlier financial crises of 2008 and 2009.

Moreover, it is necessary to provide the mechanisms
by which all citizens have access to, and knowledge of,
the information on the United Nations sanctions lists.
Furthermore, citizens must be aware of the actual
sanctions to be applied, such as the seizure of capital,
goods and assets of those listed. Such mechanisms have
already begun to be implemented in Angola, based
on information provided by the Financial Intelligence
Unit. We think it is also important that all countries
develop and speed up legal cooperation mechanisms
and knowledge-sharing regarding such matters as
the origin and destination of funds, as well as the
implementation of restorative measures required by
other foreign States.

