Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of April, and to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Argentina, for his outstanding work
last month.

I would also like to thank you, Sir, for having
urgently convened this meeting in response to a request
to address the recent dangerous and disturbing
developments that have taken place in Palestine. These
events are of concern to my country, and they have
serious, profound and diverse repercussions for
international peace and security.

It is worrying to observe, yet again, that the
Security Council failed to discharge its responsibilities
with regard to the maintenance of international peace
and security when, yet again, it did not respond to the
aggression that Israel had clearly committed in
violation of its obligations under international law as
an occupying force. We regret that several days ago the
Council failed to adopt a presidential statement
denouncing the serious deterioration in the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories following the daily
attacks by the Israeli army against the Palestinian
population that we so firmly condemn. We appeal to
the international community and to the Quartet to do
their utmost in order to put an end to the ongoing
aggression by Israel against the Palestinian people.

The recent hostile acts perpetrated by Israel add
to the long list of aggression against the Palestinian
people and of the violations of the most basic human
rights that it has perpetrated for decades. These include
the illegal settlements, the demolition of homes,
arbitrary detentions, extrajudiciary executions, the
building of an illegal separation wall on Palestinian
territory and the choking of the Palestinian economy.
All of these illegal practices run counter to
international humanitarian law and to the numerous
resolutions that the Security Council and the General
Assembly have adopted since 1967.
It is in this context of impunity that on 14 March
Israel attacked the prison in Jericho, kidnapping
Palestinian detainees in defiance of international
accords and conventions. We call for their release to
the Palestinian Authority without delay.

The Security Council must denounce these acts of
aggression. Unilateral measures and the policy of fait
accompli must cease, for they could prejudice the
outcome of the negotiations that are to lead to the
establishment of an independent, sovereign Palestinian
State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

The latest Palestinian legislative elections have
proven the ability of the Palestinian people to organize
free and democratic elections in conditions that
objectively are extremely trying. We express our
consideration and our respect for the achievements of
the Palestinian people. We reiterate our tireless support
to the Palestinian Authority and to its institutions, and
we welcome the national Palestinian dialogue that has
responsibly led to the formation of a national
Government. The Council must call upon the
international community, specifically the Quartet, to
respect the will and choice of the Palestinian people.

We believe that the suspension of international
aid to the Palestinian Authority on the heels of their
democratic choice could only further destabilize the
Middle East. For our part, we believe that freezing
assistance is an unfair and unjustified decision. The
international community should end its policy of
double standards in dealing with the Palestinian
question. It should adopt equitable measures with
respect to the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people to ease their daily plight and the acts of
aggression against them.

The just and comprehensive peace to which the
people of the region are aspiring is an indivisible
whole and cannot be achieved without a full
withdrawal from occupied Arab territories in Palestine,
the Syrian Golan and the Shaba'a Farms, and without
the return to the borders of 4 June 1967. The
framework for achieving this peace does exist and is
set forth by the Arab Peace Initiative and by Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003). These need to be implemented
resolutely.

