The Deputy Secretary-General: First of all, let me
reiterate our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for placing this
item on the agenda of the Council. It is clear from all the
statements that have been made today that we all share the
same deep sense of concern over the multiplication of grave
incidents - deliberate attacks against United Nations and
humanitarian workers.

Many delegations - most delegations, I think -
have reaffirmed a number of very important principles: that
the primary responsibility for the safety of United Nations
and other humanitarian workers rests with the Governments
of the countries in which we are operating; that the
perpetrators of attacks against United Nations and
humanitarian personnel must be brought to justice; and that
the impartiality and neutrality of humanitarian agencies and
humanitarian workers must be protected.

I very much welcome the commitment of the
Security Council increasingly to factor into its decisions the
security dimensions of its mandates, as exemplified by the
draft presidential statement that the Council will be
adopting shortly. I noted with great satisfaction that many
speakers again supported the notion of the need to
strengthen the international legal framework for the
protection of United Nations and humanitarian workers. I
also noted with great pleasure that a number of countries
have initiated the process of ratification, and that we can
hope to see a good number of new ratifications coming
about in the near future.

As well, I have noted that many countries have
indicated interest in seeing whether the scope of application
of this Convention could be enlarged. Also, there were
many positive references to the important role that the
International Criminal Court would play in this matter
once it enters into operation.

I welcome very much the support expressed by
most speakers for the number of concrete measures that
Catherine Bertini and I mentioned in our presentations,
particularly training, and the recognition by many
speakers that to implement some of these measures,
resources will have to be provided.

Let me say in passing, Mr. President, that we
appreciate very much the contribution that you have
announced today to the trust fund that was set up a
couple of years ago for the purpose of providing for
security of United Nations staff.

I believe the next step in the consideration of these
very important issues will be the comprehensive report
that the Secretary-General will issue on the protection of
United Nations and associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel. Many of you have invited us to come forward
with concrete proposals, and I can assure you that we will
do that.

Let me finally say, in the name of Catherine Bertini
and all our colleagues in the United Nations system, that
we appreciate very much the moving tributes that you
have all paid to our colleagues who have fallen victim in
the course of their duty as United Nations and
humanitarian workers. I think you will all agree that we
must move beyond words to concrete actions so that, in
the words of one of the speakers today, today's heros do
not become tomorrow's victims.

