Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to begin by
paying respect to the memory of the victims of
violence, whether in Lebanon, Israel or Palestine, and
expressing our deep condolences to their families for
their loss. As Greek Prime Minister Karamanlis said,
this violence - any violence - cannot be
distinguished as being good or bad. We condemn it in
its totality, unequivocally and categorically.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the Permanent Representative of Finland
on behalf of the European Union.

The current situation in the Middle East is cause
for grave concern and risks having far-reaching
repercussions for the entire Middle East. Recently in
Lebanon and Israel the use of force has inflicted a blow
against the highest right - the right to human life. It
tests the conscience, the principles and the values of
06-43915
the international community. It is high time that the
violence stop. We must return to diplomacy and create
the minimum level of trust among the people of the
area to allow for the development of a political process
of negotiation leading to a peaceful and lasting
solution. In particular, the dire humanitarian situation
and the extensive destruction of civilian infrastructure,
along with the indiscriminate taking of civilian life,
require the immediate attention of the international
community. It is obvious that a situation as serious as
the current one cannot continue.

We deplore the suffering of the civilian
population, whether in Lebanon, in Israel or in the
occupied territories. We call upon all parties to use the
utmost restraint, and we call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities in order to prevent further loss
of human life. United Nations agencies and
humanitarian workers should be allowed to have access
to southern Lebanon to assess the needs of the civilian
population and deliver the humanitarian assistance that
is needed. In this respect, we support the Secretary-
General's appeal to establish safe corridors to allow
humanitarian workers and relief supplies to reach the
civilian population.

We call for the immediate and unconditional
release of the abducted Israeli soldiers, as well as for
the immediate cessation of all attacks on Israeli cities
and towns. We recognize Israel's legitimate right to
self-defence. However, in exercising that right, Israel
must abide by its obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law. Actions
contrary to international law cannot serve anyone's
legitimate security concerns. In this respect, we repeat
our call on Israel not to resort to the disproportionate
use of force. In our view, that will not solve the
existing problems.

The sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and
political independence of Lebanon must be
safeguarded and respected. The air and sea blockade of
the country must be immediately lifted, and the
stability of the country, as well as of its legitimate
Government, must not be further undermined.

At the same time, it is imperative that the
Lebanese Government be supported so that it can take
immediate and effective strong action to prevent
further attacks against Israel by Hizbollah. We urge the
full implementation of Security Council resolutions
06-43915
1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), including the disbanding
and disarming of all militias.

The proposals made yesterday by the Secretary-
General in his briefing to the Council constitute a
good, sound basis for a sustainable solution and merit
urgent consideration by the Council. The Security
Council must now take immediate action, because
further delays and silence will impair our collective
credibility.

At this critical juncture, we believe that, above
all, we should not lose sight of our agreed common
vision for a lasting, comprehensive and viable solution
of the Palestinian question, which lies at the heart of
the whole Middle East conflict.

Greece remains committed to the achievement of
such a solution, based on all relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as the
Madrid terms of reference and the principle of land for
peace, leading to the existence of two States, Israel and
an independent, viable Palestine, living side by side
with each other, in peace and security, within
internationally recognized borders.

In this context, we firmly support the position of
the Quartet that all members of the Palestinian
Government must be committed to non-violence, to the
recognition of Israel's right to exist and to the
acceptance of previous agreements and obligations,
including the road map.

It is on that basis that the international
community stands ready to continue to support the
Palestinians in their quest to achieve their goals of
building the institutions of a democratic State and
economic and social development.

