Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank President Meron, President Joensen and
Prosecutors Jallow and Brammertz for their briefings.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

This year we are celebrating the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 827 (1993), which created the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The Security Council commemorated the event on
28 May. In 20 years, the region has recovered its human
face. The political dialogue has continued to make
progress under the auspices of the European Union.
The Tribunal, guarantor of the right to the truth, the
fight against impunity and the duty to remember, has
played its full part in that evolution. It has not been
ideal, of course; the political rhetoric and denial of
some crimes, and the lack of regional cooperation in
bringing intermediate-level criminals to trial are still
cause for concern. But the course has held steady.

The Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
have anchored the United Nations in an era that
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has called the age
of accountability. As they prepare to bring their work
to a close, another body, this one permanent and with
a universal jurisdiction, endowed by a statute that
reflects the great juridical traditions, has already
taken up the baton. The shadow of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) continues to lengthen, with the
Rome Statute hanging like a sword of Damocles over
those who torture, recruit children or commit sexual
violence. The Secretary-General's determined policy
in promoting human rights, avoiding contact with
those wanted by the ICC and instructing mediators
not to consider amnesty or immunity for perpetrators
of serious crimes has done a great deal to strengthen
the impact of international justice, and we salute his
efforts.

Regarding the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, I commend the efforts that it has made to stick
to its work deadlines as far as possible. I should also
confirm our concern to receive full information from the
Tribunal about the two cases that have been referred to
French jurisdiction, those concerning Mr. Bucyibaruta
and Mr. Munyeshyaka. The French authorities pay full
attention to issues raised by the Tribunal with regard to
those proceedings.

While the Tribunal works to conclude its activities,
we should remain vigilant; three high-ranking fugitives,
whose arrest is a priority, are still at large - Felicien
Kabuga, Augustin Bizimana and Protais Mpiranya.
They will be tried by the Residual Mechanism when
they are apprehended, and we must ensure that the
Mechanism has sufficient resources to allow it to see
that task through. I should point out that the Council's
resolutions mandate universal cooperation with the
ICTR, and it is important that the Council remind
everyone of that obligation. Regarding assistance to
the Tribunal, moreover, the relocation of those who
have been acquitted or who have completed their
sentences after having been found guilty is a matter
that we are seriously focused on. France was among the
first to admit several individuals to its territory at the
Tribunal's request. We hope that more States will grant
entry to such people.

The Tribunal has positioned the issue of justice
at the heart of our concerns in the region. The ICC is
continuing that work in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Today we are pleased to see the work of
international justice completed at the political level
by the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework Agreement for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region. Its
aim is to strengthen the integration of the States in the
region and to put an end to decades of instability and
mistrust by tackling the root causes of tension.

For its part, the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia is now managing some
very complex cases, which explains the slippage in
its timetable. We hope that it will conclude its work
as soon as possible, though nothing should undermine
its capacity to see that justice is served. I should recall
that the decisions of the international criminal justice
system apply to all, something that is as true for the
ad hoc Tribunals as for the International Criminal
Court. We are also obliged to respect the victims. Every
decision of the Tribunal has confirmed that atrocities
were committed in the region of the former Yugoslavia
by all parties. The ICTY has designated the Srebrenica
massacre as genocide - soldiers were disarmed and
executed, in violation of the law, ethnic cleansing
campaigns took place and members of ethnic minorities
were persecuted.

While the international Tribunals are bringing
their work to a close, the responsibility of the States
in the region to commit to combating impunity must
now take centre stage. As I said previously, we are not
entirely convinced that the countries of the region have
mobilized to continue those efforts at the local level. And
regional cooperation remains inadequate. For France,
as a member of the European Union, full cooperation
with the ICTY, as well as regional cooperation, remains
a major consideration and an essential obligation within
the framework of the stabilization and association
process for candidate and potential candidate countries
for membership.

The historic agreement of 19 April between
Serbia and Kosovo, reached under the auspices of the
European Union, creates a new context that brings hope
for stability in the region, the future of the peoples
involved and the European prospects for those two
States. We hope that the spirit that made that agreement
possible, one that promotes justice and rejects impunity,
will enable them to definitively turn the page on the
conflicts in the former Yugoslavia.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Ambassador
of Guatemala, Chair of the Informal Working Group
on the International Tribunals, his entire team, the
representatives of the Tribunals and the staff of the
Office ofLegal Affairs for their efforts in accomplishing
the transition provided for in resolution 1966 (2010).

