Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the holding of this meeting and express our
gratitude for the important information provided by
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller.

Peru continues to follow with grave concern the
continuing conflict and grave humanitarian situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic. While recent days have
seen positive developments in the north-west of the
country, the overall situation remains uncertain and
millions of people continue enduring conditions of
extreme vulnerability.
We note with alarm the report of approximately
630,000 new internally displaced persons since May,
the majority located along the Turkish border. Those
people, largely women and children, are facing abjectly
precarious conditions as a result of the extensive
territorial control attained by terrorist groups and the
continuous air strikes that make no distinction between
civilians and combatants.

Peru once again expresses its profound solidarity
with the Syrians enduring this cruel and protected
conflict, as well as our gratitude and support to United
Nations personnel and other humanitarian agencies
deployed on the ground.

We hope that, given this delicate situation, the
bilateral arrangements announced relating to those
areas will pose no threat to the civilian population or
affect humanitarian assistance operations. We wish to
underscore the joint United Nations operation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the Red
Crescent, as mentioned by Ms. Mueller, to address the
grave situation facing the thousands of displaced people
in Rukban, characterized by daily shortages of food,
drinking water, health care and medical supplies as
well as extreme weather conditions. While we welcome
the recent humanitarian deployment by the United
Nations to the camp, we stress the obligation to provide
continuous access to humanitarian assistance for as
long as necessary and continue in efforts to guarantee
the safe and dignified return of persons currently in the
camp due to a lack of resources to move.

We must also emphasize the major challenge
involved in meeting the critical needs of the more
than 70,000 people in the Al-Hol camp and the
importance of continuing to mobilize the support of the
international community.

We encourage the Government of Iraq to implement
the repatriation plans for its 30,000 nationals with the
support of the United Nations. To that end, we believe
it vital that the parties continue to work on measures
that foster a climate of better understanding, including
the release of detainees, the identification of missing
persons and the transfer ofhuman remains. We welcome
the work being done in that regard Within the Astana
framework but we note the urgent need to make more
substantive progress in that area.

We also highlight the importance of continuing to
promote humanitarian demining work and the clearance
ofimprovised explosive devices in Syria, whose effects
not only wreak havoc among the population but also
hamper the delivery of the necessary assistance.

I would like to conclude by underlining the
urgent need for a permanent end to the hostilities as
the only way to begin to put an end to the suffering
that the continuation of the conflict will cause to
Syrian civilians.

