Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for organizing this open debate. We also thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Herve Ladsous, Ms. Yoka
Brandt and Mr. Gregory Ramm for their statements.
We offer special recognition to Luxembourg for its
leadership in the Informal Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, as well as the negotiation of the
draft presidential statement to be adopted at the close
of this debate. We welcome the presence of Mr. Jean
Asselborn.

The introductory statements and the Secretary-
General's report (S/2013/245) illustrate once again the
persistent violations and abuses that children affected
by armed conflict continue to face. The chapter on the
evolving nature of conflict and emerging challenges to
the protection of children cries out for the attention of
the Council.

Although the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians falls on the State, and while those States
that fail to protect their children are putting their own
future at risk, it is also true that new tactics emerging
in conflicts represent threats without precedent to all
children. In this regard, we are concerned that schools
are being used for military purposes, including as
military barracks, weapons caches, command centres,
detention and interrogation centres. This situation not
only puts children and their caretakers at greater risk of
attack, but also clearly increases school absences when
parents do not send their children to school out of fear,
and obstructs children's own right to education.

We are further concerned over the use of unmanned
aircraft in areas inhabited by civilians, which increases
casualties among children, makes it impossible to
distinguish between combatants and non-combatants,
and seriously weakens the capacity of communities to
defend their children. By the same token, it is deeply
concerning that children are being used as suicide
bombers or human shields.

We support the Secretary-General's call on parties
to armed conflict to immediately cease committing
grave violations against children. We also believe that
the issue of persistent offenders or perpetrators of abuse
against children should continue to be addressed. It is
imperative that those responsible for serious violations
be brought tojustice in order to pay for their crimes; this
is a task that we must undertake until it is completed.

We believe in strengthening national capacities in
thejustice and security sectors, as well as in the creation
of specialized chambers and mixed tribunals. We
consider the complementarity of international justice
to national mechanisms, such as the International
Criminal Court, to be equally as important, especially
in the fight against impunity for persistent perpetrators.

On the basis of the aforementioned points, we
support the further consideration of another mechanism
at the Council's disposal - the application of a
sanctions regime. Currently, we have four sanctions
committees with criteria for the designation of serious
violations of the rights of children in Cote D'Ivoire,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and
the Sudan. We also have the lists in the annexes of the
report of the Secretary-General, beginning with annex
I, which lists the parties to the armed conflicts on the
agenda of the Council. Further work is needed to ensure
the imposition of sanctions against offenders.

Regarding the signing of action plans to halt the
recruitment of children, we are pleased to see that
their numbers have continued to increase, as have the
establishment of dialogues with parties to conflicts.
However, from our own experience we prioritize the
signing of peace accords that comprehensively address
the problems of the country involved and seek a
sustainable solution and a construction of a firm and
lasting peace. We advocate for the issues of children
affected by conflict to be addressed in any ceasefire
agreement, as well as in post-conflict agendas.

We remain especially concerned about the
continuing conflict in Syria, where children have been
victims of unacceptable and unbearable violations, and
we join in the calls made by the Secretary-General to
the Government and affiliated groups to cease engaging
in acts of violence that kill children and cause their
suffering.

