Mr. Augusto (Angola): Allow me, on behalf of the
Republic of Angola, to extend a warm welcome to your
Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah
II and to express our appreciation to the delegation of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for organizing this
very important debate. We would also like to reiterate
our support and appreciation to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his tireless efforts to promote peace and
justice throughout the world. We welcome and thank
Mr. Peter Neumann, Director of the International Centre
for the Study of Radicalization and Political Violence
at King's College, and Mr. Scott Atran, Director of
Research in Anthropology at the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, for their briefings.
Over the past few years, we have witnessed an
alarming increase in the number of young men and
women, many of them well-bred and -educated, joining
forces with terrorist armed groups, contrary to the
traditional stereotype idea of terrorism as a product of
disadvantaged, marginalized people. This phenomenon,
along with the increasing influence of such terrorist
networks around the world, should serve as a warning
to the international community that the root causes of
this issue must be identified and dealt with effectively.
Today's debate is therefore very timely.

Although the reasons driving young people to
become radicalized vary, we believe that there are some
common traits.

First, identity crisis, exclusion, misinformation
and a discrepancy between expectations and reality are
factors that young people can experience, irrespective
of geographic location or social condition. During this
stage of life, young men and women are rebellious,
tend to vent their frustration at the community and are
vulnerable to Violent extremist propaganda, in virtual
networks, youth clubs or places of worship. It is therefore
important that local communities engage with young
people and provide positive outlets for expression,
through sports, the arts or any other programmes that
provide a safe and nurturing environment.

Secondly, the evolution of technology and the
rapid spread of information through such means of
communication have provided greater awareness among
young people of political events around the world. In
addition, political and military interventionism, often
sustained by double-standard approaches, breeds
resentment that leads to various forms of Violent
extremism.

These realities make it absolutely imperative to
find ways to deal with such critical issues, address
the spiritual and material fundamental needs of young
people and promote their political, economic and social
inclusion, in a manner whereby no one is left behind
in enjoying the common good and the outstanding
achievements of our contemporary world.

On the other hand, the world's political and strategic
outlook must change so that, at the international level,
peoples and countries are treated equally, and policies
contributing to exacerbating tensions and humiliating
peoples are definitively set aside.

In Angola, around 60 per cent of the population is
young, and as in many African countries they are faced
with various obstacles and challenges in their self-
realization. We have many young people who either
actively participated or were indirectly affected by the
long and bitter civil strife. They are the object ofconcern
to the Angolan Government, which has established as a
central objective of its economic policies the generation
of qualified, competitive and adequately remunerated
employment for young people. Angola's 2013-2017
national development plan gives a central role to youth,
who are considered promoters of modernization and
major agents of change. As such, the plan aims not only
to improve the living conditions, but also to strengthen
capacity building for Angola's youth.

An equally important aspect consists in promoting
effective participation by young people in the democratic
process for social change and the development of the
country. Such participation is based on the promotion
of youth and student associations, and the strengthening
of social, community-based projects directed at young
people.

Recently, due to the increasing threat of international
terrorist groups and the more sophisticated recruiting
methods used by them to attract disenchanted youth to
their evil causes, the Angolan Government created the
National Counter-Terrorism Observatory, comprising a
multisectoral technical group, joining the Ministries of
Foreign Affairs, the Interior, and Defence, and the State
security services, in the main objective of monitoring
and combating any potential threats.

Angola, which has enjoyed steady economic
growth in recent years, is an attractive destination for
many illegal immigrants. That is of great concern to our
authorities, and is seen as a real threat to the country's
security and stability.

In February 2015, our Government invited experts
from 11 countries in Central Africa for a seminar to
debate issues related to terrorism around the world and
to seek proposals for a common strategy to combat the
threat in the region. Promoted by the Ministry of Justice
and Human Rights and the Ministry of the Interior, in
partnership with the United Nations, issues related
to terrorism and human rights were discussed during
the seminar, including, inter alia, violent extremism,
terrorism and the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters in the Central African region; the question of
development and social inclusion in the fight against
terrorism; measures to guarantee respect for human
rights and the rule of law as the fundamental basis
of the fight against terrorism; and strengthening the
international legal architecture to promote respect for
human rights and an effective justice system.

Mr. Judeh took the Chair.
We stress once again the importance of today's
debate and of the effective implementation of national
and international policies to tackle this problem at its
roots. Young people are increasingly interconnected,
and we must promote the means for bringing them
even closer together. However, young frustrated men
and women without a purpose in life and deceived by
the promise of fighting for a just cause are extremely
vulnerable to recruitment by these increasingly
sophisticated terrorist networks. We must, at all
levels of society - at home, at school, in grass roots
organizations, at places of worship, in academia, at
social networks at the local, national, regional and
international level - conduct an energetic and creative
ideological struggle against terrorism. It is high time
that, going beyond military means, we engage not only
with Governments and international organizations
but also with large movements and grass-roots groups
to foster a dialogue and a mutual understanding to
promote democratic principles and defeat radicalism
and extremist violence.

Some concrete steps that could facilitate this
process are, in our View, strengthening the role of local
Governments in addressing community problems, in
coordination with local authorities and civil society;
developing projects that seek to reduce inequality and
promote the active participation of youth in social
projects for peacebuilding; creating opportunities
for young people's sustained and institutionalized
participation, ownership and leadership in local,
national, regional and international decision-making
processes; supporting innovative ideas of youth-led
organizations and young people who are influential
among their peers to improve the daily security
situation and safety within communities; ensuring
access to quality education, health-care services and
justice and judicial systems and supporting youth-
oriented organizations; and fostering increased
information-sharing and transparency with national
and international networks that seek to combat Violent
extremism.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that we
strongly believe that the youth of the world can be
agents of development for social inclusion, tolerance
and peace. We will therefore continue to work to
implement all the programmes and initiatives that
we have delineated and work with our partners in the
international community to stop the violent extremism
that is spreading so dangerously throughout the world.

