Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. I would also like to to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her important briefing.

The Libyan authorities are aware of their primary
responsibility to fight impunity and to render justice
throughoutLibya. Ourresolve to exercise our sovereignty
and national jurisdiction in prosecuting suspects does
not imply disrespect for the decisions of the ICC judges
or any lack of cooperation. Libya considers the Court to
be an important and supportive partner in the context
of complementarity between national and international
jurisdictions, as been demonstrated by a number of
meetings between the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICC and the political and judicial authorities of Libya.
Some tangible and important measures have also been
adopted to promote cooperation and integration between
national justice and the ICC judges, as highlighted by
the ICC Prosecutor in several of her reports.

We recognize the delay in prosecuting and bringing
the suspects to trial. However, that delay should not be
equated with the national judiciary's unwillingness to
prosecute the perpetrators of crimes. Rather, it is due
to the security situation in Libya. That same situation
has prevented the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC
from carrying out its investigations within the Libyan
territory. We therefore underscore the fact that in
order for the national judiciary to meet its obligations
to deliver justice and promote the rule of law, the
international community should urgently assist the
Libyan authorities in overcoming the security crisis
in Libya, while at the same time promoting efforts to
ensure the success of the political dialogue. That can
be achieved by supporting efforts to consolidate and
operationalize security institutions and build State
institutions, which will enable Libya to promote security
and stability, control all factors and circumstances that
give rise to such violations, and confiscate the tools used
to commit crimes, in particular weapons. That would
clearly help the Libyan judiciary to hold perpetrators
accountable for the crimes committed and to prevent
the reoccurrence of such crimes and violations in the
light of the proliferation of weapons and terrorist and
outlaw groups. The rise in crime is reflected in the
various reports of the ICC Prosecutor.

We recognize and understand the concern of the ICC
Prosecutor over the alleged crimes committed against
migrants. We recognize their rights and are well aware
of the degree of their humanitarian suffering owing to
insecurity and the ongoing proliferation of weapons
and militia. However, we note from the reports of the
Prosecutor and those of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and other relevant international
organizations that the violations and crimes committed
against migrants in Libya continue to be a focus although
no attention is paid to combating human trafficking.
That in itself is one of the most appalling organized
crimes perpetrated by transnational criminal networks,
and must be addressed by the international community
in accordance with international humanitarian law; the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; and the relevant

Security Council resolutions. In that regard, we stress
that any attempt or request to return those migrants to
Libya represents a great violation of their rights, as they
might be exposed to dangerous practices owing to the
chaotic security situation in Libya.

Accordingly, we hope that future reports will
include genuine procedural efforts to identify progress
in combatting these criminal networks in the countries
of origin and destination. It is well known that Libya is
a transit country that is suffering from security chaos.
Accordingly, if there were no criminal networks in
the countries of origin and destination, no crimes or
violations would be committed in transit countries.

Finally, we know that the international community
seeks to see justice done and fight impunity, but
we cannot fully achieve that end in Libya if the
international community fails to support and reactivate
the professional security apparatus and to promote its
capabilities, since it is the sole guarantor of establishing
a security and administrative environment that would
enable the judicial authorities to prosecute suspects
and guarantee the non-recurrence of violations. Failure
to ensure such support will only engender greater
violations and more crimes.

Council members all surely know that the
investigation and prosecution of crimes allegedly
committed in Libya would promote justice, since
Libya is the scene of these crimes, some of which are
linked to other criminal activities. Its fragmentation
could therefore lead to the damage of evidence and the
obstruction of investigations, particularly given that
justice must be for all and not limited to a particular
case or suspect.

To conclude, one member ofthe Council referred to
the fact that Libya is suffering from Islamic terrorism.
We categorically object to that, and stress that terrorism
cannot be linked to any religion.

The meeting rose at11.40 a.m.
