Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): Let me
first thank the Japanese presidency for convening this
meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman and the observer of the European Union for
their very enlightening briefings. I would also like to
particularly thank the Italian Facilitator and his team,
whose work I warmly commend.

The Council has worked for years with the rest
of the international community to build a strong and
sustainable system of collective security, at the heart
of which is the current non-proliferation architecture to
which each of us has contributed. Today, that architecture
is based on robust international instruments, to
which we are all committed and of which the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is the
cornerstone. The nuclear agreement reached with Iran
on 14 July 2015 in Vienna is part of that framework and
must reinforce it.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
entered into force two years ago. Its adoption, endorsed
by the Security Council in resolution 2231 (2015), has
enabled us to respond robustly to a major proliferation
crisis. It ensures that the Iranian nuclear programme
will not be used for military purposes for more than
10 years. It is a key step both for our international
non-proliferation efforts and for international peace
and security. The JCPOA is well established, and the
decision by the United States not to proceed to the
certification that its domestic legislation envisages
does not change the situation. The JCPOA remains in
place and must be fully implemented. Nevertheless,
the decision has created uncertainty, as the Secretary-
General's report indicates (S/2017/1030). All the parties
to the agreement must abide by it in the interests of the
international community, which has other proliferation
crises to deal with, and because respect for commitments
voluntarily entered into is a fundamental element of
international relations.

The JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) are closely
linked. In that regard, France welcomes the Secretary-
General's solid, balanced report on the implementation
of the resolution. Ensuring the ongoing monitoring of
Iranian commitments under the resolution is essential
if the international community is to follow the situation
as carefully it should. France was an active participant
in the negotiations for the robust agreement reached on
Iran's nuclear programme and endorsed in resolution
2231 (2015). We have frequently expressed our firm
commitment to both documents and to their full and
effective implementation by all parties. In October,
President Macron of France, together with the Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom and the Chancellor
of Germany, reaffirmed that commitment. Iran has
not violated its nuclear commitments under the
JCPOA. I would like to point out that in its report of
13 November, the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) did not identify any violations by Iran of its
nuclear commitments for the reporting period. France
fully supports the IAEA's excellent monitoring and
verification efforts, and we also welcome the reports
that the Procurement Channel is functioning well.

However, it should be clear to all that the
commitments undertaken more than two years ago are
not limited to the framework of the JCPOA or to the
nuclear sector generally. Just as it would be a mistake to
denounce the JCPOA, it would also be irresponsible to
selectively implement the provisions of the resolution
endorsing it. Iran must respect the totality of its
commitments under resolution 2231 (2015), and which
it voluntarily committed to implementing. The long list
in the Secretary-General's report of the cases of Iran's
ongoing non-compliance with several of its important
provisions is very worrying.

First, there is Iran's pursuit of its ballistic-missile
programme and its transfers of ballistic-missile
capabilities in the region, activities that are a growing
cause for concern for my country. They contribute to
the destabilization of the region and are a threat to the
security interests of countries there. The recent tests
and launches of missiles capable of carrying nuclear
warheads, such as those on 18 June and 4 July, as
well as the space launch on 27 July, are in violation of
resolution 2231 (2015). Make no mistake, these missiles
are technically capable of carrying nuclear weapons,
which Iran has agreed not to develop. Therefore, those
activities must stop. The stability of the region and
international security depend on it.

With regard to the allegations of transfers of
ballistic technology to the Houthis in Yemen, it will
be important to ensure that the relevant information is
rigorously examined by the Secretariat. In that regard,
France supports the holding of a joint meeting with the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014). We are also gravely concerned
about the reports, suspected or confirmed, of seizures
of arms originating in or destined for Iran, and which
have been reported or confirmed by the Secretariat.
Such transfers are violations of resolution 2231 (2015)
and foment mistrust in a delicate regional context.
Finally, we are also worried by the reports that General
Soleimani has been abroad, when he is still subject to
a travel ban. All States Members of the United Nations
must comply with their obligations, which in this case
are an assets freeze and a travel ban.

The Council deals regularly with the North Korean
and Syrian dossiers and the immense and serious
challenges of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The case of Iran represents confirmation
that the will of the international community, expressed
through pragmatic and realistic multilateralism, can
lead to solutions. The sustainability of such a solution, as
with the other instruments I mentioned, requires a joint
and sincere commitment to rigorously implementing the
agreed provisions. I would like to assure the Council of
France's commitment in that regard.

