Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, I wish to thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate on such an important topic. I
would also like to thank Ambassadors Grauls and
Jurica for the briefings that they have just delivered to
the Council on the work of the Committees they had
chaired. I should also like to thank them on behalf of
my delegation for the very demanding work that they
carry out at the head of these Committees, something
they always do in a very professional way.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU).

Terrorism knows no borders, and over the past six
months the Security Council has pronounced itself on a
number of occasions to condemn terrorist attacks
worldwide. This global threat requires global
cooperation, and it is the European Union's view that
no organization is better suited for that purpose than
the United Nations. Everyone here knows full well that
this Organization has a long track record in setting
norms for counter-terrorism. What is also important are
the values on which this Organization is founded,
values that lead to rejecting the use of terrorist tactics
as a means to pursue whatever end, however legitimate
it might be. And, when the Council pronounces itself
on counter-terrorism, it does so by recalling that all

measures taken to combat terrorism must be in
conformity with international law, including human
rights, refugees and international law. For the European
Union, respect for human rights and the rule of law is
an essential element of counter-terrorism. We must not
renounce our values in trying to defeat those who reject
them.

This meeting today is an opportunity for us to
hear the briefings by the Chairmen of three subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council: the Al-Qaida and
Taliban Sanctions Committee known as the 1267
Committee; the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), better known as the Counter-
Terrorism Committee; and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors,
including terrorists. These are obviously very
important subsidiary bodies of the Security Council,
and the European Union closely follows their work.
The Union also supports close cooperation between
these three Committees and their support bodies, and
we welcome the practice of joint and common
briefings, similar to the one our colleague from Costa
Rica gave us today. The three Committees must strive
to achieve greater cohesiveness, and we welcome their
participation in the broader effort undertaken by the
United Nations family to achieve greater cohesiveness
throughout the Secretary-General's Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.

As a token of the support of the European Union
for this close coordination between the three
Committees and their expert support groups, the
European Union would like to call on the Secretary-
General to explore all possible ways to take advantage
of the capital master plan and locate these three expert
support bodies in a common location.

After these general remarks, I would like to turn
to the work of the three Committees.

The European Union fully supports the sanctions
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban. Al-Qaida threatens
the whole world and is, by its very nature, a unique and
paramount threat to international peace and security.
Europe has been targeted and struck by this terrorism,
as have numerous regions around the world.
The European Union is pleased to see that the
sanctions regime has evolved over the years, in
particular in response to the need to ensure that fair
and clear procedures are set up for the listing and

delisting of individuals. Resolution 1452 (2002)
provided exemptions to the assets freeze. Resolution
1617 (2005) defined the concept of association, which
is central to the consolidated list and, as a
representative of France, I would not want to omit
resolution 1730 (2006), which opened access to
individuals to ensure that their petitions to be removed
from the list be brought to the attention to the
Committee.

In this spirit, the European Union welcomes the
fact that Security Council members brought
improvements with resolution 1822 (2008) on
notification, information, the reasons for listing and on
the review of the list. It is clear, however, that these
efforts will need to be pursued, because they follow a
general objective that needs to be constantly borne in
mind - namely, ensuring that targeted sanctions are
governed by fair and clear procedures. This is one of
the core elements of the efficiency and effectiveness of
these sanctions.

It is the view of the European Union that the key
priority for the Committee over the coming months
will be to start implementing the changes introduced in
resolution 1822 (2008). It is all the more important for
the European Union as these changes will assist the
Union in defining its own framework for
implementation of the sanctions, following the
European Court of Justice ruling in the Qadi case. The
European Union wishes to work very closely with the
Committee and is grateful for its responsiveness.

Given its unique and broad mandate, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee also has a very important role to
play. The European Union welcomes the new mandate
and organizational plan for the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), which acts
under the Counter-Terrorism Committee. This effort
has led to new methods of work to improve dialogue
with States, with the ultimate goal of enhancing the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The
European Union notes in particular the creation of a
horizontal working group on respect for human rights
and implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). Further
work will be required in this area, particularly in
helping States to define their own strategies to combat
incitement and radicalization. The European Union is
currently updating its own strategies in this area and
will be pleased to share its experience.

The European Union welcomes new tools
developed by CTED to monitor States" implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) - namely, the preliminary
implementation assessment and the global survey of
implementation that was presented to the Security
Council in June. We also note the change in terms of
visits to States. This is an essential part of CTED's
activity, and the European Union is pleased to note that
these visits can now be more focused, either on
thematic issues, for example, or on regions. We look
forward to similar creativity on follow-up, which is
essential to the success of these visits over the long
run.

As part of the general efforts of outreach and
increase transparency, the European Union fully
supports the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
aimed at strengthening cooperation with regional and
specialized organizations. We recall in this regard the
convening of the fifth special meeting of the
Committee in October 2007 in Nairobi, and we look
forward to the implementation of its outcome. The
European Union is committed to work with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and CTED. The
Committee heard a briefing by the EU Counter-
Terrorism Coordinator in March; the CTED Executive
Director addressed the Counter-Terrorism working
party in Brussels in September. The European Union is
also currently working on technical assistance projects
in support of counter-terrorism activities.

At the beginning of my statement, I referred to all
of the terrorist attacks this Council has witnessed and
reacted to. These are a reminder, if need be, that the
threat remains out there. But the threat of nuclear,
bacteriological and chemical terrorism remains one of
the gravest security challenges faced by the
international community. The International Agency for
Atomic Energy recently reported to the General
Assembly more than 250 incidents in the period
January to June 2008. This is a matter of grave
concern.

In this respect, the European Union deems the
1540 Committee as an essential and legitimate
instrument to counter this threat. The Union welcomes
the extension of its mandate under Security Council
resolution 1810 (2008). The European Union calls for
full implementation of the resolution's provisions. It
also calls for increased cooperation between the
Committee and relevant organizations for the
implementation of its mandate.

The European Union itself is fully committed to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). EU
member States show the highest record of compliance.
The Union is also a major donor to the Committee,
with a pledge of €475,000 to support outreach
activities implemented by the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs.

As it works to deliver its mandate, the 1540
Committee must continue to strive to be ever more
relevant, more action-oriented and more results-
oriented, particularly, but not exclusively, in the area of
assistance. We encourage it to continue to work in this
spirit.

My delegation would like in conclusion to stress
that the work carried out by these Committees is long-
term work that needs to be followed thoroughly. The
European Union is grateful to the three Chairmen, their
teams and their experts for the efforts in this
endeavour. Faced with such a challenge, the United
Nations system should reflect more broadly on the
support it can provide to capacity-building and other
assistance to States required to implement those three
resolutions.

