Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, on behalf
of my delegation, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September. We wish
you every success.

We would also like to commend Poland for its
successful presidency last month.

My delegation would like to thank the briefers:
Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL); Ambassador
Juergen Schulz, in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya; and Ms. Marwa Mohamed,
Head of Advocacy and Outreach of Lawyers for Justice
in Libya.

I agree with the observation of the Secretary-
General in his most recent report (S/2019/682), which
states that Libya's descent into political uncertainty and
armed hostilities is deeply alarming. There can be no
military solution to the conflict in Libya. Allow me to
focus on the following points.

First, military actions must stop immediately. Today
marks five months since the start of the current crisis
in Tripoli and Libya as a whole. While we welcome
the truce that was observed during the weekend of Eid
Al-Adha, we are still concerned about the situation on the
ground, including various attacks on civilian facilities
and the attack in Benghazi last month that resulted in
the death of three UNSMIL personnel. We extend our
deepest condolences to the families of the victims for
their loss and call on all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and exercise restraint with regard to
attacking civilian facilities. We urge all parties to stop
undertaking military action, de-escalate tension on
the ground and return to political negotiations. In that
regard, I would like to reiterate the call on all Member
States to fully respect the arms embargo and not to
intervene in the conflict or take measures that would
exacerbate it, as stated in the Security Council press
statement of 5 July (SC/13873) and in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011).

Secondly, Indonesia reiterates its call for the
protection of civilians. The current report shows that
since the outbreak of fighting, more than 100,000
people, half of whom are children, have fled their
homes. A total of 552,000 people are in need of
humanitarian assistance. Basic supplies, such as water,
food and electricity, are limited and the fighting has
resulted in at least 395 civilian casualties. Even in the
midst of that dire situation, the Libya humanitarian
response plan for 2019 received less than 29 per cent of
its requested funding. Conditions are indeed dreadful;
the situation must end.

Thirdly, Indonesia supports the convening of a
Libyan dialogue for Libyans to peacefully discuss the
future of Libya. We welcome and support the three-step
initiative put forward by Special Representative
Salame at the most recent Council briefing in July
(see S/PV.8588). The truce during Eid Al-Adha was a
first step that, to a certain extent, has been successful
in reducing violence, in particular in the Tripoli area,
as mentioned by Special Representative Salame. It is
a very important step. It not only triggers the start of
the plan, but is also a beacon of hope for Libya and
the international community. It shows that peace
can be achieved in Libya. We hope to transform the
accomplishment of the truce into a lasting ceasefire
using confidence-building measures.
The next step, which involves the international
community, is also very important to support the
Libyan national dialogue. We call on all partners and
regional organizations, including the African Union
and the League of Arab States, to engage constructively
and maintain their support in a sincere manner to find
a solution for peace in Libya.

Indonesia reiterates its full support for UNSMIL
and Special Representative Ghassan Salame', including
his latest appeal to the Council to consider adding a
provision to the Mission's mandate to enable scalable
ceasefire support for any form of further truce or
cessation of hostilities to be agreed upon by the
conflicting parties. We look forward to the unity of the
Council in providing the same support in the upcoming
extension of the UNSMIL mandate.

In conclusion, we hope that our voices in the
Chamber today will resonate with the people in
Libya and that we are able to do what we are all here
for - saving lives.

