Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
commends the United States for organizing today's
meeting and thanks the many leaders from around
the world who have come to give their support to
this important initiative. We also extend our deep
condolences to the Government of France for the
horrific execution this morning in Algeria.

New Zealand strongly condemns the activities of
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
violent extremist groups in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere.
We recognize that the international community must
make a determined and cohesive response to those
horrific acts. That is why we co-sponsored resolution
2178 (2014), which was adopted earlier today. Foreign
terrorist fighters have been directly involved in some
of the worst atrocities committed by those groups.
We recognize that the international community must
play its part in confronting the threat posed by such
fighters and by those whose assistance supports them.
Today's resolution and debate are therefore timely but,
as President Obama has reminded us, resolutions and
rhetoric are not enough.

The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is
not new. It is a threat that has featured in the Council's
counter-terrorism discussions for more than a decade.
However, information technologies now present
terrorist networks with opportunities to radicalize and
recruit foreign fighters and to finance and facilitate
their movement and activities on a scale that makes the
threat truly formidable.

While national and regional circumstances vary, no
country is immune to the threat. A small number of New
Zealand nationals are known to have traveled to Syria
to fight with extremist groups, and we are conscious of
the threat that foreign terrorist fighters can pose to many
of our neighbours in the Asia-Pacific, including our
nearest neighbour, Australia. New Zealand recognizes
the need for a comprehensive approach to tackling
that threat. Domestically, we are looking to tackle
the drivers of radicalization and violent extremism by
engaging communities in building resilience, as well
as taking preventive security and law enforcement
measures such as canceling passports. We are also
working with our partners in South-East Asia and the
Pacific to build their capacity to counter terrorism and
violent extremism and to help them ensure that they do
not become either a target or a source of international
terrorism.

New Zealand welcomes the calls in today's
resolution for enhanced efforts by the United
Nations counter-terrorism machinery to support such
capacity-building and to support the work of other
relevant regional and international forums to promote
cooperation in that area.

