Ms. D'Achon (France) (spoke in French): We are
delighted today to meet with Ambassador Gambari,
back from his recent mission to Angola, and we are all
grateful to him for his efforts to find a way conducive
to dialogue and reconciliation in Angola between the
Government and UNITA on the basis of the Lusaka
Protocol.

The consequences of the Angolan conflict are
tragic for the Angolan people, a great majority of
whom have never known peace. Fighting and guerrilla
activities spread terror among the people there. Lines
of communication are the target of deadly attacks, and
the several million mines planted in the territory make
road travel extremely dangerous.

We are all aware of the cause of this interminable
war that has ravaged Angola without letup since its
independence in 1975. It is Jonas Savimbi's UNITA
which bears the main responsibility for this tragedy,
because they have not implemented the provisions of
the Lusaka Protocol, because they have re-armed, and
now, again, because they are still carrying out
intolerable attacks throughout the country, including
against the civilian population.

Even if the Government has managed to
considerably weaken UNITA's forces, the latter has
nevertheless preserved its guerrilla capacities
throughout the country, as borne out by the recent
terrorist attacks directed against the civilian population
that the international community unanimously
condemned. That is why, on behalf of the international
community, the Security Council enacted sanctions
against Mr. Savimbi's movement. We believe that these
sanctions are necessary to force UNITA to abide by its
obligations and to return to the path of peace. They
must be implemented, and once again we would like to
take this opportunity to salute the efforts of
Ambassador Larrain and of his Monitoring Mechanism.

Nevertheless, as many speakers have pointed out,
clearly there is no military solution to the Angolan
crisis. We are therefore happy to note that recently
chances for a resumption of the dialogue have
emerged. This has to do with the dynamism of civil
society, and particularly that of the churches. I wish to
recall here that the European Parliament's Sakharov
Prize was awarded on 12 December to Monsignor
Zacarias Camuenho, the Archbishop of Lubango and
Chairman of the Inter-Church Committee for Peace in
Angola, for his action in support of a return to peace in
his country. But this was also the result of the efforts
made by the United Nations, and more specifically,
those of Mr. Gambari. Ambassador Gambari is indeed
one of the craftsmen of the good relationship now
enjoyed between the Angolan authorities and the
United Nations. This should be welcomed.

We are also pleased to note that, for its part, the
Government is responding positively to those efforts.
The policy of openness, attested to by the Angolan
Government, is an encouraging sign of this. We could,
inter alia, refer to measures taken for amnesty for and
reintegration of former combatants and the
announcement of elections and institutional reforms to
which the international community, in due course,
should lend all necessary support.

We should also welcome the gestures of openness
by the Government towards Jonas Savimbi by having
invited him to dialogue regularly under certain
conditions and by requesting him to set a date for the
cessation of hostilities or solemnly to renounce war.

Furthermore, as was stated by Ambassador
Gambari, the Government has just authorized the
United Nations to play an even more important role to
facilitate a dialogue between the two parties to the
conflict. We hope that UNITA will act on these signs of
goodwill about which Mr. Gambari spoke. Like the
United Kingdom representative, I would like to hear
his views on the reality of this commitment.

The international community should make a rapid
and strong commitment to work with Angola in the
peace process and to help rebuild the country. Right
away, though, it should help the Angolans to address
the grave humanitarian situation there. A solution must
be found that will provide security for the provision of
humanitarian assistance, for facilitating contacts
between non-governmental organizations and the
people and for enabling humanitarian organizations to
establish contact with all parties so that they can do
their jobs.

Indeed, it continues to be too difficult to gain
access to people in distress. The poor condition of
landing strips, the lack of fuel and the precarious
security conditions are obstacles to intervention by
humanitarian organizations. We were encouraged to
hear Mr. Gambari say that progress has been made in
this area. But it is up to the Government and to UNITA
to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
throughout the territory of Angola, including in the
East. UNITA absolutely must stop threatening the
security of humanitarian convoys. And for its part, the
Government must do everything to ensure their
security in the areas under its control.

In the longer term, we would recall that national
reconciliation and a return to stability in Angola also
require an improved economic and social situation, the
establishment of the rule of law and the protection of
human rights. In all those areas too, the international
community will have a key role to play in support of
the peace process.

