Mr. Bourgel (Israel): After hearing Lebanon's
statement, allow me to make some clarifications
regarding the situation in our region.

This 11 August will mark 13 years since the adoption
of resolution 1701 (2006), calling for the establishment,
between the Blue Line and the Litani river, of an area
free of any armed personnel, assets and weapons other
than those of the Government of Lebanon and of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). It
is clear that this call has yet to be answered.

For the past 13 years, Hizbullah's presence in
UNIFIL's area of operations has only amplified,
converting all villages into command-and-control
centres, weapons warehouses and intelligence bases.
Hizbullah has only entrenched itself further into
southern Lebanon, strengthening and widening its
grip. All of those activities are taking place in parallel
to the exponential growth of Hizbullah's rocket and
missile capabilities.

Eight months ago, we came to the Chamber
following Israel's initiation of Operation Northern
Shield (see S/PV.8432). The discovery and demolition
of six terror tunnels, in violation of both Israeli
sovereignty and resolution 1701 (2006), should have,
at least, raised questions regarding the claim that
UNIFIL's area of operations remains relatively calm.
Let us be very clear - UNIFIL's area of operations is
anything but calm.

Eight months have elapsed and UNIFIL has yet to
be granted access to the tunnel's entry points on the
Lebanese side. The claim of private property cannot
continue to deny UNIFIL the ability to discharge
its mandate. The Lebanese Armed Forces and the
Lebanese authorities have the responsibility to extend
sovereignty over their land and are failing to do so. As
a result, they are only serving Hizbullah's game. This
situation should be unacceptable to anyone whose goal
is to prevent a new war. Today more than ever, the
question of where the Lebanese Government ends and
where Hizbullah begins remains pressing and needs to
be answered.
The restriction of movement of UNIFIL forces in
its area of operations is cause for alarm. UNIFIL should
report all restrictions in its movement to the fullest
extent, detailing where the restrictions took place, who
was responsible and why. The Security Council should
demand detailed maps with coordinates pointing
to the locations of those incidents. No one should
accept any assault on UNIFIL troops or any seizure
of their material. The Security Council must ensure
that the Lebanese authorities investigate such attacks
thoroughly and swiftly. Turning a blind eye is simply
not an option.

The Secretariat's report regarding the
implementation ofresolution 1701 (2006) should reflect
accurately the dangerous situation developing on the
ground. In that sense, the creation of a map that would
show where UNIFIL is successfully operating at this
time and where it is not would be very helpful. Weapons
are pouring into and out of Lebanon and the Lebanese
authorities show no sign of making any effort to fix this
urgent problem. The international community and the
Security Council must ensure that the arms embargo
set forth in resolution 1701 (2006) is fully implemented
and duly reported.

The meeting rose at 4.20 pm.
