Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, I would like to
express our appreciation for the briefing just delivered
by Mr. Jean Arnault, which not only provides a clear,
detailed and concise picture of the current situation in
Colombia, but also shows the ongoing effort that the
United Nations team is making to support the peace
process in the country. We also welcome the presence
of His Excellency Oscar Adolfo Naranjo Trujillo,
Vice-President of Colombia.

The successful conclusion of the recent presidential
elections held at the end of May and beginning of
June is a another step forward in the political process
in Colombia, which has been under way since the
triumphant legislative elections of 11 March. It
demonstrates the goodwill of the Colombian people
and the progress made, with the support of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, and thus
demonstrates the positive changes in its national policy.

However, we note with great concern the
confrontations that continue to take place in the country
despite the signed pact, which is recognized by all
parties, institutions, political parties and the President.
We are concerned that all the progress achieved is being
reversed. We therefore urge all parties to the Colombian
political process, despite the change of Government,
to work together to ensure the implementation of the
Peace Agreement, which enjoys the unanimous support
of the members of the Security Council and concerning
which the representatives of the country's main political
parties stressed the need to ensure irreversibility.

To guarantee the development of the Colombian
political process, the new Government must facilitate
the improvement of the gains already made with
regard to the reintegration and security of the former
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP). It must allow
that process to continue, establishing strategies and
taking necessary measures to reintegrate the members
of that group into society and to provide the necessary
protection and security in the areas formerly occupied
by FARC, protecting also thousands of children
and women who were displaced by the fighting and
guaranteeing their rights as members of civil society.

The Colombian Government is called upon to take
action in the interest and to the benefit of the people
of Colombia, who for so long have been victims of the
many differences that sadly persist to this day, though
on a smaller scale. We encourage the Government to
continue engaging in the negotiations being carried out
in Cuba with the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional.

We note that in the case of any problem, the root
causes of the conflict must be tackled first, because
therein lies the foundation for the lasting peace that is
sought in this case. In that regard, we would like to
recall the words of the President of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, His Excellency Teodoro Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, during the sixth national dialogue
round table, held from 16 to 23 of this month, between
the Government and the political parties of our country,
when he said,

"The chief guarantor of national unity, the
balance of State institutions by virtue of the attributes
conferred to them by law, is the Government, which
must ensure that the needs of the people are met in
order to defuse possible divisions and overcome the
challenges the country faces."
Finally, my delegation would like to express its
appreciation for all the hard work that the Security
Council is doing in Colombia under the protection of the
resolutions adopted in this Chamber and with respect
for the Charter of the United Nations to put an end to
the situation that has affected the Colombian people for
several decades.

