Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. I would like to draw
delegations' attention to the written statement that is
being distributed and to the conclusions on the Middle
East peace process that the European Union Foreign
Affairs Council adopted just a few hours ago. In the
interests of time, I will deliver an abridged version of
my statement.

The European Union is extremely concerned at
the continued escalation of violence in Gaza and calls
for an immediate cessation of the hostilities, based on
a return to the November 2012 ceasefire agreement.
We welcome ongoing efforts to that end by regional
partners, in particular by Egypt, and reiterate our
readiness to provide the necessary support.

We strongly condemn the indiscriminate firing of
rockets into Israel by Hamas and militant groups in the
Gaza Strip, which directly harm civilians. Those are
criminal and unjustifiable acts. We call on Hamas to
immediately put an end to those acts and to renounce
violence. All terrorist groups in Gaza must disarm. We
strongly condemn calls on the civilian population of
Gaza to provide themselves as human shields.

We condemn the loss of hundreds of civilian
lives, among them many women and children. While
recognizing Israel's legitimate right to defend itself
against any attacks, we underline that the Israeli
military operation must be proportionate and in line
with international humanitarian law. The European
Union stresses the need to protect civilians at all times.
We are particularly appalled by the human cost of the
Israeli military operation in Shujaiya, and are deeply
concerned at the rapidly deteriorating humanitarian
situation. A11 sides must meet their obligations and
immediately allow safe and full humanitarian access
in Gaza for the urgent distribution of assistance. We
call on all sides to implement an immediate ceasefire
in good faith.

The tragic escalation of hostilities confirms again
the unsustainable nature of the status quo with regard to
the situation in the Gaza Strip. While fully recognizing
Israel's legitimate security needs, the European Union
underlines that the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation in Gaza must be addressed. We reiterate our
call for the immediate, sustained and unconditional
opening of crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from the Gaza
Strip, in line with resolution 1860 (2009).

We stand ready, including through the reactivation
of our European Union Border Assistance Mission
for the Rafah crossing point, if conditions allow, to
contribute to a comprehensive and sustainable solution
that meets the legitimate security, economic and
humanitarian needs of Israelis and Palestinians.

Recent events in the broader Middle East pose
serious threats to the European Union and its immediate
neighbours. We reiterate our fundamental commitment
to the security of Israel, including with regard to current
and emerging threats in the region. The European Union
has fully supported United States-led peace efforts. We
urge the parties to resume meaningful negotiations with
the aim of achieving a comprehensive peace agreement
based on a two-State solution. Clear parameters are key
elements for a successful outcome. We are willing to
work with the United States and other partners on an
initiative to relaunch the peace negotiations, based on
the following parameters.

First, there must be an agreement on the borders
of the two States based on the 4 June 1967 lines, with
equivalent land swaps as may be agreed between the
parties. The European Union will recognize changes
to the pre-1967 borders, including with regard to
Jerusalem, only when agreed by the parties.

Secondly, there must be security arrangements
that, for the Palestinians, respect their sovereignty and
show that the occupation is over, and which, for the
Israelis, protect their security, prevent the resurgence
of terrorism and deal effectively with security threats,
including new and vital threats in the region.

Thirdly, there must be a just, fair, agreed and
realistic solution to the refugee question.

Fourthly, the aspirations of both parties for
Jerusalem must be fulfilled. A way must be found
through negotiations to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States.

We call on Israel to halt continued settlement
expansion, especially in sensitive areas such as Har
Homa, Givat Hamatos and E-l, and to put an end to
settler violence, to the worsening of living conditions
for Palestinians in Area C, to demolitions - including
of European Union-funded projects - to evictions
and forced transfers and to increasing tensions and
challenges to the status quo on the Temple Mount/
Haram Al-Sharif. A fundamental change of policy on
those negative developments is necessary to prevent the
irreversible loss of the two-State solution.

The European Union has welcomed the appointment
of a Palestinian Government of independent personalities
and the declaration by President Abbas that the new
Government is committed to the Quartet principles. Our
engagement with the new Palestinian Government is
based on its continued adherence, in words and actions,
to those policies and commitments. The Palestinian
Government needs to take charge of Gaza and end the
internal division. We call on it to work towards genuine
democratic elections for all Palestinians. We reiterate
our call on the Palestinian leadership to use its United
Nations status constructively and not to undertake steps
that would lead farther away from a negotiated solution.

The further development of our relations with both
Israeli and Palestinian partners will also depend on their
engagement towards a lasting peace based on a two-
State solution. We reiterate our offer to both parties of
a package of European political, economic and security
support and of a special privileged partnership with the
European Union in the event ofa final peace agreement.

The human catastrophe is now proliferating to reach
Syria's neighbours, most dramatically Iraq, which are
facing an extremely difficult situation. The European
Union welcomes their efforts to cope with the growing
crisis and will continue to support them.

There can only be a political solution to the conflict
in Syria. We support efforts to resume an inclusive
political dialogue among all Syrians on the basis of
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). Stronger
international efforts, including among regional
countries, will be of crucial importance.

We fully support Mr. de Mistura and Deputy
Special Envoy for Syria Ramzy's difficult and
urgent mission, as well as the priorities set out by the
Secretary-General in his speech "Crisis in Syria: Civil
War, Global Threat", of 20 June, at the Asia Society in
New York.

The European Union welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014). We note the binding nature of
the obligations set out in the resolution, as well as the
Council's commitment to take further measures in the
event of noncompliance.
We reaffirm the urgent need to hold accountable all
those responsible for grave violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We regret
that the Council has so far not been able to effectively
address that issue.

The European Union is deeply concerned about
the rapidly deteriorating situation in Iraq and strongly
condemns the armed assault conducted by terrorist and
other armed groups. We are particularly concerned
about reports of grave violations of international
humanitarian law committed by those groups. All those
responsible for such acts must be held accountable.

Military operations should respect human rights
and international humanitarian law. All parties must
facilitate unimpeded access for humanitarian workers.

We remain firmly committed to Iraq's unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and we insist
on respect for the democratic process in the country.
We welcome the appointment of a new Speaker of
the Council of Representatives, and we call on all the
political leaders to step up efforts towards the speedy
formation of a new inclusive Government that will steer
Iraq in a process of national reconciliation.

