The President (spoke in French): I shall now speak
in my capacity as the representative of France.

First of all, I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Jan Kubis,
and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Tanin, for their statements. I align myself
with the statement to be made shortly by the observer
of the European Union.

I shall address three points: the upcoming
presidential election, the human rights situation and
drug control.

First of all, with respect to the elections, Afghanistan
has entered the final phase ofpreparations for the spring
2014 presidential elections. The preparations are being
carried out in a satisfactory manner. The presidential
electoral campaign should start next February. The
election will be the foundation for the future legitimacy
of the Afghan Government and the sign that democracy
has become entrenched in Afghan public life and that
reversing course is no longer possible. The success
of the elections will hang on security, and everything
must be done to ensure that the Afghan forces meet that
challenge successfully. There must be comprehensive
mobilization against fraud so as not to affect the
legitimacy of the winner at the polls.

Beyond the elections, the confidence of Afghan
forces in their own ability to operate independently and
to engage with strength and determination against the
insurgents is critical. The short-term viability of the
Afghan State will depend on it.

The human rights and humanitarian situation also
remains a concern. The renewed fighting has had a tragic
impact on the civilian population. Nearly one civilian
casualty in five occurs in the field. We therefore urge
the parties to take all necessary measures to minimize
the impact of such clashes.

We remain attentive to the rights of women, which
have enjoyed unprecedented progress in Afghanistan.
These rights should not be diminished because of
political uncertainty. Moreover, reporting delays on
the part of Afghan authorities on the implementation of
the law for the elimination of violence against women
are of concern. We urge the Afghan Government to
remove all doubts about its continued commitment to
human rights following the withdrawal of international
forces. We are also concerned about the security of
humanitarian workers and the staff of development
agencies. The compliance of the parties with the
principles of humanitarian law is essential to the
continued international engagement in Afghanistan.

With regard to the anti-drug campaign,
Afghanistan has seen record opium production in 2013.
Drug production has also been diversified. Cannabis
cultivation and methamphetamine production centres
have emerged. The Afghan population has nearly
1 million drug addicts. The fight against drugs is an
imperative not only for security but also for public
health.

In that respect, we emphasize the importance of the
regional framework in the fight against the production
and trafficking of drugs. The Paris Pact framework
remains essential to the mobilization of the international
community. We support the activities of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries through our
annual voluntary contributions to the Paris Pact and to
the regional Afghanistan and Neighbouring Countries
programme. Bilaterally, a treaty of friendship and
cooperation between France and Afghanistan provides
for enhanced partnership in the fight against drugs,
which is recognized as a priority by both countries.

While operational cooperation may be satisfactory,
the fight against drugs must be taken better into account
at the political level, whether by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) or the
Afghan authorities. As the Secretary-General points
out in his report (S/2013/721), this is a prerequisute for
the stability and development of Afghanistan and its
neighbours.

Afghanistan's partners will remain present in
the form of bilateral relations based on enhanced
military and civil partnership. The modalities of future
international missions to support the Afghan security
forces are being defined in response to requests by
the Afghan authorities. The recommendation handed
down by the loya jirga on 24 November and the timely
signing of the bilateral security agreement with the
United States will mark a new step in the consolidation
of that partnership. In this context, we believe that
the United Nations will be required to assume greater
responsibility in Afghanistan. Placed in a more visible,
central and complex position, UNAMA will absolutely
need to strengthen its political role.

UNAMA will provide its good offices to facilitate
the implementation of the Afghan political process.
It will also need enhanced competencies in matter of
defence and the promotion of human rights. Finally,
it will need to assume the role of coordinator of the
funds, programmes and specialized agencies of the
United Nations in order to promote a development
model that meets the challenges of an eonomy fueled
by drug trafficking. To that end, we feel it particularly
important to simplify the UNAMA mandate. However,
we remain committed to maintaining its presence
throughout Afghan territory, which will be essential for
a clear and comprehensive view of the situation.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of India.

