Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the presentations of the Secretary-General,
Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy and Susana
Malcorra, Special Representatives Alan Doss and Ellen
Margrethe Loj. We are also grateful to have Executive
Representative Michael Von der Schulenburg in the
Council today. Mexico welcomes the initiative of
France to pursue the analysis and discussion of the
various ways in which peacekeeping operations can be
improved, as well as how to design transition and exit
strategies - an issue that undoubtedly represents one
of the main challenges to the Security Council in
fulfilling its fundamental role of maintaining
international peace and security.

In the light of lessons learned in recent years, it
has been recognized that peacekeeping operations must
incorporate a number of essential elements if they are
to meet their main objective of attaining sustainable
peace. Among the most important of these elements is
the drafting of clear, credible and achievable mandates
supported by the material resources, troops, police and
civilian capacities required to fulfil their functions. The
unequivocal commitment of the parties to achieving a
negotiated solution to the conflict is also necessary.
Other essential elements are the existence of a general
peace agreement that also addresses the underlying
causes of the conflict, and an understanding on the part
of the parties to the conflict and the population in
general of the benefits of achieving the mission
objectives, which they should also perceive as their
own.

Likewise, with respect to these elements, there is
consensus that objectives should be established with
defined timeframes at every stage, including a
transition and exit strategy, and that peacekeeping
missions should adopt an integrated approach that
takes peacebuilding considerations into account from
an early stage. To achieve this, it is imperative for the
Security Council to establish an efficient planning and
coordination mechanism involving special
representatives of the Secretary-General and those
responsible for the coordination and direction of the
military, civil, financial and humanitarian components
of missions.

Within the framework of the United Nations, we
reaffirm the importance for the Security Council to
continue to promote ongoing and substantive dialogue
among the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Fifth Committee of the General
Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission, troop-
contributing countries and major financial donors to
peacekeeping operations, especially given the current
international economic climate. The aim of such
dialogue would be to afford these actors greater input
in the process or drafting, adopting and revising
mandates.

In this regard, we recognize that there has been
positive progress in the dialogue among these actors.
However, greater coordination can still be achieved.
That is why we stress the importance of following up
on resolution 1353 (2001), and commend the work of
the Working Group of the Whole on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations to offer recommendations
with a view to improving cooperation and coordination
mechanisms throughout the entire lifecycle of a
peacekeeping operation.

Moreover, we encourage the Security Council, in
drawing up peacebuilding strategies, to cooperate with
regional organizations and such informal mechanisms
as the groups of friends of the Secretary-General, in
recognition of their broad experience, knowledge of the
specifics of a conflict and interest in guaranteeing the
transition to stability for the country and the region.

It is essential for a host country to cooperate with
a peacekeeping operation throughout the entire length
of its deployment, on which the successful transition to
a peacebuilding process depends. A peacekeeping
operation cannot be perceived as having been imposed
by the international community alone. The
reconfiguration of a United Nations presence should
also be accompanied by a high degree of coordination
between the United Nations system and other
international actors, including financial institutions and
civil society organizations on the ground.

It is also important to explore mechanisms for
strengthening cooperation between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in order to
ensure coherence in mandates between peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development
activities so as to establish conditions conducive to
peacekeeping transition strategies. Consideration of
this issue could help to strengthen the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in the context of its review
later this year.

We cannot ignore the fact that no two operations
are the same. We have to take into account not only the
nature of the conflict, but also and above all the
institutional structure present in the host country of the
peacekeeping operation. Let us not forget that we
frequently face situations in which there is an
institutional vacuum or extreme fragility that calls for
the United Nations to perform a support role that goes
beyond simply ending the military aspect of the
conflict. Where there is no State, the international
community must take on the responsibilities of a State
in support of and consultation with national authorities.
What rule of law can we speak of when there are no
sustainable national institutions?

The Security Council should closely monitor the
situation at all stages of a peacekeeping operation. That
would help to ensure that the transition from one stage
to another occurs in the most effective way possible
and to incorporate timely modifications into the
mandate, including in terms of logistical and
operational capacities, always with the aim of adapting
to events on the ground.

In this context, we support the use by the Security
Council of follow-up mechanisms, such as
benchmarks, which help to improve the relationship
between peacekeeping operation mandates and their
due implementation, underscore the achievement of
objectives, and help to more clearly define the lifecycle
of each operation.

Finally, we reaffirm the importance of the
Secretariat and the Security Council pursuing periodic
consideration of ways to improve peacekeeping
operations, and we encourage the relevant Working
Group to continue its consideration of transition
strategies and to make recommendations in that area.

