Mr. Valle (Brazil): For more than two years, the
Security Council has followed with keen interest and
concern the evolution of the situation in Mozambique. My
delegation is extremely pleased that the Security Council
has decided to hold a debate on an issue the outcome of
which has been very much welcomed by the entire
international community. Gathered here today, in a far
different atmosphere and with a clearly different purpose,
the Council is considering the conclusion of the United
Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ).

First of all, I would like to welcome very warmly His
Excellency Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao, Minister of
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Mozambique, and thank
him for the very comprehensive statement he made. His
thorough analysis of the situation clearly demonstrates the
magnitude of the achievements attained by the
implementation of the Rome peace accord. My delegation
was particularly impressed by his words, in the light of the
huge challenges facing his Government in the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of his country.

It is a known fact that Brazil feels very closely linked
to Mozambique, given our common historical, cultural and
ancestral ties. We maintain with that sister country an
intense relationship that both Governments have been
continuously nurturing over a long period of time. With the
successful conclusion of the peace process, as provided for
in the accords of 1992, our relations are bound to grow
even closer at a moment when Mozambique takes decisive
strides on the path of peace, stability and economic and
social development.

The meeting today should result in an appraisal of the
collective effort of the international community towards
ensuring peace and stability in a country ravaged by
conflict for well over a decade. The accomplishment of the
Operation just concluded has decisively contributed to the
elimination of the horrors of war and the creation of an
environment allowing political negotiation to prevail over
confrontation, and understanding over suspicion.

There is no better way to successfully conclude a
peace process than to abide by the wishes of the people.
The general elections held in October 1994 represent a
milestone for the country. The elections were conducted
in a remarkably peaceful and orderly manner. The
massive participation of voters, just shy of 90 per cent,
clearly indicates the desire of an entire people to actively
participate in the shaping of the future of their country. It
also signifies the strong will of Mozambicans to start a
new period in their history, leaving behind war and
suffering. It should also be noted, as pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report, that all Mozambican
political parties have accepted the results of the elections.
This is an obvious indication that peace, stability and
democracy are part of an irreversible process in
Mozambique, dispelling the fears of some Member States
that the elections might not be free and fair.

My Government has consistently supported the
United Nations efforts to bring peace to Mozambique,
both as a member of the Security Council in the biennium
1993-1994, when the Council was actively seized of the
matter, and as a troop contributor to the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ). A Brazilian
military officer, General Lelio Rodrigues, had the
privilege of being the first force commander of
ONUMOZ. Later, in 1994, Brazil sent an infantry
company that was deployed in the region of Zambezia
and contributed actively to the process of assembly of
troops and demobilization.

We have also consistently stressed our position that
ONUMOZ, as well as any other peace-keeping operation
of the Organization, should be established and deployed
in the name of the United Nations as a whole, and not of
the Security Council alone. My delegation has repeatedly
underscored the two main policy principles that have
guided our position. First, peace-keeping operations must
be aimed at contributing to alleviating tensions and
promoting peace in regional conflicts that pose a threat to
peace and stability. Secondly, peace-keeping operations
must be absolutely impartial if they are to implement their
mandates successfully. These operations constitute an
important means to assist in the implementation of
agreements to which the parties have freely committed
themselves.

The success story of ONUMOZ allows us to draw
some conclusions on ongoing and future United Nations

 

efforts in the field of peace-keeping. To be effective, these
operations have to be adequately staffed and equipped;
delays in their deployment are to be avoided at all costs.

Most important is the need to persevere in the search
for peace when the commitment to national reconciliation
prevails among the parties. No precipitate reduction or
withdrawal of the personnel of any operation should occur
without prior determination of the impact on the operation's
capability to discharge its mandate successfully.

In the specific case of Mozambique, fortunately, the
Council in its wisdom avoided a premature reduction of the
military component of ONUMOZ at a crucial moment in
the peace process, when demobilization was still under way
and the formation of the new defence force had barely
begun. We have always stressed that if peace has its costs,
the absence of peace is even costlier.

Peace in Mozambique was possible because of a
combination of domestic and international factors. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, together
with the force commander and all the personnel of
ONUMOZ - military, civil police and civilian staff -
deserve our recognition for the successful conclusion of the
mission.
Although the support provided by the international
community was substantial and decisive, the Operation
owes its success to the unequivocal commitment to peace
of the people of Mozambique as a whole and, in particular,
that of President J oaquim Chissano. My delegation pays its
sincerest tribute to his leadership, political wisdom and true
statesmanship, which played a vital role in the successful
conclusion of the peace process. Our recognition is
extended to the people of Mozambique, who must receive
the ultimate praise for the success story of ONUMOZ.

Finally, we would like to express our hope that the
successful trend which started in South Africa, has now
been repeated in Mozambique and is being extended to
Angola can indeed spread northward in Africa and,
hopefully, to other peace-keeping operations in troubled
areas in other continents.

As we witness the dawning of a new era in
Mozambique, the international community should, in order
to reaffirm its commitment to the welfare of that country
and of the entire subregion, shift its efforts from
peacemaking to reconstruction, rehabilitation and
development in Mozambique. Brazil stands ready to
continue to do its part.

