Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I wish to thank His Excellency the Secretary-
General for his briefing and to warmly welcome
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime Minister of
Somalia, and Mr. Boubacar Gaoussou Diarra, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, and to express our gratitude
to them. Additionally, I would like to warmly welcome
His Excellency Mr. Henry Bellingham, Minister for
Africa of the United Kingdom.

Let me underline that Bosnia and Herzegovina
fully aligns itself with the statement of the European
Union to be delivered later this morning. I shall now
highlight a few additional points.

I wish to begin our statement by congratulating
the Chinese presidency for organizing this important
and timely debate on Somalia as the end of the
transitional period approaches.

Bosnia and Herzegovina shares the opinion of the
other delegations that the peace process is at a critical
juncture and that it is of crucial importance to adopt a
comprehensive strategy for peace and stability in
Somalia. We reiterate our full support to the
Transitional Federal Government, having in mind that
the Djibouti peace process remains the only viable
framework for conciliation, confidence-building and
long-term stability in the country. We urge all parties
outside the Djibouti peace process to join in and work
together in the interest of the Somali people. In that
regard we wish to stress the importance of national
ownership of the transition process in Somalia. We call
on all stakeholders in Somalia to do their utmost,
through unity and full commitment, to implement the
commitments undertaken without delay and share the
successful completion of the transition period.

We consider it highly important that the
Transitional Federal Institutions refrain from any
unilateral actions so as not to have negative impacts on
the overall political, security and humanitarian
situation. Furthermore, we call on the Transitional
Federal Institutions to redouble their efforts in the area
of national reconciliation, completing the constitution,
capacity-building, building up national security forces
and expanding the political space in the country
through inclusive dialogue.
Another important aspect in insuring peace and
stability throughout Somalia is strengthening State
institutions in order to ensure delivery of basic services
to the people. To reach that goal it is important that the
international community make additional efforts and
provide the necessary support to the Transitional
Federal Institutions, including through training and
equipping the Somali security forces.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains deeply
concerned about the security situation in Somalia. We
condemn all terrorist activities and attacks in the
country, especially those aimed at the civilian
population. We are gravely concerned at the reports of
violations of the human rights of women and children
and of the recruitment of children by parties to the
conflict, including recruitment by pirates.

One of the main reasons for the recruitment of
youth and children by pirates and insurgents is lack of
financial security. Therefore, socio-economic recovery
should be one of the priorities of the Transitional
Federal Institutions and the international community.
Furthermore, we urge the Transitional Federal
Government to do its utmost to end the culture of
impunity through genuine efforts to establish the rule
of law.

The role of the African Union Mission to Somalia
is significant in assisting and protecting the
Transitional Federal Government and maintaining
security in Mogadishu. In that regard we pay homage
to the troop-contributing countries - Burundi and
Uganda - for their dedication and commitment. We
commend the troops of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and appreciate the efforts of the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development.

We are encouraged by reports of some territorial
gains in Mogadishu by the Transitional Federal
Government's forces. We are of the view that the
recent endorsement by the Security Council of the
proposal by the African Union to increase the
AMISOM. troop level up to 12,000, as well as the
requisite logistical support package for AMISOM, will
have a positive impact on expanding the security and
political space in the country. We call upon the
international community to provide additional support
for AMISOM. to reach its mandated strength and for it
to have the necessary capabilities to fulfil its mission.
We express our deep concern regarding the
worsening humanitarian situation in Somalia, where
reportedly around 2.3 million people still depend on
humanitarian aid. The obstruction of the delivery of
much needed humanitarian assistance to the people of
Somalia is another issue of major concern. A serious
decline in the provision of humanitarian aid has been
evident. We thus appeal to the international community
to address the humanitarian situation and provide
indispensable assistance.

On piracy, we share the view that there is a great
urgency in establishing effective counter-piracy
measures before a spillover effect produces further
instability in the region. The phenomenon of piracy is
one of the challenges that still awaits an adequate and
effective response from the international community,
although some security, judiciary, prevention best
practices and awareness-raising measures have been
taken.

We should continue to concentrate and cooperate
on the elimination of the root causes of piracy. In that
regard, we welcome the proposal of the Secretary-
General on possible options to further the aim of
prosecuting and imprisoning persons responsible for
acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia, as well as the proposal of Mr. Jack Lang,
Special Adviser on Legal Issues Related to Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
Secretary-General and Mr. Augustine Mahiga, his
Special Representative for Somalia, for their hard work,
dedication and ongoing efforts aimed at securing a
better future for the people of Somalia.

