Mr. Dah (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Like
others, my delegation would like to welcome Mr. Stef
Blok to New York and to congratulate him on the
holding of the current meeting in the Security Council.
My delegation also wishes to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his informative briefing on the humanitarian situation
in Syria.

As we are all aware, the war in Syria has unleashed
one of the most serious humanitarian crises in recent
history and continues to have a devastating impact on
the Syrian people. My country remains particularly
concerned about the attacks and bombings, including
those against hospitals and civilian infrastructure,
that continue to punctuate the daily lives of people
subjected to forced displacement in the areas of Afrin,
Idlib and eastern Ghouta. cote d'Ivoire condemns
those actions and calls on the parties to take the steps
necessary to protect people, civilian infrastructure and
humanitarian personnel.

More than a month after its unanimous adoption
by members of the Security Council, resolution 2401
(2018), on which so much hope was pinned, has fallen
woefully short of our expectations, much to our
regret. The fact is that the demand for an immediate
cessation of hostilities to allow safe and unhindered
delivery of humanitarian aid and related services, as
well as medical evacuation of the seriously ill and
wounded, in accordance with relevant international
humanitarian law, has still not been adhered to, despite
our joint efforts.

The ongoing fighting has forced hundreds of
thousands of civilians to flee to camps and makeshift
shelters where living conditions are extremely difficult.
Cote d'Ivoire calls once again for the effective
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018) with a view
to resuming the delivery of humanitarian aid, including
medical evacuations from besieged areas and camps
for internally displaced persons, in order to ease the
suffering of people in distress. We urge the Council
to overcome its differences and to demonstrate unity
in order to ensure the effective implementation of the
resolution, which is more relevant than ever.

My delegation reiterates its belief that the
humanitarian situation will not improve unless
significant progress is made at the political level, as the
two issues are closely linked. We therefore encourage
the parties to prioritize political dialogue and resume
peace talks in the framework of the Geneva process, in
accordance with the road map established by resolution
2254 (2015).

