Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to express
our gratitude to you, Sir, for having convened today's
open debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and the African Union (AU) Commissioner
for Peace and Security, who provided us with an
update on strengthening the United Nations-African
Union partnership.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later today on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and wishes to make several remarks in its
national capacity.

As we gather here today, peace remains as elusive a
goal as it has been throughout human history. Despite the
universal appeal for peace and the declared commitment
of States to uphold it, wars and armed conflicts remain a
recurring feature of today's world affairs. Their causes
may be different - some are internal in nature, some
are instigated and sustained from outside - but their
consequences are similarly horrible.

It is true that the long overdue reform of our
Organization is yet to be accomplished in order to
maintain its once unquestionable credit of trust and to
restore its ability to take prompt preventive measures. As
a Chinese philosopher once said, it does not matter how
slowly you go so long as you do not stop. I do not dare
challenge that philosophy. Nevertheless, I insist that,
in matters of preventing conflicts and gross violations
of human rights, the speed of United Nations action is
crucial. In 1994, in Rwanda, the United Nations failed
to act promptly to prevent genocide. Twenty years later,
in Ukraine, the United Nations, the Security Council
and the Secretary-General took no action to stop the
occupation of Crimea and the military aggression
by Russia.

Regional organizations remain one of the most
efficient mechanisms that are employed swiftly in
response to full-scale conflict or a situation where
the civilian population is in danger. Therefore, the
United Nations should redouble its efforts to enhance
strategic partnerships with them, while building up
joint planning and supporting collaboration.

The African Union has made tremendous progress
in developing its peace support capabilities since the
deployment of its mission in Burundi back in 2003.
Today it acts as the first responder to crises in Africa,
with the authorization of the Security Council. As an
observer to the African Union, Ukraine follows closely
the development of the Union's peace support potential
and shares the view of the Secretary-General that
the world can greatly benefit from African wisdom,
African ideas and African solutions. As a country
associated with the European Union, we also support
the approach of exploring possibilities for trilateral
United Nations-EU-AU cooperation in order to ensure
effective and sustaining peacebuilding assistance in
Africa. The upcoming fifth African Union-EU summit
in November will provide an important opportunity in
that respect. It is also in that light that Ukraine decided
to co-sponsor this year's General Assembly resolution
71/254, on cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union.

Last month, in this very Chamber, Council members
expressed a variety of views on ways to enhance United
Nations-AU cooperation (see S/PV.7971). At the same
time, there was a common understanding that both
organizations have to work in concert while using
their competitive advantages. We believe that, given
the complex nature of threats to international peace
and security on the continent, supporting the full
operationalization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture should be seen as a priority for the African
Union. At the same time, we see a need to provide
adequate support in logistics and funding for peace and
security operations in Africa on a sustainable basis.
The African Union-United Nations mission in
Darfur has become one of the vivid examples of how
the two organizations can be partners in the design
and implementation of peacekeeping operations. The
African commitment and United Nations resources and
experience allowed the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur to implement its mandate
effectively, thereby paving the way to transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding in the region.

No less important is the African engagement in
promoting the political process in Darfur. We welcome
African Union efforts to meaningfully engage all
parties in the Sudan in the peace process. As Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, Ukraine fosters further
collaboration and dialogue between the Government of
the Sudan and the United Nations. In May, the Chair
and Committee members visited Khartoum and Darfur,
where they received first-hand accounts of the state
of implementation of the measures imposed by the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The visit helped
to develop a number of recommendations intended
to review the sanctions regime in order to reflect the
needs and demands of the current situation.

In the Horn of Africa, a strong relationship
between the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, the United Nations Support Office in Somalia
and the African Union Mission in Somalia, as well
as the Somali security forces, helped to significantly
reduce terrorist activity and the number of recruits to
Al-Shabaab, which, however, continues to constitute a
threat to peace and security in the region.

A similar approach and level of coordination with
the international community is desperately required
in Burundi. Without meaningful cooperation with
the United Nations, the African Union and other
international community actors, the road to a political
settlement of the crisis will be even longer and, most
likely, fraught with additional complications and
dangers. While resolution 2303 (2016) has yet to
produce a breakthrough, we call on Burundi to accept
the deployment of the African Union human rights
observers and military experts with increased human
rights monitoring capacity and police components.

Developments in the Central African Republic
are a cause for concern. As Chair of the Sanctions
Committee on the Central African Republic, Ukraine
is especially worried about the continuing presence
and violent activity of armed groups. We are ready
to continue our practical contribution to support all
peace and reconciliation efforts. We recognize the
important role of the African Union in that process and
welcome the African Union's initiative on peace and
reconciliation in the Central African Republic.

As an active troop and capabilities contributor
to United Nations missions in Africa for many years,
Ukraine is proud to be a part of success stories on the
continent. We welcome Cote d'Ivoire being entrusted by
the United Nations membership to serve on the Security
Council as an elected member with vast experience in
peacebuilding and in overcoming past conflict. The
United Nations Mission in Liberia is another vivid
example of the United Nations positive peacekeeping
and stabilization efforts. We must draw from positive
transitions from war to peace in order to reinforce the
United Nations and regional peace support capacities.

Yesterday, the world marked Nelson Mandela
International Day. He was a person who devoted his
life to the service of humankind in Africa. In that light,
it is particularly encouraging that efforts to put in place
effective mechanisms for human rights protection
have become an indispensable element of the African
Union's activities and policies. Human rights and
democracy are two prerequisites that could bring about
lasting peace and security on the African continent.

