Ms. Malcorra: I appreciate this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the steps being taken on
the support side to strengthen the security institutions
of Somalia and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM).

Resolution 1863 (2009) established a strategy of
support for security in Mogadishu, integrating
voluntary contributions through a United Nations trust
fund, bilateral donor support for AMISOM. and Somali
forces, and United Nations-funded logistical support
for AMISOM. Each is equally critical if we are to
succeed in establishing the peace and security in
Somalia necessary to pursue stable governance and
lasting recovery efforts.

The contributions pledged at the 23 April donors'
conference were very positive - more than $200
million was pledged. They are expected to support the
significant requirements identified to strengthen
AMISOM. and to develop Somali security institutions.
While the success of the donors' conference highlights
the level of international commitment to security in
Somalia, the disparate funding mechanisms and
approaches represent a coordination challenge.
Measures must be taken to ensure that we arrive at an
alignment of views to address gaps and avoid potential
areas of duplication. Work is being done on that as we
speak.

The gains achieved by Somali leaders and the
international community to build peace must not be
lost. The current situation on the ground provides
evidence that Somalia's nascent and yet-fragile peace
process must be protected. Our window for action is
small. The disbursement of donor pledges must be
expedited.

There are still a number of critical requirements
to meeting the security challenges. Those include the
acquisition and maintenance of military equipment for
AMISOM, such are armoured personnel carriers and
patrol boats. The commitment of the African Union
(AU) to bringing the AMISOM. force up to its full
mandated strength of 8,000 troops must be supported
to ensure the protection of key installations in
Mogadishu, including the airport, seaport and other
strategic areas. Sierra Leone pledged a full battalion
this week. That is a critical pledge. All measures must
be taken to hasten its deployment and ensure its full
capacities.

With regard to AMISOM, the complementary
strategies of United Nations-funded logistics and donor
support for other requirements are both essential if we
are to establish conditions for AMISOM. to source the
additional troops and equipment it needs to reach its
mandated strength and operate effectively. The African
Union is mapping all donor trust fund and in-kind
contributions to ensure appropriate coordination and
address gaps and possible areas of duplication.
Although progress has been hampered by the volatile
and unpredictable security situation in Mogadishu -
which has seen a rise in insurgent attacks, which are
becoming more sophisticated, coordinated and
lethal ~ key milestones have been achieved. Let me
now speak about some of them.

On 22 April, essential expendable assets were
delivered to AMISOM. in Mogadishu. This delivery, the
first one the United Nations has made, included United
Nations supplies of security equipment and field
defence storage, pharmaceuticals and other essential
medical supplies. Specialized support equipment, one
airfield firefighting truck, engineering vehicles,
information and communications equipment and
related infrastructure were delivered to Entebbe in
April for the initial training of AMISOM. troops before
being delivered to Mogadishu. These training
programmes are in progress and are scheduled to be
concluded by the end of this month. With that, all
equipment and trained troops will be deployed into
Mogadishu to take full advantage of this additional
support.

Separately, following the liquidation of the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, the
United Nations-owned equipment was deployed into
Mogadishu by the end of this past March. Among other
things, the equipment included 400 prefabricated
accommodation and ablution units, which are very
important for the AMISOM. troops. Action is under
way to establish a maintenance arrangement and
assistance in construction.

A comprehensive funding proposal for 2009 and
2010, based on the current Security Council resolution
and United Nations standards of support and
operational requirements, has been submitted for
comptroller review and should be before the General
Assembly shortly.

The United Nations support to AMISOM. will
require unprecedented action in ensuring effectiveness
and accountability, with our significant United Nations
presence in the theatre of operations and with multiple
ways to channel contributions. The core team of the
United Nations Support Office has been established,
recruitment of the staff is ongoing, and the initial team
is already deployed in Nairobi and working closely
with the United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
AMISOM. and the AU in Addis Ababa.

Resolution 1863 (2009) requires that a
memorandum of understanding be signed with the AU
and AMISOM. to ensure that support provided through
the United Nations is used transparently and effectively

for the intended purposes. This includes payments and
other support provided through the United Nations
trust fund. The draft memorandum of understanding
has been finalized and is being sent this week to the
African Union for its final approval. Assistance
arrangements are also being negotiated with a Member
State for the United Nations to fund a continuation of
the existing AMISOM. life-support services through a
vendor until the United Nations completes its own
procurement processes. All procurement processes are
launched, with proposals starting to arrive this week.

A small passenger jet is expected to be deployed
in Nairobi later this month. As well as providing for
United Nations passenger movement in support of
AMISOM, this jet is critical to providing standing
medical evacuation capacity, which AMISOM. lacks
today.

To advance the construction of the AMISOM
headquarters and level 2 hospital, current greenfield
sites in Mogadishu are being assessed. We are also
undertaking the construction of a small infrastructure
at the airport to have minimal accommodations for an
initial footprint deployment.

Lastly, in direct response to the 9 May insurgent
attack in close proximity to the AMISOM. troops who
are protecting Villa Somalia, the seat of the presidency,
the Department of Field Support is deploying trauma
kits and airfield lighting equipment to enable AMISOM
to conduct 24-hour operations at Mogadishu and to
improve immediate casualty treatment. Arrangements
are also under way to provide AMISOM. with a
strategic reserve of rations to mitigate any threat to the
AMISOM. supply chain.

In conclusion, we have a unique opportunity to
support this process. Our partnership with the AU is
key to ensuring streamlined support among all the
stakeholders involved. One major challenge stems from
the need to deliver this level of support within the
standards of oversight traditionally associated with a
United Nations peacekeeping operation of an
analogous size. Such a level of oversight calls for an
international United Nations footprint on the ground in
Somalia, which is at present precluded by the current
security situation. Until the United Nations support
office for AMISOM. can establish a small footprint in
Mogadishu, interim oversight mechanisms will be put
in place, using United Nations, AU and contractual
personnel in order to achieve our core objectives.

To conclude, I must tell you, Sir, that I have to go
to the Fifth Committee to present the overall
peacekeeping budget, so I will be leaving shortly and
will return a little later.

