Mr. Andereya Latorre (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, first of all, to congratulate you,
Sir, on the way in which you are leading the Council's
work this month. We particularly welcome the
convening of this public meeting on the situation in
Bougainville, given that it is very important to know
the views of the countries of the region, which have
demonstrated their commitment and cooperation in the
peace process. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Danilo Turk for his briefing on the developments in the
peace process in the most recent period.

We welcome the common position reached
among the parties for the destruction of arms and
munitions under stage III of the weapons disposal
programme. However, we understand that this depends
on a number of conditions that are not easily achieved,
among them, the entry-into-force of the Constitution,
the settlement of outstanding issues, such as the
Me'ekamui Defence Force, and reconciliation among
the various factions. That is why we look forward with
great interest and hope to the upcoming meeting to be
held between those groups of Bougainville and the
Government of Papua New Guinea. We hope that they
achieve the necessary agreements in the peace process.

We acknowledge that many challenges still lie
ahead for Bougainville. Among them should be noted
the important task of developing the proposed
Constitution and, most especially, preparations for the
elections. In that context, we recognize the central role
of the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) in resolving disputes and mediating on
differences and changes in the holding of the elections.

As well, it is necessary to support the process of
laying the basic foundations for establishing the
autonomous government of Bougainville. That process
requires, among other things, the reforming and
strengthening of the public sector, the mobilization of
resources, the rebuilding of infrastructure,
reconciliation and the reintegration of ex-combatants.
We underline as well that in order for peace to be
lasting, it is necessary to establish an efficient
administration and a functioning economy. Therefore,
the relevant bodies of the United Nations must closely
coordinate efforts in Bougainville with the
international donor community in order to establish and
strengthen peace. We value the activities already
initiated by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF).

It is essential that the Political Office of the
United Nations continue to be present after the
imminent withdrawal of personnel from Australia, Fiji,
New Zealand and Vanuatu, who are part of the
transition team of Bougainville. We therefore support
the extension of UNPOB's mandate at least until
elections have been held and greater progress has been
achieved in the other outstanding tasks. As well, we
support the establishment of an observer mission of the
United Nations to assist in completing the transition
process and to follow on UNPOB when its mandate
expires at the end of this year.

We value the growing collaboration between the
authorities of Papua New Guinea and the leaders of
Bougainville. We hope that spirit of mutual
commitment and trust continues to develop.

Finally, we thank Ambassador Noel Sinclair and
his team for their valuable work in Bougainville.
Although much remains to be done, we are aware that
their efforts have contributed to the search for the
peace, security and stability of the people of
Bougainville.
