Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I welcome your presidency, Madam. We
are convinced that your guidance, like that of previous
Presidents, will be highly successful. I also welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia.

We thank Ambassador Mahbubani for his
introduction of the report and for the detailed
information provided to us at the meeting on Friday.
We also express our appreciation to the members of the
Panel of Experts, chaired by Mr. Martin Chungong
Ayafor, for their broad and detailed report on the
implementation of sanctions provided for in resolution
1343 (2001).

I also thank Mr. Tsui of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for his briefing.

The high quality of the information provided and
of the additional reports prepared by the Secretary-
General has allowed Council members, with the
cooperation of the other delegations speaking today, to
make a balanced assessment of those measures. We
must always bear in mind the fact that sanctions
imposed against the Government of Liberia because of
its relationship with the rebels of the Revolutionary
United Front are designed to promote peace in Sierra
Leone and in the West African subregion.

In assessing the effectiveness of the measures
imposed on the Government of Liberia, Colombia
believes that attention must be focused essentially on
the four following aspects.

First, the measures must be accurately targeted
and calibrated. It is clear that we do not intend to direct
them against the people of Liberia, which is already
suffering from the debilitating effects of poverty.

Secondly, with respect to the attitude of the
Government of Liberia, the report of the Panel notes
that that Government has responded with some positive
and some discouraging actions. The measures have
thus proven only partially effective and we must adjust
them accordingly.

Thirdly, we need the cooperation of the States
Members of the United Nations, which the experts
consider to be inadequate with respect to compliance
with the sanctions. Members must therefore conduct
themselves in the manner required by the United
Nations.

Fourthly, the sanctions regime must be effectively
monitored. This can be undertaken by the sanctions
Committee, by the extension of the Panel of Experts'
mandate or by other joint mechanisms to be
considered.

In the light of the comments made by the Panel of
Experts, we feel that the measures have been partially
successful, since the prevalent environment in Sierra
Leone is conducive to political reconciliation under the
auspices of the United Nations Mission, while the
incursions of rebel groups along the Guinean border
early in the year have been neutralized.

We take note, however, that violations of the arms
embargo continue. In this respect, before we consider
additional sanctions against Liberia, we feel it would
be advisable to call for compliance with the
recommendations made in the Council's presidential
statement of 31 August on small arms, in which arms
exporting countries were called on to exercise the
highest degree of responsibility in their international
transactions so as to avoid practices that violate
embargoes and facilitate the deviation of weapons to
areas of conflict.

Greater vigilance is therefore necessary over
intermediaries in arms sales and contracts for aircraft
that facilitate the illicit trade. The passivity and lack of
cooperation of some exporting countries only benefit
the arms traffickers and make it impossible for the
Council to obtain satisfactory results.

Moreover, we support the recommendation of the
Panel of Experts that greater cooperation must be
promoted between the States members of the Economic
Community of West African States in order to expand
and strengthen the regional moratorium on arms
imports to the region, including enhanced exchange of
information among members. We are facing a situation
of conflict and political instability in which a regional
approach to supporting Council action is necessary
with regard not only to the arms embargo, but also to
airport operations, the import and export of diamonds
and travel restrictions on high-ranking officials of the
Government of Liberia. We congratulate the three
countries of the Mano River Union for their steps to
restore confidence and political cooperation among
themselves.

It is thus necessary to prevent the weapons that
circulate freely in the world's illicit markets from
claiming more victims in Sierra Leone, Liberia and
throughout West Africa. The Council will have to
encourage improved dialogue with the United Nations
funds and programmes in order to ensure that the
humanitarian needs of the population continue to be
met when private organizations find their contributions
reduced. We are concerned that the official Liberian
propaganda will succeed in convincing the people that
the social and economic misery that has resulted from
their country's poor administration and institutional
management has been brought about by the United
Nations. In this regard, we support strengthening the
United Nations Office for Liberia in Monrovia.

Finally, we must ensure that the measures that
have already been adopted by the Council continue to
be respected by Members of the United Nations,
companies and individuals. As long as we have no
other monitoring mechanism, my delegation supports
extending the mandate of the Panel of Experts, as put
forward in the final section of the report. We have a
commitment to ensuring that there will be peace for the
people of West Africa, and we must not fail to see that
commitment through.

