The President: On behalf of the Security
Council, let me convey our deepest condolences to the
Afghan authorities and people following the
devastating earthquake in northern Afghanistan. Our
thoughts and prayers go to the thousands of Afghan
families bereaved and affected by this calamity, in a
land which has had far more than its share of suffering
in recent years. There can be no doubt that the
international community will help the Interim
Administration and the local Afghans deal with this
tragedy and help the victims, as we are helping the
Afghans heal the wounds of war and create lasting
peace and development in their country.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Afghanistan

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, New Zealand,
Pakistan, Spain, Tajikistan and Turkey, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhcidi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Dauth (Australia), Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada),
Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (the Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Yoshikawa
(Japan), Mr. MacKay (New Zealand), Mr. Ahmad
(Pakistan), Mr. Arias (Spain), Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) and Mr. Pamir (Turkey) took seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Danilo Tiirk, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on the agenda. The Council is
meeting with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations. Members of the Council have before
them the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security, document S/2002/278.

I should also like to draw attention to the
following documents: S/2002/274, which contains a
letter date 14 March 2002 from the representative of
the United Kingdom transmitting a report on the
activities of the International Security Assistance Force
in Afghanistan, and S/2002/283, which contains a joint
letter from the representatives of Afghanistan and the
Russian Federation transmitting a Joint Russian-
Afghan Statement of 12 March 2002.

I welcome the Deputy Secretary-General, Her
Excellency Ms. Louise Frechette, to this meeting and
invite her to take the floor.


