Mr. Sirleaf (Liberia): It is an honour and privilege
for me to address the Security Council as it considers the
situation in Liberia, which is vividly captured in the
fifteenth progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL),
contained in document S/ 1996/47 of 23 January 1996.

Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
January. Already your tenure has produced positive
results. We welcome the innovation in the working
methods of the Council which, inter alia, affords
interested delegations an opportunity to participate in
open deliberations of the Council prior to its decisions on
matters bearing on the maintenance of international peace
and security. Undoubtedly, this approach promotes
transparency, broadens participation in the Council's
work, and points towards the eventual enlargement and
democratization of the Council.

I would also like to extend to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the sincere gratitude of the
Council of State and the people of Liberia for his deep
personal concern with, and untiring involvement in the
search for a durable, peaceful solution to the Liberian
civil war. In particular, we recall with thanks his
initiatives which facilitated the convening of the
Conference on Assistance to Liberia, during which
financial and other pledges were made in support of the
Abuja Agreement, the disarmament and demobilization
processes, the recovery and rehabilitation needs of the
country, and assistance to the Economic Community of
West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in the
execution of its mandate. We also applaud Mr. Boutros-
Ghali for his visit to Liberia on 29 November 1995,
another manifestation of his interest, which resulted in the
clarification of relevant issues in the peace process.

In my address to the General Assembly during its
fiftieth session, I said:

"The Abuja Agreement will hold and usher in a new
dawn for Liberia; but even if it did not hold, we
would still pursue peace, [and] ignore those who
prefer war to peace ..." (Ofiicial Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 25th meeting, p. 10)

 

We also apprised the Assembly that the installation of the
Council of State last September pointed towards a final
peaceful resolution of the Liberian crisis and raised the
hopes of Liberians, who believe that the process is now
irreversible. The Liberian civil war is virtually over.
Today, I reiterate to the Security Council and the
international community that the Council of State remains
firmly committed to the terms of the Abuja Agreement, and
will employ its best efforts to ensure that the peace process
is not derailed. In this connection, the Council of State
considers the recent skirmishes in Tubmanburg and other
areas of the country as unfortunate incidents which will not
deprive the people of Liberia of the peace they have longed
for for the last six years. We have therefore held
consultations with the disaffected party in order to hear its
grievances and find acceptable peaceful means to address
them. Additionally, the Council of State has informed that
party, in unambiguous terms, that the peace process will
proceed according to the Abuja Agreement.

We are not unmindful that the war was waged by
Liberians against themselves, and of the consequent toll it
has exacted from countries of the West African subregion,
which, through ECOMOG, provided the enabling
environment for Liberians to harmonize their differences by
way of peaceful negotiations. We deeply appreciate the
many sacrifices which ECOWAS member States continue
to make for the restoration of peace in the country.

We are also grateful to the United Nations, its
specialized agencies and Member States for the provision
of humanitarian assistance in the form of food, medicines
and so on. However, as Liberians endeavour to make the
transition from war to peace, we appeal to the international
community to empathize with the circumstances now
obtaining in the country.

Some degree of anxiety still exists within and among
the warring factions. As the war wanes, combatants have
their anxious moments. What life awaits them after years of
knowing only armed confrontation? We have to abate their
fears, and we stand in need of substantial assistance to
provide productive alternatives in civil society.

Since 1990, ECOMOG has kept the peace in Liberia.
It has had to do so with the meagre resources of the troop-
contributing countries. Over and over again, appeals have
been made to the international community to supplement
the wherewithal provided by ECOWAS in order to advance
the peace process in all of its terms. As the peace process
is now at a critical juncture, we appeal to the international
community to be more understanding and lend the
necessary assistance for ECOMOG to carry out its
mandate in pursuance of the Abuja Agreement.

ECOWAS has taken on an unprecedented task. It has
given concrete expression to the much-heralded talk about
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. In this respect, my delegation believes that
the international community has more to gain from
ECOWAS's success in Liberia if the necessary assistance
is provided.

In conclusion, I wish to re-emphasize that the
Council of State has given its solemn pledge to the
Liberian people that it will abide by the Abuja
Agreement. The Council has also pledged its fullest
support for the ECOWAS peace initiative, and is awaiting
the signing of the status-of-forces agreement. While
realizing that Liberians are ultimately responsible for
restoring peace and democracy in their country, we need
the Council's help to jump start the process of
disarmament and demobilization, social and economic
rehabilitation and the holding of national elections that
will return the country to civil administration under the
rule of law.

The delegation of Liberia commends to the Council
the recommendation of the Secretary-General that
UNOMIL's mandate be extended until 31 May 1996, and
joins in his appeal for increased support to ECOMOG.
For our part, I pledge anew the commitment of the
Council of State to the full implementation of the Abuja
Agreement.

