Mr. Piot: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on action to
implement resolution 1308 (2000), in relation to AIDS
and security. I am particularly pleased to update the
Council during Angola's presidency. As members are
well aware, in many places the tragic legacy of conflict
has been the spread of HIV. The Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) is redoubling its
efforts to work with Angola's leaders to ensure that the
peace dividend in Angola does not become the casualty
of a more insidious enemy - AIDS.

When the Security Council first considered the
issue of AIDS in January 2000 and subsequently
adopted resolution 1308 (2000), it reshaped the global
landscape of the fight against AIDS. The Council's
actions laid the groundwork for the prominence given
to AIDS as a security issue in the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS, adopted by the General
Assembly in June 2001.

Subsequent resolutions of the Security Council -
1325 (2000) in relation to women, 1379 (2001) in
relation to children and 1327 (2001) concerning the
Brahimi report - have all reinforced the determination
of the Security Council to ensure that global responses
to conflict situations address the AIDS dimension.

I must note with some regret, however, that the
Security Council has not taken the opportunity to
expressly address AIDS in a number of recent
resolutions establishing and extending United Nations
missions, especially given that some of these missions
are operating in regions which already have major HIV
epidemics.

Nevertheless, the resolve on the part of the
Security Council has been integral to winning the
support of national Governments in responding in a
more concerted fashion to the threat of AIDS in the
peacekeeping context. But more than that, it has
opened the door to UNAIDS, working with defence
and civil defence forces in many countries, and it also
signalled a need to address the myriad ways in which
AIDS undermines regional and human security.

UNAIDS has addressed AIDS and security in
three ways. First, we have taken action in conjunction
with Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
in implementing the aspects of resolution 1308 (2000)
which relate to peacekeeping forces, as we heard
earlier from Under-Secretary-General Guehenno.
Secondly, we are spearheading a wider response to
AIDS among uniformed services. Thirdly, we are
expanding the response to AIDS as a pre-eminent
humanitarian and security challenge. Let me now
consider each of those issues in turn.

First, as we heard from Mr. Guehenno, UNAIDS
and DPKO are now undertaking a solid collaborative
effort; I will not repeat what he said. As a result,
working jointly we have been able to ensure that
responses to AIDS have permeated every peacekeeping
operation.

The full-time AIDS policy advisers in major
peacekeeping operations work on a daily basis on HIV
prevention and care initiatives at mission level and
with United Nations theme groups on HIV/AIDS and
the UNAIDS country officers in the context of the
various missions.

We are also currently establishing a
comprehensive information base for the targeting and
evaluation of HIV activities among peacekeepers. We
have produced an AIDS awareness card with a pocket
for a condom. It has been produced in 10 languages so
far, with Chinese soon to be added. We are now
providing 50,000 cards per year to peacekeeping
missions and to troop-contributing countries for use in
pre-deployment training.

Responding to a debate in the Council, I
established, in November 2001, an Expert Panel on
HIV Testing in United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, chaired by Australian High Court judge,
The Honourable Michael Kirby, with the wide
participation of uniformed services, as well as of
DPKO. Its report has informed the formulation of
DPKO policy, and I am heartened to see that DPKO is
now clarifying its policy on testing to support the more
extensive use of voluntary HIV counselling and testing
in the context of peacekeeping missions. Earlier, we
heard from Mr. Guehenno about some of the details of
the process, as well as about the achievements.

It is also true, however, that countries hosting
peacekeeping missions are increasingly calling for the
mandatory testing of peacekeeping troops. I remain
convinced that this is a problem better solved upstream
than downstream - that is, with sound policies in
place, voluntary HIV testing should be a normal part of
defence force operations.

While we have made undoubted progress in
responding to AIDS as it has an impact on
peacekeeping operations, major challenges remain.
First, as we heard earlier, we are still hampered by a
lack of reliable data on the spread of HIV among
peacekeepers and in conflict-ridden countries.
UNAIDS is therefore ensuring that we have better
baseline measures and the capacity to measure progress
against them.

Secondly, AIDS responses among peacekeepers
need to be backed up by concerted leadership. Defence
ministers and chiefs of staff worldwide ought have
AIDS on their radar screens to a greater extent.
Thirdly, sustainability is a major challenge:
peacekeepers are rotated through their missions in
relatively short time frames, which makes it imperative
that mission responses be reinforced in the ongoing
programmes of uniformed services.

Let me now turn to my second point: the wider
issue of AIDS in the uniformed services. Peacekeepers
are drawn from, and demobilized to, national
uniformed services. By working with uniformed
services, in both troop-contributing and other
countries, we establish the norms of conduct for
uniformed personnel, and model effective AIDS
response activities.

We are now working extensively with armed
forces to ensure that HIV awareness and prevention
takes place prior to deployment and that it is reinforced
at demobilization. At least 38 countries worldwide now
have a national strategy addressing AIDS in the
uniformed services, which was one of the goals of
resolution 1308 (2000).

UNAIDS - including our co-sponsors,
especially the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Health Organization and the United Nations
Children's Fund - is engaged in approximately 50
countries, working with young recruits, peacekeepers,
police and immigration officers in the prevention of
HIV and to strengthen HIV care. We have produced
key tools - programming guides and a peer-education
kit. Young recruits - both men and women - are a
particular focus, because like other young adults, they
are those primarily at risk.

One aim has been to institutionalize training on
AIDS into training curricula for uniformed services.
This has been achieved in Ukraine's defence forces,
with support from UNAIDS and, in particular, UNFPA.
Similar efforts have targeted border guards in West
Bengal and military and police forces in Uruguay, and
are beginning among law enforcement agencies in the
Russian Federation and Belarus.

In order to allow Wider lessons to be drawn,
UNAIDS is publishing case studies of HIV prevention
and care among armed forces and United Nations
peacekeepers in Eritrea - as can be seen from the
report that is before Council members - and it will
also do so shortly in the case of Ukraine and Thailand.
The results of that first study are both sobering and
hope-giving. They have identified gaps for better
action by all of us. We have also placed special
emphasis on recruiting gender advisers in conflict and
post-conflict situations, as members heard earlier.

Complementing the emphasis on uniformed
services, we have intensified our actions targeting all
United Nations system staff. The AIDS awareness card
for peacekeepers, for example, is being adapted for use
among all humanitarian workers, and the uniformed
services peer education kit is serving as a model to
extend HIV-related peer education to all United
Nations staff.

Thirdly and finally, let me just mention briefly
the wider context in which AIDS constitutes a threat to
global security, as presaged in resolution 1308
(2000) - although it also extends further.

In the worst-affected regions, AIDS now
constitutes a full-blown crisis of human capacity. It is
profoundly exacerbating economic instability and food
insecurity, and may even affect governance and lead to
State failure. The coming generation of orphans will
require unprecedented levels of support. Last month,
the United Nations Chief Executive Board approved a
plan, submitted by the World Food Programme and
UNAIDS, for intensified United Nations system action
on AIDS in Southern Africa - a plan that calls for an
all-out effort combining longer-term development and
emergency-type humanitarian support, because both
are necessary today in those countries that are most
affected.

While part of our action is directed at regions
where the epidemic is newly emerging and therefore
most containable, such as Eastern Europe and
throughout Asia, we also need to attend to those States
where AIDS has so eroded national capacity that
massive and coordinated delivery of emergency
assistance for development is needed to stave off State
collapse.

When the Security Council first considered AIDS
in January 2000, it was truly breaking new ground.
What the Council achieved then has been of lasting
merit. It set in train a process which has enabled us to
place peacekeepers and uniformed services in the
forefront of effective global AIDS responses.

In the new year, I look forward to presenting to
the Council a detailed progress report on results
obtained in relation to resolution 1308 (2000).
However, the extent of action among peacekeepers and
uniformed services is already evident.

HIV represents a challenge to every one of the
42,000 soldiers and police officers under United
Nations command. Many are serving in high-
prevalence regions - a third are in Africa - and all
face the strain of separation from families and of
stressful working conditions. Unless the HIV challenge
is met, the sustainability of those operations - and
their invaluable contribution to global security - will
be under threat.

But for the personnel involved, a peacekeeping
mission is only a relatively small part of their career.
We cannot rely only on HIV education efforts delivered
in the context of peacekeeping operations. I urge
Member States to ensure that all uniformed services,
including future and returning peacekeepers, are able to
participate in ongoing HIV programmes.

Our goal, pursued jointly with DPKO, is a simple
one. We want to ensure that peacekeepers and all
uniformed personnel are leaders in the fight against
AIDS - as wejust heard.

AIDS is not only the great moral challenge of our
time. It is also a massive barrier to development, the
cause of economic crisis, and a fundamental threat to
security and to the basic stability of many nations. We
thank the Security Council for the part it has played in
recognizing and meeting that challenge, and look to its
continued leadership in doing so.

