Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): My delegation is particularly
grateful for the fact that the first Council meeting of the
new millennium has dealt with this high-profile discussion
on the AIDS pandemic in Africa. We thank you very much,
Mr. President, for making this possible.

There is no doubt that the AIDS epidemic is having
a negative impact on the sustainable development of
African countries. It destroys the most productive sector
of African populations. Technicians, teachers, factory
workers, doctors - all fall victim to this pandemic.
Virtually no aspect of public or private life remains
untouched by its devastating impact. The disruption of the
social fabric of African communities is immense. The
numbers of orphaned children, street kids and households
headed by teenagers who are themselves HIV-positive are
all on the increase throughout Africa. The AIDS scourge
is threatening the very foundations of African societies,
threatening economic and social stability and, in the end,
leading to political instability throughout the continent. In
this new millennium, HIV/AIDS will constitute the key
factor that will determine the pace and quality of our
development, well-being and survival.

It is clear from what we have heard this morning
and this afternoon that the AIDS pandemic presents the
greatest challenge not only to Africa, but to the
international community as a whole. A number of
responses have been offered by many speakers today.
However, my delegation would like to emphasize several
points.

I will start with African countries. In this regard, the
most important first step, as we see it, is political
commitment. We must recognize the disease for what it
is: a threat to our very survival as viable nations.
Secondly, we must step up the effort that we are engaged
in to discontinue traditional or cultural practices that
encourage the spread of HIV/AIDS. Thirdly, we must
reduce the stigma associated with HIV/AIDS. We must
embrace people living with AIDS and recognize them as
equal members of society. The conspiracy of silence must
be broken and we must begin treating AIDS like any
other disease that must be openly confronted. Fourthly,
AIDS education should form an essential part of the
curricula in our schools. We must openly discuss, in the
workplace, the prevention and treatment of AIDS, and
care for those living with AIDS. Education not only
removes the stigma on the AIDS condition but also leads
to favourable and positive change in behaviour patterns
by groups most at risk.

The next stage in the fight against the AIDS
pandemic is international support. The world and Africa
must fight the disease as partners. International
partnerships in research activity and treatment already in
place must be strengthened, improved and better
coordinated. In the end, however, it is the lack of

 

financial resources that is proving the greatest obstacle to
success in the war against AIDS. At this juncture, my
delegation would like to thank the United States
Government for the contribution which the Vice-President
announced this morning to the global war against the AIDS
pandemic. We must hope that this example will be
emulated by other Governments and international financial
institutions.

The next track of international support to Africa lies
in a renewed commitment to increase official development
assistance to Africa. In this regard, it is our belief that
development assistance from donors could include specific
components for AIDS-related activities. There is also the
eternal problem of the debt burden of African countries.
Scarce resources continue to be spent on servicing the debt.
If the war against AIDS is to be meaningful, a
comprehensive and lasting solution must be urgently found
to the debt problem. Creditor nations have the capacity and
the will to bring about positive change and make a
difference in this regard.

The last area in which international support is required
is treatment and drugs. Africa must have access to
affordable drugs that prolong the lives of people with HIV,
together with treatment for opportunistic infections that
occur in people with AIDS. There are also the problems of
dual infections, such as HIV infection concurrent with
tuberculosis or with other sexually transmitted diseases.
There is also the problem of mother-to-child transmission.
All of these can be prevented only if appropriate and
affordable drugs are available.

The Zambian delegation values the discussion that has
taken place today on a subject that is so vital to human
development, and my delegation shares your hope,
Mr. President, that the dialogue that has begun today will
be continued in the Council's later work.

