Mr. Palous (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; and the European Free Trade
Association country Liechtenstein, as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
First and foremost, let me extend our warm
welcome to President Jose Ramos-Horta of Timor-
Leste. The European Union highly appreciates his
courage and his dedication to securing a better future
for the people of Timor-Leste. It is a pleasure to hold
today's debate with President Ramos-Horta present,
especially when recalling the terrible events of
11 February 2008.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2009/72), the Japanese
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, for the tireless
work of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) on the ground, which is highly
appreciated by the international community.

The European Union has been following the
recent developments in Timor-Leste with great interest.
We commend the Government and people of Timor-
Leste for their efforts to achieve long-term stability and
ensure sustainable development in all spheres of public
life in the country. Since 1999, the European Union has
provided about €327 million in development and
humanitarian assistance. We are committed to
continuing our support in crucial public sector areas.
For the period from 2008 to 2013, the European Union
is providing support of about €81 million in areas such
as institutional capacity-building, rural development,
assistance to the health sector and food security.

Furthermore, under the Instrument for Stability,
the European Commission is providing support to
Timor-Leste in security sector reform, the social
reintegration of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
employment generation. In those areas, the European
Union works closely with the United Nations
Development Programme, the International Organization
for Migration and the International Labour Organization.

The European Union commends recent positive
developments in the security situation in Timor-Leste
and acknowledges the significant progress achieved in
addressing the challenges of the Falintil-Forcas de
Defesa de Timor-Leste petitioners and the return of
internally displaced persons. In that respect, the closure
of a large number of IDP camps in Dili and Bacau and
the process of reintegration are encouraging signs. The
European Union has taken note of them with
appreciation. At the same time, the European Union
encourages the Government of Timor-Leste to continue
its efforts and to focus on long-term solutions to those
challenges.

The active engagement of the National Police of
Timor-Leste (PNTL) and of UNMIT, which have
contributed considerably to internal security, calls our
attention to the question of resumption of
responsibilities by the PNTL. In that regard, the
European Union welcomes the possibility of starting

that process on 27 March 2009, as indicated in the
report of the Secretary-General. In addition, the
European Union looks forward to receiving a document
defining the specific roles of UNMIT police and the
UNMIT-PNTL engagement, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General's report, which is to be submitted
before gradually handing over responsibilities to the
PNTL.

The European Union expresses its full support for
the role performed by UNMIT, especially the United
Nations police contingent, as well as for other relevant
actors implementing the security sector reform plan.
The European Union underlines the need to intensify
training activities for the PNTL, including in the area
of human rights, and supports the development of a
comprehensive and coherent concept for the whole
security sector, which should be elaborated in a
coordinated, inclusive and transparent manner and with
the direct involvement of all relevant governmental and
non-governmental actors. The recent establishment of
the security sector reform team in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, and the attention that the team
and the United Nations task force on security sector
reform have been paying to addressing the needs of
Timor-Leste in the area of security sector reform are
very welcome and encouraging developments. It
cannot be overemphasized that all this would not make
sense without the direct and active involvement of
Timor-Leste and without true national ownership of
security sector reform processes.

Along the lines of the Secretary-General's report,
the European Union remains concerned about the
situation of the judiciary. Further support with regard
to the backlog ofjudicial cases is necessary in order to
help mitigate the difficult situation. On its part, the
European Union will continue to assist Timor-Leste in
developing its justice sector and reinforcing the rule of
law. An identification mission has already been sent to
the country, with a mandate to identify specific support
to the National Parliament as a way to support political
and democratic dialogue in the country.

The European Union is also concerned about the
socio-economic situation in Timor-Leste despite
positive results as far as overall economic growth is
concerned. The Union is especially concerned about
World Bank data regarding the increase in the poverty
rate, which has reached about 50 per cent, and the high
rate of unemployment, which could potentially lead to
renewed instability. It is therefore the European
Union's aim to support labour-intensive work
programmes, mainly through the implementation of the
rural development programme. The European Union
also encourages Timor-Leste to make use of the
Petroleum Fund for future investment projects and to
stimulate the non-oil part of the economy by creating
new job opportunities and through basic infrastructure
development.

The European Union appreciates the Secretary-
General's presentation in his report the medium-term
strategy for UNMIT, with illustrative benchmarks for
the four mandated priority areas - the review and
reform of the security sector, the strengthening of the
rule of law, economic and social development and the
promotion of a culture of democratic governance
dialogue - as requested by resolution 1802 (2008).

The international community is eagerly awaiting
the Government's revised national development plan,
which is to focus on poverty reduction as called for
under the 2008 national priorities, thereby signalling
Government ownership of the process and giving
donors a longer-term orientation, including the
possibility of alignment according to the Accra Agenda
for Action.

Bearing in mind the persisting political, security
and economic challenges at hand, the European Union
fully supports the extension of UNMIT's mandate for
another 12 months, at the current composition and
strength, as recommended in the Secretary-General's
report. The European Union is convinced that such an
extension will help to ensure continuity in further
stabilizing the country.

Last, but not least, the European Union will
follow with great interest the 2009 local elections in
Timor-Leste as another important milestone in the
country's democratic processes and as a significant
indicator of the progress achieved so far in the area of
institutional capacity-building and democratic
governance, which are both so crucial to ensuring
stability and good governance in the country.

In conclusion, I would like to reassure President
Ramos-Horta and the Timorese people of the European
Union's unwavering commitment to assisting their
country in achieving further positive results in their
country's stabilization and reconstruction and in
addressing remaining challenges.
