Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
and for the United Kingdom's deep commitment to
stability and democracy in Somalia. I would also like
to thank Prime Minister Sharmarke forjoining us today
and for his leadership. I am grateful to Mr. Kay, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his dedicated work and for all he has given and the
risks he has taken for Somalia over the years, and to
Ambassador Antonio for all that the African Union
(AU) has invested in and sacrificed for Somalia.

At the end of August, Mogadishu experienced
something it had not had in years - an international
book fair. More than 1,000 people came from around
the country and abroad. President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud was one of them. They bought books,
attended readings, participated in panels and discussed
issues ranging from literature to education to local
governance. According to one report, more than half
the books sold were written by women. That such an
event could occur and so many people would attend
demonstratedjust how much is changing in Mogadishu.
Locals recalled the open-air book fairs that used to take
place in the 1980s. One said, "With events like this,
Mogadishu is gradually reclaiming its image". A Somali
who travelled from the northern city of Hargeysa told
a reporter,

"It is my seventh time in Mogadishu. This
time it is different. So much creativity and talent
displayed in one place... It is beautiful being here."

The change under way in Somalia is real. We all
know the fragility of the political transition, and we all
know the horrors still being inflicted by the terrorist
group Al-Shabaab, which continues to assault Somalia's
Government and people. But it is important to recognize
that there have been security and economic gains and
that those gains are meaningful and important. The
international community's focus must now be on
building and sustaining momentum on two critical and
interconnected fronts - improving security through
increased military and police pressure on Al-Shabaab
and improving governance by supporting accountable
Government institutions.

Thanks to the perseverance and sacrifice ofAfrican
Union soldiers, and with support from the United
Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission
in Somalia (UNSOA), the territory that Al-Shabaab
controls is shrinking, while Government authority
is expanding, as seen, for instance, in the recapture
of key towns such as Baardheere and Diinsoor. But
while Al-Shabaab is diminished, its brutal strikes
on civilians in Mogadishu and large-scale attacks on
AU peacekeepers demonstrate that it is not defeated.
Fulfilling that mission will require continuing the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union.

Resolution 2245 (2015) will help ensure that the
United Nations, through the renamed United Nations
Support Office in Somalia, improves its logistic support
to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
the Somali National Army and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia. The recently completed
strategic review of UNSOA identified key ways to
improve our support to the political transition, and we
very much appreciate the United Kingdom's leadership
in addressing the report's recommendations through
today's resolution. The number of personnel supported
by UNSOA has more than quadrupled, to more than
33,000. The area of operations has increased 4,000
times over. It is extremely important that the changes
in resolution 2245 (2015) have now taken account of
those new circumstances and responsibilities.

Maintaining momentum on the security front will
require continued bilateral support for AMISOM.
The African troops fighting for Somalia's future have
achieved major successes, but not without significant
costs - first and foremost the scores of AMISOM
troops who have given their lives to this important
mission and whose sacrifice we deeply respect and
honour. The United States will remain a steadfast
partner of the AMISOM. troop-contributing countries,
providing equipment, pre-deployment training and
other assistance. And, as we do with United Nations
peacekeeping operations, we will continue to urge that
AMISOM. investigate reports of serious violations or
abuses of human rights, including those that involve
the killing of civilians or sexual exploitation and abuse,
and that AMISOM. hold accountable those responsible.
Ultimately, lasting security in Somalia will come
through the development of a professional and effective
Somali National Army that respects human rights and
civilian control. The United States has provided some
$300 million in training and other support, and we
will continue to help the Somali National Army build
capacity so that it can defend its people. But a new
Somalia will not come through military force alone,
needless to say, and improving governance in Somalia
must be a huge and urgent priority.

The security gains of AMISOM. and the National
Army have created a historic opportunity. It is now
up to Somalia's political leadership to seize it and,
with the help of the international community, to lead
the transition to a stable, national and representative
Government. To that end, we welcome President Hassan
Sheikh's repeated commitment to holding elections in
2016, which have been reiterated by his administration,
the Parliament and regional officials. We urge the
Somali Government to work with the international
community to ensure a process that is free and fair and
that ultimately represents the will of the Somali people,
including internally displaced persons and refugees.

We also appreciate the President's public
commitment to improving accountability and
transparency in the security sector. The same high
standard must be rigorously applied across the entire
public sector. There can be no tolerance for corruption,
fraud or abuse within the Government or the electoral
process. Such misconduct will threaten the entire
transition. The Somali people deserve a Government
that puts the public's needs first and is committed to
serving all Somalis.

The Mogadishu international book fair points to the
readiness of Somalis to put war behind them. As one of
the fair's organizers said, "Next year will be bigger and
better, God willing". He was referring to the fair, but
his words ring equally true for his country. Somalia's
future can be bigger and better if security and political
progress continues. The United States stands alongside
Somalis in their determination to see that happen.

