Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): Madam President, I
would like to thank you for providing us with this
opportunity to present Japan's Views on the situation in
East Timor in the light of the recent events, particularly
the tragic death of Private Leonard William Manning
on 24 July. The Government and people of Japan
extend their profound condolences to the family of
Private Manning, who gave his life while serving the
cause of peace, and also express their sincere sympathy
to the Government and people of New Zealand.

Japan's views on the situation in East Timor, as
presented in the open meeting last month, remain
unchanged. Today I would like to focus my comments
on recent developments and issues which were not
elaborated on in our previous statement.

First of all, Japan is gravely concerned at the
recent resurgence of militia activities in the border
areas of East Timor. As we have repeatedly stressed,
the maintenance of security is a prerequisite for
successful nation-building, and every effort should be
made to this end. We recognize that the measures taken
by the Indonesian Government have resulted in a
decrease in incidents caused by the militias in the
border areas since April, but recent events have shown
that these efforts need to be continued and furthered.

Such efforts should be twofold. First, the border
areas must be secured to prevent cross-border
incursions. In this respect, we call on the military
forces of Indonesia and the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) to cooperate
more closely in order to fully implement the
Memorandum of Understanding on tactical
coordination signed on 11 April. Secondly, the root
cause of the problem must be addressed by disarming
and disbanding the militias in West Timor. Difficult
and complex as this task may be, only the Government
of Indonesia is in a position to take effective measures
to this end, and we call on it to make further efforts in
this respect.

The fate of the remaining East Timorese refugees
in West Timor is also a matter of concern to Japan.
Efforts by the Indonesian authorities and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) have enabled more than 167,000 refugees to
return, but the Secretary-General has estimated that
85,000 to 120,000 refugees still remain in West Timor.
The lack of tangible progress on this issue in recent
months makes it clear that greater efforts are required
by the parties concerned. We are also reminded of the
fact that UNHCR's resources are not limitless.
Nevertheless Japan believes that international support
is essential in resolving this difficult problem, and it
supports the involvement and efforts of UNHCR. We
call upon the Indonesian authorities to make further
efforts in collaborating with UNHCR, which is the only
effective formula for resolving this refugee problem.

The recent tragic incident and the lack of progress
in certain aspects of the situation underscore the need
for continued and determined efforts on the part of all
the relevant parties and players. In this respect, I would
like to reiterate once again Japan's commitment to
cooperate to the best of its ability with UNTAET and
the people of East Timor in their efforts to build a
peaceful and democratic nation.

