Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to begin by
welcoming the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan,
Mr. Taro Kono, to the Security Council today to preside
over our work. We would also like to thank Secretary-
General Guterres for his briefing

Bolivia, as a pacifist country, promotes the culture
of dialogue and the right to peace, as well as cooperation
among the peoples ofthe world, with full respect for their
sovereignty, through diplomacy in their relations with
each other. In that regard, our Constitution prohibits the
manufacture and use of chemical, biological or nuclear
weapons on Bolivian territory.

As part of the first densely populated zone in the
world that declared itself free of nuclear weapons,
through the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, known
as the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and as the first region to
declare itself a zone of peace, we urge that our example
be replicated in other regions of the world.

In that regard, Bolivia expresses its strongest and
most energetic condemnation of the ballistic missile
launches and the nuclear tests carried out by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We call on that
country to abandon its nuclear and ballistic missiles
programme in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner and to comply with the provisions of Security
Council resolutions and return to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

We would point out the importance of complying
with the Charter of the United Nations, which designates
the Security Council as the only legal organ that can
take the necessary measures to maintain or re-establish
international peace and security, in that way ruling out
any unilateral action.

We therefore reject any act of provocation or
application of unilateral sanctions, not only because
they constitute a flagrant Violation of international law
but also because they undermine the efforts and work of
multilateral organizations such as our own, as unilateral
sanctions seek to extend the jurisdiction and internal
legislation of one State to another, thereby violating the
principles of equality, sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of the States. We therefore urge all the parties
involved to avoid increasing tensions or escalating
rhetoric, and we call on them to stop the current spiral
of confrontation and threats of the use of military force.
It must be understood that there can be no military
solution to the situation on the Korean peninsula.

The sanctions imposed in the resolutions adopted
by the Council should not be an end in themselves.
They should serve as a stimulus aimed at bringing
the parties to the negotiating table so that they can
resume dialogue and achieve a peaceful, diplomatic and
political solution that results in the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula.

So far this year, the Security Council has adopted
three resolutions, which are increasingly harsh and,
depending on their degree of implementation, are
also affecting the civilian population with possible
humanitarian consequences. We believe that, as is
clearly stated in those resolutions, it is not only necessary
to work to implement those sanctions, but also to bring

about a return to dialogue and a resumption of the Six-
Party Talks. That is essential.

We reiterate our support for the Chinese initiative
of simultaneous suspensions on the Korean peninsula.
On the one hand, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea would stop its nuclear and ballistic missile
tests immediately, and, on the other hand, all types
of unilateral or joint military exercises in the region
would also cease. We also reiterate our support for the
Russian-Chinese proposal and road map, which is, to
date, the only concrete proposal that has been presented
to resolve the situation.

Along those lines, with regard to the efforts made
to re-establish mechanisms for dialogue, we would
highlight the recent visit to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea by Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman. We hope that the
communication channels that could be established will
remain open in order to initiate a dialogue without
preconditions and build mutual trust.

Finally, my delegation would like to state that today
we are meeting at a time of great tension globally. With
regard to the situation on the Korean peninsula, we
feel that it is important to begin a dialogue that will
give rise to stability in the region and achieve just and
lasting peace.

