Mr. Bohayevsky (Ukraine): We have every reason to
thank you for convening this open meeting of the Security
Council devoted to the problems of demining in the context
of United Nations peace-keeping. We believe that the
consideration of this issue is a very timely and important
step, since the problem of land-mines long ago transcended
humanitarian considerations and, as indicated by recent
developments in the hot spots of our globe, has figured
prominently whenever United Nations peace-keeping
operations are conducted. Increasingly, land-mines pose a
serious problem for United Nations peace-keeping activities.

The implications of the use of land-mines affect all
aspects of the implementation of the Organization's
mandate. Uncleared land-mines significantly complicate and
slow down the process of the deployment of United Nations
peace-keeping troops and make the conditions of their
devoted service extremely dangerous. In the final analysis,
all these factors undermine the effectiveness and
efficiency of United Nations efforts aimed at the
prevention and settlement of conflicts. It should also be
noted that the use of land-mines, apart from being very
detrimental to peace-keeping missions, has a negative
impact in terms of future participation of individual
countries in United Nations peace-keeping activities.

The use of land-mines in areas of conflict and their
negative effect on the security of both civilians and
United Nations peace-keepers are a cause of special
concern to Ukraine.
The figures speak for themselves. During the years
of conflict in the former Yugoslavia alone, land-mine
explosions have claimed the lives of 20 United Nations
peace-keepers and more than 200 people have been
injured to various degrees. Besides, millions of refugees
and displaced persons are potential victims of this danger.

That is why it is our deep conviction that the time
has come to drastically change our approach to this very
complicated problem.

The Ukrainian delegation believes that the problem
of demining should become an integral element of the
planning and implementation of any peace-keeping
operation. The questions of timing, stages and conditions
of engagement of the demining capacity are yet to be
answered. There is no doubt that demining activities in a
country can be justified and effective only if parties to the
conflict are reliably prevented from acquiring land-mines.
Ideally, these measures should be most actively
undertaken when an armed conflict has ended and its
causes are dealt with through political means.

At the same time, lessons learned during the recent
peace-keeping missions in heavily mined areas, such as
Angola and the former Yugoslavia, prove that conducting
mine detection and clearance activities in areas of
operation before the actual deployment of peace-keepers
is becoming an important prerequisite for the full-scale
deployment of a mission, because peace-keeping forces
can effectively implement their mandate only in areas
known to be free of land-mines. That is why it is
appropriate to consider further the question of sending
forward-line demining units to the field before the full-
scale deployment of an operation.

 

In our opinion, it is worthwhile to use more often the
practices of dispatching the joint missions of the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) and the
Department of Peace-keeping Operations (DPKO) to the
areas of conflict. They could be entrusted with the tasks of
assessing the scope of the land-mine problem in each
country and accordingly developing the most effective
programmes of assistance in the demining of the territories.

Careful consideration should also be accorded to the
issue of establishing mine-clearance centres in countries
where an armed conflict has ended, but where land-mines
continue seriously to undermine efforts aimed at achieving
long-lasting peace and stability. At the stage of post-conflict
peace-building, such centres could function as valuable
training institutions, strengthening the national capacity in
the demining process.
Welcoming the idea of establishing a lessons-learned
unit within DPKO, we are looking forward to receiving
relevant information containing a thorough analysis of the
experience gained during United Nations demining
operations.

It is also very important to address the problem of
improving the existing techniques of demining. At a time
when in some regions of the world the great number of
mines silently awaiting their prey exceeds the number of
residents, the mobilization of scientific and material
resources to create state-of-the-art demining technologies
appears to be an extremely urgent problem.

Our delegation's participation in the discussion of this
item is far from accidental. Ukraine strongly supports the
measures aimed at eliminating the threat associated with
land-mines. It is for this reason that our State declared a
self-imposed four-year moratorium on the export of anti-
personnel land-mines of all types, effective 1 September
1995. Moreover, we remain convinced that the declaration
by all States of a comprehensive moratorium on the export
of anti-personnel mines could significantly contribute to
solving all the problems related to the use of these
dangerous devices.

Irrefutable is the fact that the destructive impact of
land-mines is much greater than their short-term military
benefits.

Ukraine also attaches great importance to international
cooperation in mine clearance. The Ukrainian bridging
company participates in the peace-keeping operation in
Angola, where an extremely serious situation prevails
because of a large number of land-mines. Therefore, our
troops, apart from fulfilling their direct duties, have to
conduct mine-clearance operations. Moreover, being a
part of the United Nations peace-keeping forces, engineer
troops from Ukraine are also engaged in demining
activities in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. At the
same time, Ukraine has a mine-clearance training centre
that provides all the facilities necessary to train foreign
specialists in this field.

I would like to take this opportunity to announce that
Ukraine is prepared to provide, on specific terms, special
units of its military forces for demining operations
conducted under the auspices of the United Nations and
of other international organizations, as well as on a
bilateral basis.

But, obviously, all these efforts by Ukraine alone are
not enough. The scope of the global problem of uncleared
land-mines is so enormous and its humanitarian
consequences so devastating that it is only through the
concerted efforts of the concerned Member States,
working in close cooperation with each other, that
significant progress will be made on this issue and these
seeds of death will finally be destroyed.

I wish all of us success in this noble endeavour. The
faster we act the more innocent lives will be saved.

