Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
friendly country on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and for convening this
important meeting on such an important topic, which
has a great impact on security and stability in Africa.

I also congratulate the new members that joined
the Security Council in January, as well as the friendly
Republic of China and its people on the Chinese new
year. I also welcome the participation in this important
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Cote
d'Ivoire, Gabon and Rwanda.

My delegation is grateful to Equatorial Guinea
for dedicating this debate to discussing the disastrous
effects of mercenary activities on peace and security in
Africa. Mercenary groups continue to exploit conflicts
in a number of African regions and consider those areas
as havens for their criminal activities. Sometimes, such
groups carry out human and arms trafficking and,
in other cases, practice banditry and exploit natural
resources. Mercenaries seek to perpetuate conflicts,
fragile conditions and weak Governments in order to
survive in environments that suit them. Accordingly,
mercenaries are one of the greatest challenges and
threats to maintaining peace and security.

Mercenary activities in Africa and in countries
like yours, Mr. President, are among the threats posed
to stability and security in Africa, as is evident in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The continuation of such activities on
our continent causes great harm to humankind as a
whole. We applaud the courage of Equatorial Guinea
and its President in combating mercenary activities,
and we strongly support the President's call on the
international community to more effectively combat
the three consistent evils in the history of humankind:
terrorism, mercenaries and piracy. We applaud Angola,
Zimbabwe and Cameroon in helping Equatorial Guinea
to decisively address the issue of mercenaries. We
call on the African Union to make greater efforts to
combat mercenaries and integrate those efforts into
current plans for Africa's contribution and funding of
peacekeeping operations. We note in particular the link
between child recruitment, child abuse and mercenaries.
We also call for priority to be given to those issues as
we celebrate the thirtieth anniversary of the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.

After becoming aware of the threat posed by
mercenary gangs, the Sudan worked diligently to
preserve State authority in conflict areas on its territory.
We did not allow mercenaries to carry out destabilizing
activities on our land or to undermine the peace efforts
leading to the signing of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur in 2011. Following the defeat of armed groups
in Darfur and their expulsion from our land, which made
peace a reality, those armed groups were forced to carry
out criminal and mercenary activities for money, such
as banditry, extortion, exploitation of natural resources
and human trafficking. However, mercenaries carried
out attacks against the Sudan from outside its borders
between 2015 and 2017.

The threat posed by the growing activities and
practices of mercenary groups requires the international
community to decisively combat such groups. We
therefore highly appreciate the convening of this
debate, and we hope that it will lead the international
community to adopt a joint vision to combat the
phenomenon, the impact of which extends to peaceful
countries. There are many examples of that.

We would like to present some suggestions, in
addition to those that have been offered by previous
speakers, to fight mercenary activities.

First, we underline the importance of strengthening
and activating the role of preventive diplomacy
to prevent conflicts, which constitute a fertile
environment for the mercenaries, as per the Secretary-
General's programme.

Secondly, we must promote the capacities and
work of expert groups in conducting investigations into
mercenary activities in areas of conflict, as well as in
developing information infrastructure that facilitates
the containment and combating of those mercenary
groups, in addition to preventing them from moving to
new regions.

Thirdly, we must strengthen and rehabilitate border
control systems in countries of conflict that constitute
an environment conducive to mercenary activities. We
also must provide those countries with the necessary
political and technical support.

Fourthly, it is imperative that we strengthen
cooperation and coordination among States in that
regard, as well as increase exchange of experiences
and information.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Government of the Sudan attaches great importance
and priority to the issue of mercenaries, as evidenced
by the regional workshop we hosted in 2017, which
was organized by the Secretariat of the Committee
of Intelligence and Security Services of Africa, in
cooperation with the National Intelligence and Security
Service of the Sudan, and held in Khartoum over the
course of three days. The workshop addressed the
phenomenon of mercenaries, foreign terrorist fighters
and non-State actors, as well as their impact on
security and stability in Africa. Twenty-seven African
intelligence services participated in the workshop with
a view to shining a spotlight on that phenomenon and
adopting the strategies and plans necessary to fight
it, while strengthening cooperation and coordination
among African States.

I am honoured to share with those present that the
Government of the Central African Republic and all the
opposition movements, without exception, successfully
brought their negotiations to a close yesterday by
reaching a peaceful settlement. The initial signing of
the peace agreement will take place tomorrow and the
final signing will take place in Bangui next week. We
are confident and optimistic that the agreement, which
is sponsored by the African Union, will enable the
Central African Republic, a neighbourly and friendly
country, to emerge from the darkness of conflict into
the expansive horizons of peace and development.

The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.
