I thank the speakers for their presentations. As we tirelessly advocate for the full participation of Afghan women in the peace process and in public life, I am pleased that the Council is being briefed by women whose experience and contribution to peace and security, in Afghanistan and elsewhere, are great. The hope raised by the 29 February agreements is rekindled. After a difficult period, there are encouraging signs that the start of inter-Afghan negotiations now seems possible again. The agreement of 17 May is one of those signs; it has made it possible to overcome the political deadlock. The first steps towards the release of prisoners and the implementation of the agreements are a second such sign. Restoring trust between the various partners is essential. But we must not stop there. Almost four months after the February agreements, much remains to be done, and discussions must begin as soon as possible. The conflict in Afghanistan continues to claim the lives of many civilians, especially women and children. The Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire must be implemented. This violence, combined with attacks on health facilities, is hampering the response to the coronavirus disease pandemic. France reiterates its strong condemnation of the attacks on the Dasht-e-Barchi maternity hospital, as well as those against Afghan security forces on 17 June and on a funeral in Nangarhar province. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, and first and foremost of children, must be a top priority, and all parties must respect their obligations under international humanitarian law. Reducing violence is imperative. Peace will depend on the fulfilment of each party's commitments, including commitments to reduce violence and combat terrorism. The Afghan authorities have pledged to do so; the Taliban must now do their part. The fight against impunity and respect for justice by all actors are also the sine qua non condition for lasting peace. Women have paid the heaviest price in this pandemic. Many have lost their jobs or are victims of gender-based, sexual or domestic violence. Our collective priority must be to support them. Tomorrow's Afghanistan must be built with the whole of society, building on the gains made in terms of democracy and human rights for all, without discrimination. We cannot accept any backtracking. The full and active participation of women in the peace process is an indispensable condition for its long-term success. Among the threats to Afghanistan's security, drugs, along with terrorism, are among those whose seriousness prevents lasting peace. Yet, Ms. Waly's presentation showed that drug production, despite years of struggle, is on the rise and diversifying. It has devastating effects on Afghan society and global security. It is also a major source of financing for terrorism. For all these reasons, the international community and the Afghan authorities must continue to show unfailing determination to combat those two scourges. The resolute commitment of Afghanistan's partners to standing at its side is indispensable to a lasting peace. France will be there, as always. I welcome the essential role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the United Nations in Afghanistan and call on all to support the stabilization of Afghanistan and to contribute positively to the establishment of lasting peace in the country.
