Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for choosing this very important
agenda item.

I would also like to thank my colleague Mr. Jiirg
Lauber of Switzerland and to align myself with the
statement he will deliver later today on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict. He will provide a more comprehensive view
of this very complicated and vast subject. I would also
like to align myself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.

I would like to echo what many have already so
eloquently stated, including the Director-General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, namely,
that there is a major gap separating words and action.
Our task is to bridge it. I need not recall the horrific
situation in many countries where civilians are under
extreme strain. We have seen the pictures of events in
Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan, Myanmar, Ukraine and
many other places where human suffering is a daily
occurrence. Again, we must bridge the gap between
words and action.

I very much endorse the remarks made by the Polish
Minister for Foreign Affairs, who stated that there
are three areas on which we must work: prevention,
protection and accountability. There can be no impunity
for those who commit crimes that demonstrate disregard
for the protection of civilians.

With regard to prevention, I would also like to say
that, if elected to the Security Council, Germany will
attempt to ensure that conflict prevention is featured
more prominently on the Council's agenda.

Turning now to the specific case of the plight of
the Rohingya, I believe that much more could have
been achieved had the international community, in
particular the Security Council, paid attention to the
issue earlier on. We saw it coming. The situation would
not be as disastrous as it is had the global community
paid attention to the situation in Myanmar earlier. A
very important step must now be taken. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten, has an opportunity
to visit Myanmar and support a structured dialogue
between the Government and victims, including
assisting the survivors of sexual assault in order to
ensure accountability for those crimes.

To build on Ms. Edwar's remarks with regard to
Iraq, the second step that should be taken in Myanmar
is that of reconciliation. In that respect, I very much
welcome the decision by the Secretary-General to
appoint a Special Representative for Myanmar, the
Swiss diplomat Christine Schraner Burgener. One of
her objectives will be to facilitate reconciliation in the
situation in Myanmar so that the Rohingya can safely
return to their homes.

In addition to prevention, which, again, is an area
where we could have done more, there is also the issue
of protection. In that regard, I would like to refer to what
the Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross said this morning, and what our colleague
from Norway highlighted, namely, the Health Care in
Danger initiative. As health care is a key issue, this is
one of the key initiatives that have to be taken forward.
When we look at the conflict in Syria, for example, it is
clear how much health-care institutions were subject to
attack. That has to stop, and more has to be done.

Also with regard to protection, I would like to
announce that today Germany is endorsing the Safe
Schools Declaration, which we believe is also a very
important initiative. As my Norwegian colleague
rightly said a moment ago, it is key that we protect all
educational institutions from attacks.

Peacekeepers constitute one of the most important
elements in the context of protection. United Nations
peacekeeping operations continue to be essential for
the protection of civilians. In the Central African
Republic, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in South Sudan, to cite but a few examples, it is
often peacekeepers who stand between the civilian
populations and their tormentors. The protection
mandates that the Security Council assigns to missions
therefore need to be more robust. At the same time,
peacekeepers need to have adequate resources and be
properly trained. And we have to see to it that mandates
are implemented.

I think there is a lot that can be done, as was
highlighted by the Santos Cruz report. The Secretary-
General's proposals are aimed in that direction.
However, I believe that discussions about cutting
budgets for peacekeeping operations are not the right
step forward, especially if the goal is for peacekeepers
to actually fulfil their mandate and protect civilians.

The last point I wanted to make is to highlight that
we think that New York and Geneva should work more
closely together. We sometimes have the impression
that New York and Geneva are not on two different
continents, but on two different planets. For instance,
the Human Rights Council has set up a group of experts
to look into human rights violations in Yemen. I believe

that the findings of that group could be highly relevant
for our political discussions here in New York. We
should make use of its results as they are presented.

In conclusion, we know from listening to debates in
the Security Council that on many political issues there
is a great deal of controversy, and sometimes severe
polarization. But when it comes to the protection of
civilians, I would appeal to the members ofthe Security
Council to put aside political differences. In our view,
a common objective should be to protect innocent
civilians from harm and persecution.

