Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
address the Security Council. Canada thanks the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto, for his insightful briefing.

Canada fully endorses the statement of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, but I would add some
additional points. I wish to start by addressing certain
key aspects of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) strategic review.

First and foremost, the review highlighted that
Afghanistan, as noted by the representative of the
Netherlands, is not a post-conflict country. Rather, it is
a country in conflict, with few signs of abating. There is
also spreading extremism throughout the region, which
is supported by criminal networks and income from
opium production. In 2017, fighting in Afghanistan has
intensified, taking an unacceptable toll on the civilian
population. The strategic review also found that
population growth and urbanization are contributing
to a growing number of unemployed youth, who may
be at risk of radicalization. It also found that poverty
is increasing and corruption continues to undermine
public confidence in the Government. Although there
has been significant progress in Afghan women's rights,
women remain unequal partners compared to men.

In the light of those challenges, Canada supports
the implementation of several recommendations of
the strategic review that will contribute to the peace
process. For their part, the Afghan Government and the
armed opposition, including the Taliban, must engage
in peace negotiations. Regional and international actors
must also support the common interest in regional
stability and the creation of conditions for peace. We
also need to continue support for essential services
to Afghans, leading to self-reliance and sustainable
peace. To support public confidence, it is vital that
the parliamentary elections in 2018 and presidential
elections in 2019 go forward as planned.

(spoke in English)

Canada fully supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned peace process. It is my hope that the Kabul
peace process will bear fruit and that Afghanistan will
soon be free ofthe level of violence we have seen of late
in the country. Furthermore, women's participation in
the peace and reconciliation process is essential. The
strategic review states that it is essential to continue to
prioritize the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
the promotion of gender quality and the elimination of
violence against women.

Canada commends the decision to move the
post of Senior Gender Adviser to the Office of the
Special Representative. We hope that this move will
support the meaningful participation of women in
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and political
processes, as well as improve the representation of
women in governance structures. If peace, security and
development are to take root and endure in Afghanistan,
women mustjoin men at the centre of decision-making
at all levels of Afghan politics, society and economy.

Finally, I must reiterate Canada's deep concern
over the continuing deterioration of security in
Afghanistan, especially the increase in civilian and
aid worker casualties reported so far in 2017. We
are dismayed by that trend. Civilian displacement,
increased vulnerability and high civilian casualties
are unacceptable. We are particularly concerned about
the impact of instability and insecurity of women and
children. We look to Afghanistan's neighbours and
partners to continue working with the Government of
Afghanistan to increase regional stability and decrease
violence within the country.

We also want to encourage UNAMA, the
Government of Afghanistan, its neighbours and
the international community to work even more
closely together to ensure the development of basic
infrastructure and access to energy. That would make
a real difference to the people of Afghanistan, the
stability of the region and its security. Canada stands
with the Afghan people, especially Afghan women and
girls, as they strive for a more secure, prosperous and
peaceful future.

