Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): At the outset, I would
like to express our condolences to the Chinese
delegation for the loss of life and property in the
earthquake that struck China today. Our hearts go out
to the victims.

The Pakistani delegation would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your successful
handling of the work of the Security Council during
your presidency. We also thank you for convening this
very important meeting.

We would also like to express our appreciation to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his invaluable insights on the
current situation in the region.

Pakistan would like to associate itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Egypt and
Syria on behalf of the Non-Alignment Movement and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
respectively.

The Middle East question and the plight of the
Palestinians have remained a major challenge for the
international community for many years. After seven
decades of futility in addressing this challenge, one has
to say that, if nothing else, at least a consensus for
peace seems to be emerging in the international
community. The statements that we have heard so far
this morning confirm our recognition that this must be
so. The question now is how to convert our collective
desire for peace into a credible action plan for a wider
political settlement that would end the cycle of
violence and conflict in the region.

Without an end to mutual suspicion and discord, I
am not sure that a durable and viable political
settlement could actually take place. It would require
the international community to unequivocally call upon
Israel to check the policies of its occupying forces that
have converted the sacred land into a complex of

checkpoints, roadblocks, siege and separation walls.
These policies have compounded the humanitarian
plight of the Palestinian people by disrupting and
adding misery to their already miserable lives.

This does not augur well for developing a
peaceful atmosphere. In addition to an improvement in
the humanitarian situation, it is essential that any
provocative measures taken by the authorities cease.
Such measures include settlement activity, especially in
and around East Jerusalem, and a growing trend to
alter the status of centuries-old places of prayer -
mosques, churches and cemeteries of the Palestinian
people. These provocations neutralize the voices of
peace and accord. These provocations also resonate as
a loud political statement of utter disregard for the
norms of international law and respect for heritage,
culture, history and traditions.

More disquieting are the latest reports of the
imposition of a military order that empowers the
occupying forces to arbitrarily expel the Palestinian
people from the West Bank and Gaza. Of late, the
world has been riddled with extrajudicial,
extra-constitutional and other such activities; this order
is the latest among them. Imposed under the garb of
so-called additional legal oversight, this order will be a
new tool for deporting and imprisoning the Palestinian
people. Such a measure will not only vitiate the
atmosphere, which needs to be conducive to the cause
of peace, but also raise doubts about the commitment
of Israel to a negotiated political settlement.

The cessation of repressive and provocative
measures is essential to building an environment that is
conducive to implementing the strategies of peace
within given timelines. In this context, we have taken
positive note of the strategy outlined in the statement
issued by the Middle East Quartet in Moscow on
19 March 2010. However, the Quartet must now back
its words with greater political drive for a sustained
dialogue towards the final settlement, in accordance
with relevant Security Council resolutions.

We believe that the Quartet's commitments do not
obviate the role of the Security Council, but reinforce
it. We hope that the Council, in accordance with its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, will continue to strive
for the implementation of its relevant resolutions.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Pakistan's full
support for a lasting peace for all the inhabitants of the

region and our strong commitment to the realization of
an independent, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living
side by side and in complete peace with all its
neighbours.

