Mr. Carazo Zeledon (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the presidency of the
Council for having convened this meeting on the
situation in Nicaragua. We believe it to be appropriate,
timely and necessary. The report entitled "Violations of
human rights and abuses in the context ofthe protests in
Nicaragua", issued by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, attests to the
"systematic erosion of human rights" in that country.
This meeting should give us the opportunity to find the
way to guarantee the full respect of human rights in
Nicaragua in order to maintain social peace and ensure
sustainable regional peace.

We have listened carefully to the briefings of
Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Chief of Staff to the Secretary
General of the Organization of American States, and
Mr. Felix Maradiaga, to whom we express our gratitude.
We paid close attention to the statement made by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua, Mr. Denis
Moncada Colindres.

The situation in the brotherly country to the north
is a priority issue for the Nicaraguan people and for
the Costa Rica, for everything that occurs in that
small, interconnected geographical area has a direct
or indirect impact on us and, similarly, on the entire
Central American region. Costa Rica cannot and will
not be indifferent to the suffering and uncertainty of
those whom we consider our brothers and sisters. Costa
Rica has been consistent in expressing its concern
about the deterioration of the rule of law and respect
for human rights in Nicaragua. Since April, when the
conflict began, we have expressed our dismay about the
escalation of violence and repression, which, according
to the report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, has already claimed
hundreds of lives and led to a regrettable wave of
serious human rights violations, thereby threatening
the security and safety of thousands of Nicaraguans.

As we have stated and as the report reflects,
we believe that extrajudicial executions, forced
disappearances, the obstruction of access to medical
care, widespread arbitrary or illegal detentions, ill-
treatment and cases of torture and sexual violence in
detention centres are all unacceptable. They have led
to the systematic erosion of the human rights of the
Nicaraguan people, as well as to the selective repression
and intimidation of demonstrators and their families,
students, journalists, social leaders, human rights
defenders and mediators, among others. In line with
international law, it must be recalled that each country
has the primary responsibility to guarantee the security
and protection of its inhabitants and, failing that, the
international community must protect the human rights
of those people.

For months we have seen the serious migration,
social and economic repercussions, which have not
remained confined to Nicaragua but have spread
beyond its borders. The deepening of the political,
social and economic crisis in Nicaragua, repression
and lack of respect for fundamental freedoms and
human rights on the part of the authorities could cause
an unbridled escalation of the crisis, which would
have a direct impact on the stability and development
of the countries and peoples of Central America.
Since the first set of student demonstrations, which
were repressed with unusual violence, Costa Rica
has experienced a considerable increase in refugee
applications and migration flows from Nicaragua.
The number of Nicaraguan migrants has increased
considerably, including in particular vulnerable people
seeking safety and better opportunities. The number of
refugee applications has also increased - from four
applications in January this year to 4,074 in August
alone. In total, during the first eight months of this year,
more than 12,830 refugee applications were received
from Nicaraguan citizens.

As a country of destination, transit and origin that
respects human rights, Costa Rica's priority has always
been the protection, respect, dignity and safety of
people. In order to meet those objectives, Costa Rican
institutions have always responded responsibly, as it
has in this case, in an orderly manner and in compliance
with national and international standards. Similarly,
since the beginning, we have worked closely with the
relevant international organizations and United Nations
agencies, such as the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, among others, with which
we maintain a close relationship and from whom we
have received considerable support.

Our country wishes to reiterate its conviction that
the path to committed and effective dialogue must be
the solution to the political conflict that plagues the
Nicaraguan people, with whom we share deep historical
ties of neighbourliness, closeness and brotherhood.
We urge the Nicaraguan Government to re-establish
conditions that ensure that dialogue among all parties is
possible. Given the current circumstances, Costa Rica
cannot remain silent. We will continue to speak out in
defence of a population subjected to arbitrary actions
that constitute a breach of the obligations under various
different human rights covenants and principles. Costa
Rica urges a prompt response from the Nicaraguan
Government and the international community to
address the grave and unsustainable situation. We will
continue to speak out until reason, good judgement and
full respect for human rights return to Nicaragua.

Costa Rica reiterates its support for, and
commitment to, actions promoted by the Organization
of American States (OAS), which are now being
presented to the Council. Our country welcomes in
particular the adoption of resolution CP/RES. 1108 of
the Permanent Council of the OAS, which resolves to

"reiterate its vigorous condemnation of and grave
concern over all acts of violence, repression, and
human rights violations and abuses committed by
police, parapolice groups, and others against the
people of Nicaragua".

We echo the Permanent Council's request to the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the
Department of Electoral Cooperation and Observation,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Secretary General of the OAS and
the European Union to take steps to help curb the crisis
in Nicaragua. We request the international community
and the Security Council to urge the Government of
Nicaragua to immediately cease its disproportionate
use of force, comply with all the recommendations of
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights on the current situation in Nicaragua
and resume a serious dialogue, based on respect,
commitment and trust - the only path to a consensus-
based solution among Nicaraguans and for Nicaraguans.

