I would like to thank the Secretary-General, the Secretary of State of the United States and the Iranian Foreign Minister for their participation. I also thank the briefers for their interventions. Our priority remains ensuring that Iran does not acquire nuclear weapons. This is a proliferation issue, and therefore a peace and security issue, that affects and concerns us all. That is why France, Germany and the United Kingdom have been working since 2003 to resolve the crisis over Iran's nuclear programme. And we were able to find a way out of this crisis in 2015, thanks to the perseverance of the international community, and to the convergence from 2006 towards the line taken by France, Germany and the United Kingdom - the E-3 - and to robust dialogue with Iran. The Security Council not only endorsed the Vienna agreement on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) through resolution 2231 (2015); it also validated a method - that of pragmatic and demanding multilateralism, a method that was then carried out by its five permanent members in unity and in a steadfast and exemplary manner. We are all keenly attuned to the challenges of the moment. The trajectories of the signatory States have diverged since the United States left the agreement, to our great regret and concern. Since then, worrisomely, Iran has taken measures that are contrary to its commitments under the agreement. Those measures have serious proliferation consequences, which is why the E-3 activated the JCPOA dispute resolution mechanism in January this year: to address this serious problem, but to address it within the framework of the agreement. France, Germany and the United Kingdom have fully implemented their commitments. We remain committed to preserving the agreement and to continuing discussions to bring Iran back to full compliance with its commitments under the JCPOA. This requires constructive engagement by Iran and by all. We have just heard very worrisome confirmation of Iran's violations of the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) on arms transfers. The Secretary-General's conclusions, which we support, are consistent with our assessment. Let me be clear: these destabilizing activities, which we have condemned, are unacceptable and must stop. As the E-3 Berlin ministerial declaration of 19 June testifies, France, together with Germany and the United Kingdom, understands and shares the concerns regarding the implications of the upcoming expiration of the embargo on conventional arms provided for in resolution 2231 (2015). We have expressed our readiness to explore constructive options to address our common concerns, including outside the Security Council. We intend to address this issue in close consultation with all members of the Council, in particular the remaining participants in the JCPOA, and other key actors. We will continue to be guided by the following objectives: respect for the authority and integrity of the Security Council and commitment to regional stability and security. We would not, however, support unilateral proposals leading to the return of sanctions. They would only deepen divisions in the Security Council and* beyond and would not be likely to improve the nuclear non-proliferation situation on the ground. As the Foreign Ministers of France, Germany and the United Kingdom stated in Berlin on 19 June, "we firmly believe that any unilateral attempt to trigger United Nations sanctions snapback would have serious adverse consequences in the Security Council. We would not support such a decision, which would be incompatible with our current efforts to preserve the JCPOA". All members of the Council share fundamental security interests. They bring us together around shared objectives and responsibilities. That is the raison d'etre of this Council and the spirit that drives us all. I would therefore like to believe that none of us would risk backsliding in such a way as to exacerbate tensions in the Middle East. The JCPOA, which is the result of compromise, can of course be seen as an instrument that could be improved. But there is, as yet, no serious alternative to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons, and its disappearance would improve neither the regional situation nor the security of our populations. We certainly have differences of approach. But it is together that we must build a comprehensive strategy on all aspects of the Iranian issue, with our eyes open, without naivety, and with pragmatism and lucidity. It is this long-term objective that we wish to prioritize, while preserving the international order based on law, of which we are the guarantors. *
