Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to thank you for arranging this
important meeting.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend Ambassador Greenstock for the excellent
manner in which he conducted the work of the Council
in April.

My delegation welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as the Ministers from Uganda and Burundi and the
special envoy from Rwanda.

I would also like to thank the Chairperson of the
Panel of Experts, Ms. Ba-N'Daw, for introducing the
report of the Panel this morning.

At the outset, I would like to express my
delegation's profound sorrow and deep condolences for
the tragic murder of six staff members of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) on
26 April in Ituri province in north-eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They died while providing
much-needed humanitarian assistance to the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is our hope
that this tragedy will not seriously disrupt the
important work of the ICRC and other humanitarian
organizations. My delegation condemns this cowardly
act in the strongest possible terms and calls for
immediate investigations to ensure that the perpetrators
and their instigators are brought to justice. These
murders, furthermore, should be condemned by
everybody. This latest incident is again proof of the
massive violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law that are being committed in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Contrary to what we have heard from some
delegations this morning, the Panel produced an
objective, comprehensive and well-substantiated
report. Its working methods were sound and it had an
inclusive approach by holding extensive discussions
with Governments, international organizations and non-
governmental organizations. The use of primary
resource documents, often produced by countries
themselves, and of vital statistics objectively revealed
the discrepancies between exports and trade before and
during the war in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. This approach has confirmed beyond any doubt
the ruthless plundering of the resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by the aggressor
countries, the rebel groups and individuals beyond
normal trade under bilateral or multilateral trade
agreements.

I, for one, did not expect the countries of Uganda,
Rwanda and Burundi to say: "Yes, we are looting the
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo".
Even in 1998, when these countries first aggressed the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, they were denying
that they had troops in the Congo, but eventually they
admitted it. Burundi in particular denied it until
recently, when they confirmed to the world that they
had withdrawn three battalions from Congo and that
two remained. This information is with the Security
Council, and we believe that the international
community should not be fooled by such denials.

Furthermore, the quality of the report reflects the
high degree of professionalism of the Panel members.
Throughout their work they have maintained a strict
evidentiary standard to substantiate their findings. The
conclusions reached in the report also clearly show that
the invasion of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
took place for economic reasons, not because of
security concerns as claimed by the invading forces.
The Security Council should take strong measures to
correct the situation and to deter the committing of
similar atrocities in the future.

My delegation fully supports the conclusions
reached by the Panel. Throughout, the report contains
alarming revelations, such as the role of some
international financial institutions in directly or
indirectly encouraging the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The fact that those institutions never
questioned the increasing exports of resources by the
aggressor countries, and even rewarded them with the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative when
it was clear that they were plundering the resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is of deep
concern and should be further investigated.

We have said from the beginning that Namibia's
involvement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was never motivated by economic benefit, but rather by
the principle of helping defend a fellow State member
of the Southern African Development Community
against aggression from outside. That action was in full
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
with the charter of the Organization of African Unity,
and it was aimed at restoring peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Namibian Government supports the
recommendations made by the Panel of Experts aimed
at curbing the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
is of particular importance that due compensation be
paid to the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for the expropriation of their property and for
the general looting of the country. The Namibian
Government, furthermore, supports the extension of the
mandate of the Panel of Experts, which will allow the
Panel to conduct follow-up investigations.

Namibia's support for the implementation of the
Panel's recommendations is rooted in its firm belief
that all avenues should be explored and all
opportunities investigated to cultivate an environment
conducive to the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement. In that regard, we call on the Security
Council to ensure that the Lusaka Agreement, the
Kampala and Harare disengagement plans and relevant
Security Council resolutions are fully implemented. Of
particular importance is the implementation of
resolution 1304 (2000), which, among other things,
demands the complete demilitarization of Kisangani.
The Panel disturbingly concluded that

"Exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by foreign
armies has become systematic and the
constitution of criminal cartels [is] becoming
commonplace in occupied territories. These
criminal cartels have ramifications and
connections worldwide, and they represent the
next serious security problem in the region."
(S/2001/357, para. 214)

That conclusion should provide enough urgency for the
Council to take immediate action to put an end to those
criminal activities.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the Council's
decision to send a mission to the Great Lakes region
this month. We hope that the outcome of the visit will
generate further momentum for the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

