Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I am sure that I
speak on behalf of my co-penholder, Germany, when
I thank all Security Council colleagues for their very
constructive engagement on resolution 2495 (2019).
May I also thank our Sudanese colleagues for their
cooperation and support, which, I think, is a sign of the
new relationship between the Sudan and the Council.

I was fortunate enough last week to enjoy several
hours in Khartoum, discussing these issues with
Sudanese officials there. Prime Minister Hamdok and
his Government have committed to achieving a fair
comprehensive peace in Darfur. With the adoption of
this resolution, the Security Council has demonstrated
its support for those efforts. As Prime Minister Hamdok
noted in his letter to the Secretary-General, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) has an important role to play in creating
a conducive environment for peace and reconciliation,
which is particularly important at this critical time for
the peace process. By extending UNAMID's mandate
for 12 months and maintaining its current footprint in
Darfur, we have also recognized UNAMID's vital role,
while responding to the request of the Government of
the Sudan to avoid any security vacuum in Darfur.

This resolution also sends a clear message to all
stakeholders in the peace process that they must seize the
opportunity before them to establish a comprehensive
peace. Preconditions need to be abandoned in favour of
meaningful engagement in the peace process. We hope
to see progress in that regard by the time the Council
returns to reassess the situation on the ground and
UNAMID's mandate five months from now.

While the resolution rightly focuses on the support
that UNAMID can provide today, it also looks forward to
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. We
have a partner in the Government of the Sudan, which
wants to define accurately its needs and which needs
to receive the necessary support from the international
community. The United Kingdom therefore welcomes
the commitment of the Government of the Sudan, the
United Nations and the African Union to continue their
dialogue on a follow-on mission to UNAMID. We look
forward to receiving options for such a mission in early
2020. We have a collective responsibility to get this
transition right. By adopting this resolution today, we
are a step closer to doing so.

