Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Let me begin by
conveying the Indonesian delegation's sincere
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for preparing the draft
resolution on Tajikistan now before the Council for
adoption. I should like also to convey our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his informative report on the
present situation in Tajikistan. We also wish to thank
Ambassador Ramiro Pr'riz-Ballen, the Secretary-General' s
Special Envoy to Tajikistan, for his perseverance in his
endeavours to promote the attainment of a peaceful
settlement to the conflict in Tajikistan.

During the course of our consultations, my
delegation has made its position clear: the resolution of
the conflict in Tajikistan can best be achieved through a
peace process leading towards national reconciliation,
within a framework that preserves the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Tajikistan. We note with
appreciation that this process has reached a stage at which

 

the parties have started in-depth discussions on fundamental
institutional issues and on the consolidation of Tajikistan's
statehood, and have confirmed their readiness to search for
practical solutions.

With particular reference to the joint statement of May
1995 by the President of Tajikistan and the Chairman of the
Islamic Revival Movement of Tajikistan, we are very much
encouraged by the fact that both sides have confirmed their
willingness to solve the inter-Tajik conflict through political
means, to repatriate all refugees to their places of origin, to
stabilize the political situation in Tajikistan fully and to
extend the agreement on a temporary cease-fire and
cessation of hostilities - the Tehran Agreement of 17
September 1994 - for another three months, until 26
August 1995. Moreover, other practical steps aimed at
strengthening confidence-building measures have also been
agreed by both sides.

My delegation is therefore pleased to note that all
these understandings and agreements arrived at by the two
Tajik sides have been incorporated into the draft resolution
and welcomed by the Council as measures to further the
achievement of national reconciliation in Tajikistan.

The convening of the fourth round of inter-Tajik talks
on national reconciliation in Almaty under United Nations
auspices, was in our view a most encouraging development.
At that round of talks, the two Tajik sides conducted, for
the first time, an in-depth discussion of fundamental
institutional and political issues. My delegation considers
that approach to be the best way towards achieving a
comprehensive political settlement.

In this context, we draw particular attention to the call
upon the parties to agree to the early convening of a further
round of inter-Tajik talks with a view to resolving the
remaining issues and to implement without delay all
confidence-building measures agreed to by them - inter
alia, on the exchange of detainees and prisoners of war and
on intensification of the efforts to ensure the voluntary
return, in dignity and safety, of all refugees and displaced
persons to their homes.

We most certainly encourage the continuation of direct
political dialogue, which could lead towards genuine
national reconciliation and to the restoration of peace in the
country.

From the outset Indonesia has believed that the
primary responsibility for resolving the conflict rests
primarily with the Tajik parties themselves; all that the
international community can do is provide only necessary
assistance towards that end, it cannot impose a solution.
In this regard, the presence of the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) in the country has
had a positive impact and has indeed contributed as a
stabilizing factor. Its close contacts with the parties, as
well as its close liaison with the Peace-keeping Force of
the Commonwealth of Independent States, the border
forces and the Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, has been instrumental in
containing the intensity of conflict and preventing it from
spreading.
It is in this light that my delegation supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of UNMOT for another six months, until 16
December 1995. It is our sincere hope that this will allow
the parties to keep up their commitment to an effective
cease-fire, national reconciliation and the promotion of
democracy. Of course, it is imperative that the parties
should continue to cooperate with UNMOT and to ensure
the safety and freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel.

Notwithstanding these positive developments, my
delegation is particularly concerned to note from the
report that the situation on the border between Tajikistan
and Afghanistan remains tense and that the deepening
economic crisis continues to have a negative impact on
the efforts to achieve political stability. In this regard, we
underline the urgency of ceasing all hostile acts and call
on States and others concerned to discourage activities
that would pose a hindrance to the peace process in
Tajikistan as a whole. In this context, we look forward to
the report of the Secretary-General on the discussions to
be conducted with the Afghan authorities on the possible
deployment of a small United Nations team in northern
Afghanistan.

In conclusion, it is the hope of the Indonesian
delegation that the draft resolution that we are about to
adopt will create a climate conducive to accelerating the
peace process towards genuine national reconciliation and
the restoration of peace in Tajikistan.

In light of these considerations, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution.

