Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, we thank you for convening
this meeting in order to consider the progress report of
the Secretary-General on the recommendations of the
Security Council mission to West Africa
(S/2003/ll47). Syria was privileged to have
participated in that mission. We would like also to
express our appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General
Kalomoh for his introduction of the progress report, in
which the Secretary-General outlines the steps taken or
envisaged to implement the recommendations of the
Security Council mission with respect to Guinea-
Bissau, Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

My delegation is pleased to note the restoration of
calm to Guinea-Bissau and the pledge by the
transitional President and transitional Government to
hold legislative elections on or before the time set in
the Political Transitional Charter, in accordance with
the recommendations of the National Elections
Commission. We support the Secretary-General's call
for the international community to participate in
providing financial assistance to enable local
authorities to fulfil their obligations.

With regard to C6te d'Ivoire, we agree with the
Secretary-General that the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement
must be implemented as expeditiously as possible by all
parties, as recommended by the Council mission, as
must the recommendations set out in paragraph 31 of
the mission's report (S/2003/688). My delegation
welcomes the steps taken by President Gbagbo, Prime
Minister Diarra and Forces nouvelles in progressively
implementing some of those recommendations. We
share the Secretary-General's regret at the lack of
substantive progress in the peace process for the
reasons cited in the report, and we support the
Secretary-General's call for recommitment to the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement. Once again, we pay tribute to the
French force for the positive role it has played.

We are concerned at the Secretary-General's
observations regarding Liberia, in terms of ceasefire
violations and sporadic serious hostilities, and we hope
that the work of the Joint Monitoring Committee will be
successful. We also hope that the National Commission
on Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and
Rehabilitation will be successful, and we commend the
role played in Liberia by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Mission until it
handed over its functions to the United Nations
Mission. My delegation would like to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his response
to the Security Council mission's recommendation to
appoint a senior representative in Liberia. He has
appointed Mr. Jacques Paul Klein as his Special
Representative for Liberia in order to coordinate the
operations of the United Nations system in that country
and to coordinate with other missions in West Africa,
such as those in Cote d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone.

My delegation welcomes the progress made so far
in Sierra Leone, but we echo the call of the Secretary-
General for further efforts to ensure that this progress
continues until the scheduled drawdown of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, in order to enable the
Government to shoulder its primary responsibilities.

We support the Secretary-General's suggestion
that the United Nations missions in the region should
develop a contingency plan for preventing cross-border
movements of foreign combatants, a point which was
underlined by the Council mission to the region. The
cross-border movement of combatants is a key reason
for instability in the region, and we support the
Secretary-General's recommendations with regard to
addressing that phenomenon.

Syria closely follows developments in Africa in
general and in Central and West Africa in particular. We
fully appreciate the efforts of the United Nations and the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General to bring
closer together the views of all parties in the
implementation of agreements forged with international
participation by neighbouring countries, the African
Union and ECOWAS member States. Here, I would like
to commend Ghana, Guinea, South Africa and Nigeria for
their key role in trying to resolve subregional crises.

In closing, we would like to stress that United
Nations missions and peacekeeping operations in the
region, such as those in cote d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone
and Liberia, have a major role to play in restoring
security, stability and national reconciliation in those
countries. Also, support for indigenous regional
solutions and concerted efforts to ensure stability in
areas of conflict and to end the cross-border flow of
arms and mercenaries is crucial. We also underline the
need to support United Nations and ECOWAS
measures to consolidate the moratorium on small arms
and light weapons in the subregion and to monitor the
cross-border flow of such weapons.

