Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We endorse the statement delivered by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Cuba is firmly committed to the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and their prevention
through mediation. The most effective way in which
the Security Council can support mediation as a means
for the pacific settlement of disputes is to ensure that
it is carried out in full respect for international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of sovereignty, refraining from the use or threat of the
use of force, territorial integrity, political independence
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
My country has noted with concern the increasing
tendency of the Security Council to invoke Chapter
VII of the Charter excessively and hastily, since war,
confrontation, hostilities and sanctions have never
helped to maintain peace and international security and
never will. It is regrettable that the Security Council is
too quick to seek recourse in the provisions of Articles
41 and 42 ofthe Charter without having fully exhausted
all other options, including those provided for in Chapter
VI, and without considering their consequences,
including the short- and long-term effects of imposing
sanctions, particularly for political processes aimed at
achieving the peaceful settlement of conflicts.

The recent events and precedents where we have
seen manipulation of the Charter, double standards and
flagrant violations of international law have shown that
when there is no good faith, impartiality or respect for
a country's independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, objective mediation is impossible. Neither can
any mechanism for the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including mediation, be effective as long as certain
States continue to use or threaten to use force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of others,
or to impose preconceived, uniform doctrines. Every
situation must be managed according to its specific
characteristics. Mediation should not be automatically
considered the most appropriate method in every case.

Cuba believes that for mediation to be credible and
effective, it must also enjoy the will and consent of the
parties to a particular dispute or conflict, the impartiality
of mediators, their fulfilment of the mandates agreed
upon, respect for national sovereignty, compliance with
State laws and operational preparedness, including
mediators' substantive and procedural expertise.
In that regard, we stress the particular role that the
Charter confers on the Secretary-General in the use of
his good offices and mediation, while at the same time
acknowledging that the peaceful settlement of disputes
and conflict prevention and resolution, particularly
through mediation, under the Charter and international
law, continue to be a fundamental responsibility
of Member States. We appreciate the efforts of the
Secretary-General to continue strengthening United
Nations mediation support capacities, in accordance
with the relevant adopted mandates. However, the role
assigned to non-governmental organizations, civil
society and other entities as mediation support actors
with regard to conflict prevention must be evaluated
carefully on a case-by-case basis, given that, as we have
seen in various conflicts, they have pursued foreign
agendas and lacked impartiality and good faith.

In conclusion, as one of the methods for the pacific
settlement of disputes provided for in Chapter VI of
the Charter, mediation can and has been proven to be
effective in certain situations. The peace agreements
reached by the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo in Havana in 2016, which ended more than
five decades of armed conflict, are one such concrete
example. Maintaining and implementing those peace
agreements currently is the responsibility not only of
the parties, but also of the international community
and the Security Council. To the extent possible, Cuba
will continue to contribute with humility, discretion
and profound respect for the parties' positions at their
request in providing the means to achieve stable and
lasting peace in Colombia.

