Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): The Council is again
meeting today to discuss the situation in the Middle
East, as a result of the latest incursions by Israel in the
occupied territories, particularly in Ramallah, the very
seat of the Palestinian leadership. Just like the
unending cycle of violence that has plagued the Middle
East, it seems that the Council itself is getting drawn in
a logic of action and reaction without being able to do
anything concrete that will end the violence and bring a
lasting solution to the Middle East problem. Indeed, in
the last few months the Council has met on numerous
occasions, each time because the situation on the
ground had become so grave and serious that the spill-
over effects could have had tremendous consequences
both to the peace process and to stability in the region.
On some occasions, the Council has even adopted what
could be termed as important resolutions, but each one
of them has remained a dead letter and has been
completely ignored by the party concerned.

The question that we should be asking ourselves
today is whether the Council can continue in this logic
without being able to ensure that its resolutions and
recommendations are fully enforced. Or is it time for it
to stop being reactive and seriously to address the root
cause of the problem and come up with appropriate
solutions? By taking this approach my delegation does
not mean to undermine what is currently taking place
in the occupied Palestinian territory or in Israel. We
believe that the situation is indeed very serious, and we
condemn the latest incursions by Israeli forces into
Ramallah. We consider those incursions totally
inadmissible. We equally condemn the attacks
perpetrated on Israeli civilians by the suicide bombers.
We believe that such actions on both sides are counter-
productive and will only make the resumption of
dialogue and negotiations between the two parties more
difficult.

We are also extremely sympathetic with regard to
the plight of the Palestinians, who are subjected to
atrocities of all kinds during such incursions. As an
expression of support to, and solidarity with Chairman
Arafat and the Palestinian people, a delegation of the
Non-Aligned Movement led by the South African
Foreign Minister, Ms. Zuma, and comprising, among
others, the Foreign Minister of Mauritius, visited
Ramallah earlier this month. Ambassador Kumalo of
South Africa provided the Council with a report of that
visit earlier, and we would like to associate ourselves
fully with his statement.

Peace cannot be achieved in the Middle East until
there is genuine commitment by the parties involved to
take forward the various plans and initiatives that have
recently been proposed. Along with the commitment of
the two parties, there is also an important role for the
international community to play in order to bring both
sides to the negotiating table.

On the Palestinian side, the announcement by
Chairman Arafat that major reforms would be
undertaken within the Authority and that presidential
elections would be held by the end of this year or early
next year is a major step forward. We welcome such a
development and we urge the international community
to give its full support and assistance in order to enable
Chairman Arafat to concretize those reforms.
On the Israeli side, we urge Prime Minister
Sharon to reciprocate the steps announced by Chairman
Arafat and to take concrete action on the ground to
demonstrate his willingness to make peace. In that
regard, automatic retaliations involving Israeli forces
after each terrorist attack will not help the ongoing
peace process. Nor will the continuation of Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories. In the last 18
months of Mr. Sharon's premiership, there has been a
40 per cent increase in such settlements. This seriously
undermines the confidence-building measures which
are so crucial for resumption of constructive dialogue
and negotiations.

It is also important that Israel refrain from
attacking the Palestinian leadership and the Palestinian
Authority, especially if it wants the Authority to
effectively clamp down on suicide bombers. It is
illogical to conceive of a situation where a weakened
and dismantled Authority can exercise control over
such elements. In fact, each time there has been an
attack on Chairman Arafat's headquarters, suicide
attacks have followed.

As regards the international community, while we
support the efforts of Washington and the "quartet", it
is essential that their combined efforts be aimed at
bringing a ray of hope, so that the Palestinian people
can expect to have a homeland of their own. The
creation of a Palestinian State with boundaries which
will ensure the security of the Israeli State seems to be
the only outcome which can bring peace and stability
to the region. It is therefore important that the efforts
of the international community be focused on that
outcome.

It is equally important that the international
community help rebuild the Palestinian infrastructure,
which has been almost completely destroyed by
violence on the ground and by indiscriminate and
disproportionate Israeli military action. Likewise, the
Palestinian security structure needs to be rebuilt in
order for it to be effectively in control of the situation
on the ground.

The whole world is eagerly looking towards the
Middle East peace conference announced by the
"quartet" last month. We believe that the conference
should seriously consider the proposal of Saudi Crown
Prince Abdullah, which was endorsed by Arab leaders
at the Beirut Summit. Let us ensure that the conference
not fail and, more importantly, that it not fail the
people of the Middle East.
