Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to express its thanks to you,
Sir, for having made this an open debate in which all
the Member States might participate. The relationship
between diamonds and weapons is a topic of interest to
many States, as was shown by the debate held by the
recent General Assembly on the role of diamonds in
promoting conflicts.

We would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, who presides over the
sanctions Committee for Sierra Leone, for the
admirable determination with which he has led the
work of the Committee and for the arrangements he
made to bring before us today, here in New York, the
Panel of Experts responsible for the report on
diamonds and arms in Sierra Leone.

We believe that the work done by the Panel of
Experts chaired by Mr. Ayafor merits our thanks and
appreciation, given the quality of the work done, the
quantity of information collected and the tremendous
contribution of their work to the work of the
Committee established by the Security Council
concerning Sierra Leone. We are pleased that the
Experts focused not only on the relationship between
the diamond trade and the supply of arms to the rebels
of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), but that they
also addressed the use of aircraft of varying
provenance in the transport of weapons and in
violations of sanctions. As a result, we have before us a
report whose recommendations are amply substantiated
by facts.

With regard to the report's specific
recommendations on diamonds, we find it morally
repugnant that diamond mines in Sierra Leone should
serve as a source of suffering for the people of Sierra
Leone while at the same time being a symbol of
ostentation and prosperity to other peoples. It is clear
that the production of diamonds is important to the
economic livelihood of various nations and that Sierra
Leone's participation in the world diamond trade is
relatively small. But, added to that of other countries in
conflict, Sierra Leone's share has taken on considerable
dimensions with in the context of international peace
and security.

We congratulate the Government of Sierra Leone
on having put in place a system to certify diamonds
destined for export. We would like to see the
expeditious establishment of a global certification
system, as called for in General Assembly resolution
55/56. We encourage the World Diamond Council and
States participating in the Kimberly process to come to
an agreement on this matter as soon as possible.

We deplore that some of the countries mentioned
in the report have refused to cooperate with the Panel
of Experts by not providing their national diamond
export statistics. The Council should urgently
encourage those countries to cooperate and to adopt a
system of certification similar to Sierra Leone's.
Greater controls should also be required of diamond-
importing countries. It is necessary to reduce statistical
discrepancies, illegal operations and sales of conflict
diamonds in the jewellery stores of numerous
countries. The customs controls adopted by many of
our countries in compliance with the sanctions imposed
by the Security Council are our own contribution to
bringing about peace in Sierra Leone and to ensuring
that its people benefit from their natural resources.

With regard to the report's recommendations on
weapons, we must find effective ways to reduce
weapon inflows in regions such as West Africa, where
countries have imposed a Moratorium on the import of
small arms. As the report indicates, responsibility for
the flow of arms lies with producing countries,
countries that trans-ship weapons and countries using
weapons. We believe it is the Council's duty to
strengthen international measures to limit weapon
flows into West Africa. Weapon-producing countries
bear special responsibility and should be the first to
monitor transactions destined for conflict areas, areas
under moratorium and areas under Security Council
embargoes. Companies that manufacture weapons
should not hide behind the excuse that they are not
responsible because they license foreign companies to
produce arms and do not themselves produce any
directly. Like many companies that produce weapons,
an international trafficker such as Victor Bout, who is
mentioned in the report, supported by lax weapon-
export regimes, can become a genuine threat to
international peace and security.

Another aspect of the arms situation is the high
number of child soldiers in the conflict in Sierra Leone.
This is closely related to the fact that they are able to
use the increasingly light weapons issued to them.

Turning to the report's recommendations on air
traffic, I would like to recognize the difficulties
encountered by airport authorities in West African
countries in relation to controlling the operations of
aircraft used to transport weapons in the region. We
believe that the Council should indeed insist on a more
transparent registry of ships and aircraft in countries
dispensing flags of convenience. As the Panel of
Experts suggests, the International Civil Aviation
Administration should also be more actively involved
in technical cooperation activities aimed at equipping
the region's airports and should even consider
deploying flight supervisors to critical areas.

With regard to the report's recommendations
concerning Liberia, I wish to say that the Panel of
Experts has given us many signs of the involvement of
that country's Government in the sale of diamonds and
weapons to rebels in Sierra Leone, including in
association with companies carrying out illicit
operations. We are deeply concerned that even the
natural resources of Liberia's forests have been
compromised in order to fuel these operations. We
regret that time constraints prevented the Experts from
describing in greater detail how Sierra Leone's
diamonds are exported through Liberia.

We are encouraged by the decision of the
Government of Liberia to participate in this debate
through the presence of its Minister for Foreign
Affairs. The Government of Liberia must be aware that
the Security Council requires the cooperation of West
African countries to promote peace and security in the
region, including in Sierra Leone. The Council is
prepared to respond vigorously to any violation of the
sanctions applied against the members ofthe RUF.

With regard to the monitoring of sanctions, my
delegation was discouraged to read the Panel of
Experts' observation in paragraph 47 of their report
that Security Council resolutions on diamonds and
weapons are violated with impunity. We believe it is
necessary to continue to deny the enemies of peace in
Sierra Leone access to arms and diamond markets. We
look forward to the upcoming opportunity to hold a
dialogue with the member States of the Economic
Community of West African States on this situation
here in New York.
In conclusion, we believe that, beyond a regime
of sanctions applicable to a single country or to a group
of rebels within a country, we must strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations Secretariat to carry out
ongoing monitoring of sanctions and embargoes
imposed by the Security Council in fulfilling its
mission of safeguarding international peace and
security.

