Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We wish you and your friendly country every success
in managing the work of the Council during this month.
We also thank Equatorial Guinea for its presidency of
the Council in February.

We welcome Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, Minister for
Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic,
who has joined us for today's meeting. I would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate him on his
country's assumption of the chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in 2019, in which we wish friendly Slovakia
every success. We also thank him for the valuable and
comprehensive briefing he provided at the beginning of
today's meeting.

The commitment of the Chairperson-in-Office
of the OSCE to providing an annual briefing to the
Security Council dates back to 2004 and confirms
the determination of the OSCE to strengthen its
cooperation with the United Nations in order to establish
international peace and security, especially in the
regions covered by its mandate. As the largest regional
security organization in geographical terms, including
countries in Europe, Asia and the Mediterranean, the
OSCE adds enormous value to our joint quest to achieve
international peace and stability, maintain and promote
the principle of multilateralism and use it to address the
security challenges facing the international community.

As the number and complexity of conflicts
increase daily, there is an ever-greater need,
repeatedly demonstrated, for regional and subregional
organizations to settle internal or external conflicts that
the United Nations cannot resolve on its own. The two
organizations need and complement each other. While
the United Nations plays a key role in the resolution of
conflicts that extends to post-conflict peacebuilding and

peacemaking, the support of regional and subregional
organizations remains indispensable.
In that regard, Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations guides us and even encourages us to
strengthen that cooperation. It is clear that regional and
subregional organizations are better and less costly in
terms of material and human resources at establishing
what is happening on the ground during a conflict. They
are also on the front lines in enabling the international
community to uncover, better understand and address
the nature of such conflicts.

We welcomed the first high-level meeting held
between the European Union and the OSCE in
September of last year. We are pleased that the two
organizations have decided to institutionalize this
practice by holding high-level meetings every year.
The European continent is a theatre of conflicts that
have lasted for too long and require radical solutions,
such as those in Nagorno Karabakh, Moldova, Georgia,
Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Cyprus. We
commend the role of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Missions, which have been deployed in many conflict
regions. We ourselves visited the headquarters of
the Mission in Georgia along the borders of South
Ossetia and noted first-hand the role that it has played
in deescalating tensions, monitoring the ceasefire,
encouraging confidence-building measures and
facilitating the movement of the population.

We note the OSCE's important role in Ukraine
and stress the importance of resolving a crisis that has
entered its fifth year. We hope that all parties to the
conflict will fully implement resolution 2202 (2015), the
2015 Minsk agreements and the presidential statement
of 6 June 2018 (S/PRST/2018/l2), while seeking a
comprehensive and balanced solution through dialogue
based on the Normandy format and the work of the
Trilateral Contact Group. In that regard, we commend
the role that the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine has played on the ground in facilitating
dialogue between the various parties to the conflict,
and we sincerely hope that those efforts will help to
bring an end to that conflict as soon as possible.

In conclusion, we wish the Foreign Minister
every success in achieving Slovakia's priorities and
objectives during its chairmanship of the OSCE, as he
mentioned in his briefing, in order to promote the main
purposes and principles of the United Nations and help
to establish security, stability and peace in the world.

