Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
would like to thank the delegation of Italy for its
leadership in ensuring that the issue of trafficking in
persons in situations of conflict remains a focus of the
Security Council.

Canada is committed to collaborating with the
United Nations and all countries to prevent this crime,
bring those who commit it to justice and to help
survivors go on to lead healthy and productive lives.

(spoke in English)

Let me say at the outset that we were pleased to
co-sponsor resolution 2388 (2017), passed earlier today
under your leadership, Mr. President. The prevention
of all forms of violence against all people, especially
women and girls, is a particular priority for Canada.
We have been working to keep this issue at the top of
the global agenda, and to implement resolution 2331
(2016). Canada's new Feminist International Assistance
Policy seeks to reduce poverty, inequality, violence and
conflict, all ofwhich increase vulnerability- especially
for women, children and youth - to human trafficking,
and lead migrants towards smuggling.

Canada is committed to ensuring that Da'esh
is held to account for its violations of international
humanitarian law, as demonstrated by our three-year
regional strategy to counter Da'esh and respond to
the Iraq and Syria crises. Our humanitarian and
stabilization assistance in Iraq also includes concrete
support to Yezidis and other vulnerable victims of
sexual and gender-based violence and trafficking.

By employing the tools developed to combat
financial crime, we can deprive human traffickers of
funding and access to the international financial system,
making it more difficult for them to accomplish their
destructive goals. For example, the Canadian Project
Protect, established in 2016, is a reporting entity-led
initiative, inspired by the story of a survivor of human
trafficking and victims advocate. The resulting unique
public-private endeavour includes Canada's financial
intelligence unit, law enforcement and financial
institutions committed to making the tracking of money
laundering associated with this activity a priority of
their compliance regimes.

In addition, sexual and gender-based violence is
a serious barrier to the full and prompt recovery of
communities after armed conflict. Canada commends
the comprehensive approach taken by the former
Special Representative of the Secretary General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

We must work to ensure that United Nations and
Member States' policies and actions in tackling the
scourge of human trafficking are fully integrated
in the context of conflicts, humanitarian crises and
post-conflict situations. In that regard, we note
the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers, which were launched at the recent 2017 United
Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial and swiftly
endorsed by Canada and over 50 other Member States.

(spoke in French)

We invite other Member States to join us and
look forward to working with all to implement the
Vancouver Principles as a means of addressing the
terrible problem of child soldiers. Canada welcomes
the ongoing attention of the Council to this issue and
is supportive of keeping this issue at the top of the
international agenda.

