Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Croatia
for holding this important meeting. We would like to
welcome his role in chairing the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, an auxiliary body of the Security Council.
We appreciate the concept paper that was presented by
the President as a basis for the Council's work in
today's meeting. We would like to thank His
Excellency the President of Croatia for his presence.

Allow me also, on behalf of His Majesty King
Abdullah Bin Al Hussein and the Government and
people of Jordan, to present our sincere condolences to
the people of India for the terrible suffering that they
have endured after the reprehensible terrorist attacks in
Mumbai. We condemn these despicable acts in the
strongest terms. We express our deep sympathy to the
bereaved families of the victims and reiterate our
solidarity with these families during this trying time.

The Mumbai terrorist acts sought to send a clear
and strong signal to people throughout the world that
terrorism is not simply a threat to international peace
and security and that it is no longer confined to
political, psychological and material damages, but that
it also seeks to make itself a crucial actor on the
international scene, to participate in defining the
security environment throughout the world and to
impose its personality and fingerprints on regional
conflicts.

We think that the message got through. This
message causes great concern to people throughout the
world. It raises essential questions in terms of the
future of combating terrorism. An important question
is: Should we take it that the Mumbai incident is a
strategic turning point, inasmuch as it pushes
extremism and evil into bilateral and regional
conflicts? Also, through these forces, is terrorism then
trying to reach its objectives with a minimum degree of
visibility, of losses and of responsibility? This message
requires a serious reply from the international
community.

This step requires a strategic transformation on
our part. Our political will and that of the international
community and international organizations must be
brought to bear on it. We must transform our vision of
terrorism and our determination to defeat it. We must
transform our reading of the magnitude, scope and
depth of the threat posed by terrorism to the
international community, human values and the
prosperity of societies. We must also bolster our
determination to establish the appropriate political,
security and social environment necessary to defeat
terrorism. Lastly, there is a need to harmonize the
resolve of the international community, which is at the
heart of that vision.

It is illogical and unacceptable that international
terrorism can adapt, renew itself and manoeuvre while
the international community continues to be held
hostage to slow bureaucracies in combating it due to its
insufficient determination and indecisive tools. In his
concept paper, the President cited some of the serious
bureaucratic difficulties that constitute serious
obstacles in the face of the scope and dynamism of
terrorist acts and highlight our ineffectiveness to
combat them. We recognize the great strategic value of
counter-terrorism and its importance as a basis for
international efforts. However, the structure of our
global strategy must be adapted and its ability to
respond quickly must be enhanced. That is the only
way to achieve the goals of counter-terrorism at the
level of this international Organization.

The current situation therefore calls for calm and
reason, and not for tension, hasty action or misguided
decisions. The policy of escalation will only serve the
interests of terrorists, who are wagering on such a
policy. We must therefore avoid escalation. My country
supports the wise efforts that have been made to
demonstrate restraint and reason. Those efforts reflect
the will of the international community and its
determination to avoid more regional confrontations,
which undermine international peace and security and
divert counter-terrorism from its real objectives.

Jordan itself is a long-standing victim of
terrorism. We have taken pioneering steps to support
international efforts to combat terrorism and have
always been an important part of the partnership to that
end. We have signed most of the international
agreements and protocols that constitute the
international counter-terrorism regime. Jordan has also
developed a national strategy to combat terrorism that
serves as an example of the balance that must exist
between the need to provide security and protect
society, on the one hand, and the need to safeguard
human rights, civil liberties, the rule of law and social
and economic development, on the other. That sensitive
balance allows us to avert the effects of terrorism and
to achieve great harmony between the Government and
the people in combating terrorism. We are confident
that our success in combating terrorism depends on
more than just deterrence, security measures and a
professional military. Our strategic vision also
encompasses other crucial elements, such as legal,
financial, economic and social ways of combating
terrorism.

Jordan has also been a pioneer in promoting the
culture of peace. We have undertaken several
initiatives and established numerous programmes that
emphasize education about and awareness of the
dangers of terrorism in order to enable us to devise
policies to confront extremism and encourage dialogue
among religions and civilizations.

Combating terrorism is a joint international
responsibility. No single State can be successful in
combating terrorism if it isolates itself from
international efforts. We are certain that genuine
partnership and effective international cooperation in
the framework of the United Nations hold the real key
to the success of our efforts. Jordan therefore strongly
supports the central role played by the United Nations
in combating terrorism. We similarly support
strengthening the capacity of this international
Organization, including its determination to play an
effective and constructive role. We shall continue to
meet our international responsibilities in the context of
that partnership, the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and multilateral international
conventions pertaining to the danger posed by
terrorism. The Government of Jordan has always taken
a positive stance on the working methods of the
Security Council, which reflects our seriousness and
responsibility vis-a-vis the threat of terrorism. It also
reflects the importance that we attach to international
cooperation.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
country's determination to abide by the international
partnership to combat terrorism as established by the
Security Council standards.

