Ms. Zerkal (Ukraine): First of all, I would
like to thank the Uruguayan presidency for having
convened today's open debate on an issue of the highest
importance for the Security Council and the United
Nations and that has probably remained on the Security
Council's agenda longer than any other item.

A Middle East peace settlement has always been
high on Ukraine's foreign policy agenda. Decades
ago, back in 1975 - in a different international
environment - my country became one of the
founding members of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and
has followed this issue through all these years. Time
has passed, but still today there is no country in the
world that can distance itself from what is going on in a
strategically vital Middle East region.

The Middle East peace process is at the very core
of any effort aimed at restoring regional stability. We
consistently support the peace process and believe
that peace in the region can be achieved only if viable
mutual compromises are made at the negotiating table.
We know that the people of Israel want peace and we
understand Israel's concerns, for it still lacks secure
borders. We believe that Israel must enjoy the same
right as its neighbours to live within internationally
recognized and secure borders, free from fear, terror
and violence. On the other hand, the Palestinian people,
like every other nation, aspire to a peaceful life, decent
work and prospects for a better future for their children.
They have another dream as well - they want to enjoy
freedom in their own country, with no restrictions on
their movement. The Palestinian people, like the Israeli
people, have the right to fulfil their dream of creating
their own viable democratic State. The Palestinians,
just like the Israelis, have the right to self-determination
and justice.

There can be no security without peace. Military
power can quell disorder, but it cannot create peace.
Lasting and permanent security for Israel can be
achieved only within the framework of a durable
peace with its Arab neighbours. A stable, peaceful and
democratic Palestinian State is in Israel's long-term
security interests, and we believe that it is the only way
to guarantee lasting peace for Israelis and Palestinians
alike. Peace depends on everyone's commitment; no
one is excluded. For that reason, we support pledges
of mediation and the tireless work done by the Middle
East Quartet. Yet we believe that this mediation tool
has to receive a new impetus.

Everybody seems to share a common vision
that there is no alternative to the peace process.
Unfortunately, we have all witnessed an impasse in peace
talks and, in recent months, a significant deterioration
of the situation. Especially worrying is the situation
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, where tensions
continue to rise. The lack of political dialogue creates
an extremely unpredictable and explosive situation.

Ukraine calls on political leaders from all sides to
work together and take visible actions to de-escalate the
situation and restore direct dialogue. Ukraine reiterates
its position that an Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement
lies within the framework of the unconditional
fulfilment by the parties of relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles including land for
peace, the road map, the agreements previously reached
by the parties, and the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative.

There are numerous problems of much larger
scale that multiply the threats within and far beyond
the region: the flow of refugees, the terrorism threat
and the danger of proliferation of the weapons of mass
destruction, to name just a few. We should not lose
track of other conflicts that have inflamed the region
and could potentially have a devastating impact on
the Middle East peace process. The Syrian crisis is
probably the gravest regional challenge and one of the
biggest global challenges the world has faced since the
creation of the United Nations. This crisis has been
affecting all spheres of life in neighbouring Lebanon,
which has resulted in a drawn-out political crisis of
State institutions and permanent security turbulence
in the country. In Libya, we saw a promising start last
December with the signing of a political agreement;
we now look forward to its broad implementation. The
situation in Yemen continues to hold the attention of
the international community in the light of the failed
ceasefire and the lack of progress in finding a political
solution of the conflict. Ukraine remains committed
to preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Iraq, which faces critical security
challenges.

These conflicts create nothing but fertile ground
for the emergence and growth of violent extremism and
terrorism, which is a challenge to the entire civilized
world. A rapidly evolving threat of violent extremism
goes beyond the boundaries of every region. It benefits
from existing conflicts and continues to destabilize the
situation across the Middle East. In line with a viable
strategy to counter this threat, we must address the
underlying root causes that have led to this challenge
in the first place.

To prevent further spread of violent extremism we
need to work harder on the unprecedented humanitarian
crisis unfolding in that part of the world. The recent
refugee crisis in Europe is yet another reminder that we
cannot turn a blind eye to the catastrophic humanitarian
crises unfolding in Syria, Libya, Iraq and Yemen.
These persistent unresolved conflicts are proving to be
a major driver of violent extremism. We must therefore
redouble our efforts to promote viable and lasting
political solutions to conflict situations, including the
Palestinian issue. We do not want to risk igniting yet
another hot conflict that will fuel regional extremism
even more.

We are convinced that it is in everyone's interest
that the outcome of these conflicts not mirror the fate
ofthe entire Middle East peace process, which has been
unfolding for decades. We cannot afford the terrible
burden of endless fires burning all over the region
threatening to set the whole world ablaze. I hope that
the tireless efforts of the wider international community
and of my own country as part of the Security Council
will bear fruit and that the vicious circle of violence
will finally be broken.

