Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Arnault
for his briefing, his recent report (S/2017/252) and the
hard work he has done on our collective behalf.

At the outset, Iwould like to express my condolences
to Ms. Mejia Velez following the tragic loss of life in
the Mocoa landslides at the weekend. It was such an
awful tragedy, and the people of Mocoa and Colombia
as a whole are in our thoughts. The disaster has cast a
shadow over what has been a very positive few months
for Colombia. And yet, despite the terrible loss of
life, I have been struck by the resilience and resolve
shown in response. I am pleased that it is a shared
resolve, with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia (FARC) offering to work side by side with
the Government to help rebuild the town. That is the
same shared commitment that will be needed from
the Colombian Government, the FARC and the United
Nations Mission in Colombia as we write a new chapter
in the country's history.

I am very pleased to see the progress already being
made. The Government has committed to making
peace a reality for all Colombians. The FARC have
moved over 6,800 of its members into the transition
zones to begin the process of laying down arms, as
Mr. Arnault has just updated us. And I am reassured
by his commitment, and that of his staff, as they move
as swiftly as possible to meet the tough time frames
ahead. We recognize that the scale of the Mission's
work is ambitious and challenging, and he has our full
support in those efforts.

As with all post-conflict situations, sustained
implementation is vital. We have learned from our
own experiences in Northern Ireland that building
peace requires a comprehensive, sustained and joined-
up effort. There is no quick fix. Establishing and
maintaining momentum in the early stages, though, is
critical. There has been steady progress, including on
the legislative track with the amnesty law and special
jurisprudence for peace, passed by Congress. I also
welcome the report that 1,000 FARC weapons have
already been taken off the battlefield. That has been
made possible by the continued commitment of both
the Government and the FARC to meeting the 180-day
time frame.

I recognize that this has been an ambitious timeline
and encourage both sides to continue to work towards the
final goal of complete disarmament. In the meantime,
it is important that visible steps be taken to deliver
implementation in the transition zones, including the
provision of health facilities. Amid the progress, we are
concerned by the activity of non-State armed groups,
including the National Liberation Army and criminal
attacks against community leaders and human rights
defenders, as verified by the Office ofthe United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights reports in March.
These attacks are a threat to public confidence in the
peace agreement, especially in isolated and vulnerable
communities. A robust, coordinated response from the
Government is needed to ensure security in all areas
vacated by the FARC, and I welcome efforts taken so
far, including the establishment of the commission
on security guarantees, which I very much hope will
cooperate effectively with civil society.
In the coming months, politics in Colombia will
increasingly focus on next year's presidential and
legislative elections. No one doubts the commitments
of both parties to achieve peace but, during the election
period, it will be crucial that work continue on the
structures and mechanisms needed for the long-term
reintegration of the FARC and the development of areas
affected by the conflict. The Colombian Government
should feel assured that the international community is
ready to assist in any way it can with these efforts. As
the penholder in the Security Council and as a witness
to the handing over of the peace agreement to the
Secretary-General two weeks ago, the United Kingdom
stands ready to play our part.

We also look forward to the Council's visit in
May, which will give us a clear sense of progress
and demonstrate our continued support for peace
in Colombia.

Finally, before giving up the floor, I would like to
say that, as we meet today, we should reflect not just
on the positive developments that Colombia has seen
in recent months, but also on the positive role that the
Council has played in bringing that progress about. That
is a role that we do not play with respect to every single
issue on our agenda. I hope that Colombia gives us all
in this chamber increased hope and belief in the power
of the Security Council to deliver peace and security.
Furthermore, I hope that we can channel this spirit into
the other difficult issues that we face.

