Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the initiative of the League of
Arab States for the convening of today's meeting with
the participation of the Prime Minister of Qatar and the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States.

Today we meet at a crucial moment, which is
perhaps the last opportunity to break the vicious circle
of violence into which Syria and its people have been
sucked. Worsening of the crisis and its plunging into
the chaos of a full-scale conflict would not only be a
tragedy for the Syrian people, but would also
inevitably destabilize the neighbouring countries and
further stir up the strategically important region of the
Middle East.

What is the solution? What can the international
community do to prevent a fatal development of events?
The answer is as complex as it is simple. Security
Council members found the key to it essentially at the
beginning of the crisis, when on 3 August 2011 it
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/16). In
it are two fundamental provisions: violence by all sides
must cease, and the crisis can be resolved only through
a Syrian-led inclusive political process. If all key
players of the international community had concentrated
their efforts on implementing these provisions, then,
we are convinced, the crisis would have long since been
overcome. Unfortunately, this has not been the case.

Russia, which for years has enjoyed close and
friendly partnerships with the Syrian people and the
Arab world, fought from the very beginning to ensure
that the Syrian people would be able to define for
themselves, without bloodshed and violence, a course
and a format for the necessary social, economic and
political transformations. We are convinced that at a
time of extreme internal political crisis, the role of the
international community should not be to exacerbate
conflict or meddle by using economic sanctions or
military force. Instead, it should foster dialogue to seek
an optimally effective and smooth resolution.

With a view to halting the Violence and
establishing a Syrian-led inclusive political process,
Russia has stepped up its diplomatic efforts with
Damascus, the Syrian opposition and the League of
Arab States. In our view, the League has an important
role, with the international community, in resolving the
Syrian crisis. Russia did much to ensure that the
League and Damascus agreed on the deployment of the
League's monitoring mission in Syria.

At the first stage of its work the mission was
already playing a useful role from the standpoint of
lowering the violence somewhat, so that - and this is
of key importance - there was more objective
information on the nature of the events unfolding in
Syria, in spite of pressures on the mission. In the
mission's report on the results of its work between
24 December and 18 January 2012 (S/2012/71, annex, enclosure 4), it is clearly confirmed that in a number of
Syrian neighbourhoods armed elements are attacking
Syrian security forces and peaceful civilians. That led
to the conclusion that all sides in Syria, not just the
Government, must take on obligations to cease all
forms of violence.

We know from different sources what is going on
in Syria. For example, after the city of Zabadani came
under the control of fighters, murders, looting and
beatings began. The country residence of the Russian
ambassador was looted. Some thousand peaceful
residents deserted the city.

It should be noted that the last section of the
mission's report contains a conclusion that a dialogue
among the various Syrian sides should run in parallel
with the mission's work, and there must be a political
process as well.

The fraternal ties that we enjoy with the League
of Arab States allow us not only to support our Arab
friends, but also, when necessary, to criticize them for
inconsistencies. We did not conceal our belief that the
League's decision to suspend the membership of
Damascus and to impose sanctions on Syria was
counterproductive. The League's position with respect
to the monitoring mission could have been more firm.
On the one hand, the League decided to continue the
mission; on the other, some countries have begun
withdrawing their observers.

We are concerned with the recent decision to
suspend the work of the mission. As we understand,
according to the mission's leadership, this was a
consequence of a recent burst of violence and of a
fatwa broadcast on a Saudi television station by a
Salafi preacher of Syrian origin, giving his blessing to
spilling the blood of observers. We think that the work
of the mission in the near future should continue, with
appropriate support from all sides.

Of particular importance in the context of efforts
to settle the crisis is the League's initiative of
22 January 2012 to call on the Syrian Government and
all Syrian opposition groups to join in dialogue under
the League's aegis. Engaging with one's opponents
should not be the duty of diplomats only, but also of
politicians, especially when the fate of one's country is
at stake.

Russia continues to act in unison with the League.
We appeal to the Syrian authorities and all opposition
groups to send their representatives to Moscow at a
mutually agreed time for informal contacts, without
preconditions. This would allow the Syrian parties to
discuss many issues on the national agenda without any
limitations, including the task of preparing an inter-
Syrian dialogue under the aegis of the League of Arab
States.

Now it is more important than ever to engage in a
dialogue that leads to a necessary agreement on the
political future of the country. Can the Security Council
play a constructive role here? We think so. That is why
on 15 December 2011 the Russian delegation submitted
to the Council a draft resolution, which drew on the
political thrust of the presidential statement of 3 August
(S/PRST/2011/ 16). The draft received a measure of
support in the Council. We circulated an updated
version among our colleagues yesterday.

We suggest that in drawing up its decision the
Council should be guided by the principle of causing no
harm. We reject any sanctions, any attempts to employ
the Council's instruments to fuel conflict or to justify
any eventual foreign military interference. But that is
not the only matter at hand. The Council cannot impose
parameters for an internal political settlement. The
Charter gives it no such authority. The sides must be
encouraged to engage in dialogue rather than be
intimidated into doing so.

We therefore have taken into account the draft
resolution presented recently by the delegation of
Morocco. We found some of the elements of the text of
our draft in it. This gives rise to hope. A consensus
position among Council members on Syria is not only
possible, but necessary.

