Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As the
Argentine presidency of the Security Council draws to
a close, allow me to congratulate you, Madam, on your
stewardship of the discussions within this principal
organ of the United Nations tasked with the maintenance
of international peace and security. I would like to
once again express how pleased we are at seeing you,
Madam, presiding over the Security Council during
the month of October. On behalf of the people and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I would like to thank the Council once again for the
efforts undertaken by the United Nations to uphold the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of our country and
to ensure its peace and stability. Finally, I would like
to pay heartfelt tribute to His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for the constant commitment
he has unfailingly shown and for his personal efforts
aimed at peace in my country.

We have carefully followed the presentation of the
two reports of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
the report on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region (S/2017/697).
Those reports were just introduced by Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region of Africa, and I thank them very
much. The briefings prompt us to make the following
comments.

Generally speaking, it is important to note that
the commendable efforts mentioned in the follow-up
report (S/2014/698) of September have continued in
the various sectors related to the implementation of the
national commitments undertaken by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo under the Addis Ababa Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework and the Nairobi
Declarations, which marked the end of the Kampala
dialogue between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23). My delegation believes it is important to go
back to the situation ofthe former members of the M-23
and the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations. In
that regard, my delegation would like to note that the
Government has undertaken several actions, including
the drawing up of a road map and a follow-up timetable
for its implementation. An amnesty law was put into
effect on 11 February by our Head of State, while a
decree regarding the measures for its implementation
was signed and issued, withthe individual commitment
forms published in our four national languages.

Furthermore, a technical monitoring and
identification team has been established and has
visited Uganda and Kigali to identify former M-23
combatants; explain the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process; explain the amnesty; and
facilitate the signing of the individual commitment
document for former combatants. An oversight mission
to verify the viability of locations has been established,
and it visited, on 24 to 29 July 2014, Walikale and
Kisangani, which are to be used as transit centres and
for the reintegration of former M-23 combatants, before
the centre in Kisangani is established. Orders granting
amnesty to 410 former M-23 members have been
issued and prisoners have gradually been released,
and that process is being accelerated. A road map
has been drawn up outlining the repatriation process
for the ex-M23 combatants in Uganda and Rwanda
through the National Oversight Mechanism of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, assisted by the
Executive Secretariat of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) in accordance
with the Nairobi declaration and the recommendation
of the joint ministerial meeting of the ICGLR and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
on 2 July and the relevant decision of the mini-summit
of the ICGLR of 14 August in Luanda.

It should be noted that a harmonization meeting
with the Executive Secretariat of the ICGLR on the
content of the draft road map was held on the premises
of the National Oversight Mechanism on 1 September.
At that time, the Coordinator designated by the former
M-23 members, Mr. Rene Abandi, was invited to
participate in that meeting as a focal point, in line
with the Nairobi declaration. However, he could not
participate for personal reasons.

It is also important to clarify that the road map
integrates the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo's decision, taken on 17 September 2014, to
conduct an immediate repatriation of ex-M-23 members
who are eligible and who wished to be repatriated.
The Coordinator of the former M-23 members was
notified of the Government decision's on 18 September
by the Executive Secretariat of the ICGLR, which
then organized a confirmation meeting on 1 October
in Kampala. Mr. Abandi and the Ugandan authorities
also participated in the meeting. Unexpectedly,
through his letter dated 2 October addressed to
the Government, Mr. Abandi, refused the offer of
immediate repatriation of ex-M23 members. However,
a joint agreement was reached with the Executive
Secretariat of the ICGLR that the Coordinator of the
ex-M-23 members would be summoned for a new
meeting to harmonize the viewpoints. That meeting
will be held on 7 and 8 November at the headquarters
of the National Oversight Mechanism in Kinshasa. This
time it will be attended by the special envoys, regional
and international observers for the process of the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework agreement and representatives of other
countries of the Great Lakes region.

As we have underscored many times to the Council,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo seeks peace
on its territory and throughout the territories of the
States of the region. That is why it has never shirked
its responsibilities and remains determined to combat
all negative forces still present in its territory to ensure
that peace and harmony return to the region. In that
regard, the country will continue to fight the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) and the Forces democratiques
de libe'ration du Rwanda (FDLR).

The resurgence of the terrorist activities of the
ADF, whose strike force was significantly weakened
following Operation Sokola, launched in January by
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo (FARDC) with MONUSCO's support, is once
again a challenge, which must be resolved. After having
driven the ADF from its stongholds and destroyed its
chains of command, the ADF terrorist elements today
are rebuilding their ranks and operate randomly in
small groups. In just one month, as Mr. Kobler has
just underscored, the territory of Beni in the North
Kivu province was struck, leaving at least 80 victims.
The FARDC and MONUSCO have already taken the
necessary security measures by deploying to that part
of the country.

With regard to the FDLR, Council members
will recall that in August, the Foreign Minister of
my country, in his statement (see S/PV.7237) to the
Council, described the time frame given to the FDLR
for disarmament and the agreement of all the States
of the region to uphold the deadline with a mid-term
assessment. This assessment was recently completed in
Luanda during a joint meeting of the ICGLR and the
SADC on 18 to 20 October, which brought together the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Defence of the States
members of those organizations.

The conclusion reached was that, as of 20 October,
the FDLR had not disarmed, despite some movement
recorded in June, when some 200 elements laid down
their arms. All participants in the Luanda meeting
formally affirmed that there would be no extension and
that, as of 2 January 2015, military actions would be
taken to disarm that noxious force. For my Government,
all FDLR elements that resist disarmament will face
forcible disarmament operations. They must all leave
Congolese territory and return to their country, Rwanda,
or look for other host countries. There is no place for
them in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In view of the reconfiguration of the MONUSCO
mandate and the transfer of responsibilities, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has taken note of the road map being developed with
respect to the reassignment of certain MONUSCO tasks
to the United Nations country team. The Government
stands ready to discuss the concrete implementation of
the road map and wishes to express its full confidence
in the joint evaluation team that calls for more
circumspection in the reconfiguration of the United
Nations Mission in terms of the logical perspective of a
gradual and orderly withdrawal.

The Council also received a letter dated 22 October
2014 in which my Government made clear to you,
Madam President, its position in the Scott Campbell
case. I want to confirm the content of this letter and
thank you for agreeing to circulate it as a document of
the Security Council.

It is important to remember in that context that
everything began with Operation Coup de Poing, which
Congolese National Police launched at the request of
the population exasperated and upset by the persistence
of urban violent crime in Kinshasa, a metropolis of
nearly 12 million. We call it the "Kuluna phenomenon",
referring to the name of the bands of outlaws and young
delinquents who, at the time of the Operation, were
stealing, engaging in racketeering, injuring people,
going so far as to cut the arms of peaceful bystanders or
even killing for a cell phone, a small chain, a watch or
simply for the fun of doing harm. Entire neighbourhoods
were thus terrorized and shops vandalized.

Those young people, for those who do not know,
feared neither the law enforcement officers nor
soldiers, who moreover were also among the victims
of their violence. The first phase of the Operation was
a resounding success with the people who, reassured
now that they are safe, no longer ask the police to
pursue those criminals in order to put an end to the
phenomenon.

Itis in that context that, on 15 October, Mr. Campbell
released a report containing falsehoods and unverified
assertions that unfairly, gratuitously and without any
evidence made charges against the Congolese National
Police. Among those falsehoods, we would cite the
32 alleged cases of enforced disappearances mentioned
in the report, as all of Kinshasa knows that most of
these supposedly missing Kulunas had left Kinshasa
themselves to take refuge in Brazzaville and in
neighbouring provinces, such as Bandundu, Bas-Congo
and Equateur, when they realized that they were being
targeted and surrounded in their neighbourhoods.

Rather than providing documentation for his
reports or supporting his allegations with evidence,
Mr. Campbell apparently believed that the Congolese
authorities had to prove their innocence in those real
or imagined crimes, although it is up to the person
making an allegation to provide supporting evidence.
In addition, there was the issue of Mr. Campbell's
systematic refusal to take into account the properly
documented comments and clarifications provided to
him by the relevant Government authorities for each
report. The contempt thus shown for a Government from
which he had received accreditation made it impossible
for him to continue to do useful work in promoting
human rights values, to which the Democratic Republic
of Congo remains attached.

Generally speaking, the behaviour oer. Campbell
has compromised not only the image of our institutions
but also and especially the security ofthe State, because
of the subsequent demoralization of our defence and
security forces. His recurrent lack of concern despite
all entreaties on this subject shook the Government's
trust in him and led it to resolve the problem with the
radical solution of removing him.

It should be noted here that the Democratic Republic
of Congo does not have a culture of expelling diplomats.
The case of Mr. Campbell, as you may have noticed,
Madam President, is due to his repeat offences that
exceeded tolerable limits. However, my Government
wishes to reassure the Council that this decision does
not undermine or do anything to taint relations between
MONUSCO and the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.
It does not constitute either a closure of the United
Nations Joint Human Rights Office in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo or a questioning of its mandate.
In fact, the office remains open and operational.

My Government is awaiting the new replacement
to be appointed by the Secretary-General and is ready
to give him or her its full cooperation. Furthermore,
my delegation also wishes to clarify that, in respect
of allegations in the criticized report, my Government
did not wait for the report from Mr. Campbell to act. It
published a list of 30 police officers convicted for their
behaviour in the Operation as the magistrates in charge
of overseeing the Operation took up the cases.

With respect to the alleged threats against United
Nations personnel, my Government has commenced an
inquiry into the matter and would like to reassure the
Council that everything is in place for their safety so
they can work in peace.

Finally, my Government hopes that the United
Nations, in its assessment ofthe situation, will take into
account the good work being one by the Democratic
Republic of Congo to promote human rights.

I would like to express the thanks of my Government
to Mr. Kobler, the entire staff of MONUSCO and all
associated civilian and humanitarian personnel for
the tireless efforts they continue to make with a view
to finding lasting peace and security in my country. I
would be remiss ifI did not express our gratitude to
Mr. Djinnit for his commitment and efforts towards the

restoration oflasting peace in the Democratic Republic The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
of the Congo and throughout the Great Lakes region. more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
To all members of the Security Council, I reiterate the invite Council members to informal consultations to
appreciation of my country for their profound devotion continue our discussion on the subject.

to this noble cause, whose purpose is the restoration of

dignity to the Congolese people. The meeting rose at 11.20 am.
