This year is a pivotal one for the women and peace and security agenda. In addition to marking the twentieth anniversary of foundational resolution 1325 (2000) and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the visionary Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, it also marks 75 years since the advent of the United Nations itself, with its founding promise of gender equality. While some progress has been made since then, gender inequality and discrimination remain major challenges. Had we more effectively addressed such inequalities and discrimination in past decades, we would find ourselves in a better place today to respond to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Discussions on conflict-related sexual violence have been dominated by an approach that looks at women and girls primarily as victims and survivors. As important as the protection pillar remains, the participation dimension is also essential, as it emphasizes women's agency to address and prevent such violence. As a contribution to further strengthening the participation pillar of the women and peace and security agenda, Liechtenstein has commissioned a research project from the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security on the impact of female peacekeepers and members of armed forces on respect for international humanitarian law. Harmful gender stereotypes and abusive power dynamics are the root cause of sexual and gender-based violence. Women and girls are disproportionately affected by sexual violence, but men and boys are also targeted. The annual report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the work of the Liechtenstein-based human rights organization All Survivors Project document rape, sexual slavery and other forms of sexual violence of comparable gravity perpetrated against women, men, girls or boys in a large number of conflict situations, many of which are on the Council's agenda. Resolution 2467 (2019) and its survivor-centred approach are an important step forward in the women and peace and security agenda. Monitoring, analysis and reporting focus more consistently on the gender-specific nature of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations against all affected populations in all situations of concern, including men and boys. That is of the utmost relevance, as sexual violence against men and boys in particular continues to be underreported owing to a lack of legal frameworks, cultural taboos and fear of stigmatization. In a time of quarantines, lockdowns and other restrictions on movement caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, it is particularly important to ensure that survivors of conflict- related sexual violence have access to reporting mechanisms and necessary services. In addition to ensuring the implementation of resolution 2467 (2019), we call on the Council to include conflict-related sexual violence as a designation criterion in targeted sanctions regimes. Accountability is an essential part of the fight against conflict-related sexual violence. The international criminal justice system has done groundbreaking work in that regard. Last year, the International Criminal Court (ICC) found warlord Bosco Ntaganda guilty of 18 counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity. It is a milestone verdict, as sexual violence crimes committed against men were held to the same standard as those committed against women. The ongoing proceedings at the International Court of Justice against Myanmar's military and security forces in the context of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide is another promising development to strengthen accountability for sexual violence crimes. In too many instances, perpetrators of sexual violence continue to enjoy impunity, and victims and survivors are left without assistance. We call upon the Security Council to refer situations such as in the Syrian Arab Republic and Myanmar to the ICC. We will continue our strong support for the accountability mechanisms created by the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council. We remain committed to strengthening criminal justice and accountability for sexual and gender-based violence in conflict, including by supporting the important work by UN-Women and Justice Rapid Response.
