Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for convening today's
very important debate. I also thank the Secretary-
General for sending a very clear signal to the Council
about how important it is that we cooperate effectively
with regional and subregional institutions.

That relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations is one of the greatest structural
issues for the Security Council. At their best, the United
Nations and the region work in partnership towards
shared objectives, harnessing each other's expertise and
making a difference to lives for people across the world.
When it works, we are very strong; when it does not,
none of us achieve what we want to achieve. Therefore,
cooperation is indispensable. The challenges facing
the Council cannot be tackled by one body on its own.
We need the united efforts of international, regional,
subregional and local bodies.

I think that is most true of all in Africa. The
Council has shared objectives and shared challenges
on peace and security with the African Union across
the continent. Those shared challenges make our
relationship with the African Union so important. At
its best, that relationship makes the lives of some of the
world's most vulnerable people better. Somalia is a good
example of that integrated partnership. The African
Union's military mission, the African Union Mission
in Somalia, supported by United Nations logisticians
working alongside a United Nations special political
mission, have been at the heart of progress in Somalia.

Ajoint team from the African Union and the United
Nations recently made important recommendations on
strengthening military and political progress in the
country. The Security Council endorsed that work
through resolution 2232 (2015) in the past month. The
results of that close partnership make Somalia one of
the few bright spots on the Council's agenda.

Bringing an end to the fighting in South Sudan
is another challenge that we jointly face. We all said
that 17 August was a hard deadline for an agreement
to bring peace. If the Government of South Sudan will
not sign up to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development-plus deal, then we must all be firm on
our next steps. We cannot sit by while leaders fight and
their people's suffering grows.

As a member of the European Union, the United
Kingdom is committed to ensuring that Europe
plays its part in making the world a safer and more
prosperous place. The European Union is engaged
across the waterfront of international issues, and it is
a key partner for the United Nations in Africa. Its role
has also been clear with regard to Iran, where it was a
key facilitator in the recent E3+3 Governments talks
and helped to achieve an outcome of which the Council
was very supportive and endorsed emphatically.

We all bring different approaches to tackling issues
of peace and security. We make the most progress
when we harness our comparative advantages, as
the Secretary-General said. The Council's ultimate
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security does not exclude the significant talents and
perspectives that regional organizations can provide,
but it is important for the United Nations to be engaged
at all stages of peace processes where we are required
to support and implement them. The report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) has interesting things to say on this. We
agree with the Panel that consultative decision-making,
a common strategy and division of labour are key
components of the relationship between the Council and
regional organizations. We also agree that partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations should be
part of the Council's early engagement on emerging
threats. Substantive dialogue between the Council
and regional organizations is an important tool, and
where possible, joint analysis and planning will enable
the Council to adopt clearer and better mandates, in
particular where regional missions are deployed.

We encourage regional organizations to review
their own planning authorization, human rights
monitoring and governance structures so that together
we can create a more coherent international and
regional approach to conflict. It is also important for
us to work with regional organizations to identify more
sustainable ways of funding their operations. The other
partner in that for all of us is civil society, the media
and other relevant non-State actors. This year, we have
heard moving and detailed accounts in Arria Formula
meetings from individuals brave enough to share their
experiences in Darfur, in North Korea and in Syria.
Those briefings improve our understanding of what is
at stake. The testimony of those on the ground is central
in alerting the international community to escalating
tensions. We should continue to examine how we
can work more effectively with those groups on the
challenges that we face internationally.

The United Kingdom is convinced that we can and
should do more to deepen our cooperation with regional
organizations across the world. Our responsibility in the
Council is to maintain international peace and security.
Our ability to discharge that heavy responsibility will
only be made stronger by deepening our relationship
with regional organizations, which is why we so
strongly welcome this important debate today.

