Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
for his report (S/2017/lll3), and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for his briefing
on the various aspects of the reconfiguration of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

We consider Darfur's progress towards stability a
positive development. The arms-collection campaign
has resulted in a decrease in violence in recent
months, and we encourage the Government to continue
those efforts in line with the provisions of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, backed by the necessary
political support. However, we note with concern that
violations of human rights continue. We would like to
remind the Sudanese authorities of their responsibility
to protect the civilian population, particularly
women, children and internally displaced persons in
vulnerable circumstances. It will be very important to
strengthen the capacity of the police and the judiciary
to prosecute and punish those responsible for atrocity
crimes. With regard to the evaluation of the UNAMID
reconfiguration and drawdown process, we would like
to highlight three issues that require urgent attention.

First, the speed with which phase 1 of the process
has been carried out has to some extent limited the
ability to plan and implement the reconfiguration
process adequately. It will be crucial to ensure that phase
2 is conducted in a more organized and coordinated
way among the teams involved. Peru supports the
recommendation to postpone the delivery of the Kalma
base until the end of phase 2 of the reconfiguration
process, so that the process can be carried out as safely
and peacefully as possible. We are also concerned
about the delays in establishing a temporary base in
G010. We believe that will be key to enabling UNAMID
to make progress with the peacekeeping process and
focus its resources and activities on sustainable
development in Darfur with a View to addressing the
root causes of the conflict. We consider it urgent and
vital to address the problems preventing humanitarian
aid from reaching its recipients. We acknowledge the
fact that improvements have been made in the process
of issuing visas, improvements that should also be
extended to humanitarian personnel. But it will be
equally important to eliminate bureaucratic obstacles
to the entry of containers into the country.

In our view, sustaining peace in Darfur means
achieving a permanent ceasefire and addressing the
root causes of the conflict. In that regard, we welcome
UNAMID and the United Nations country team's
initiative in implementing the Integrated Strategic
Framework for the period 2017 to 2019. Donor
contributions, including from non-conventional sources
and regional financial institutions, should be solicited
to ensure that it is adequately implemented.

