Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): It is a great
honour and privilege for me to speak on behalf of the
delegation of Viet Nam at this important meeting of the
Security Council. I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for the able leadership that you and your delegation
have demonstrated in the Presidency of the Council
this month. I am also very grateful to
Mr. Michael Williams for his briefing this morning.

First and foremost, my delegation would like to
associate itself fully with the statement delivered
moments ago by the representative of the Republic of
Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

There is no doubt that the Middle East continues
to be one of the flash points of great concern to the
world community in general, and to the Security
Council in particular. We hope that our meeting today
will help enable the parties concerned to work much
harder to put the peace process in the region back on
track.

My country fully shares the View that the Middle
East conflict, at the core of which is the question of
Palestine, can only be resolved through peaceful
negotiations with a View to achieving a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution on the basis of the legitimate
interests of all the parties concerned. Furthermore, in
order to reach such a solution, we strongly believe that
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right to establish a Palestinian State in
their homeland with the borders as they existed before
June 1967, must be fully respected.

In line with that consistent position, Viet Nam
supports all regional and international efforts that
contribute to advancing the peace process in the
Middle East. We urge the parties concerned to make
further efforts to revive the Road Map for peace and to
make greater contributions to the stability and
development of the region. For its part, Viet Nam
stands ready to do its utmost to contribute to the
resumption of the negotiations among the parties
involved in the Middle East peace process.

As far as the internal affairs of the Palestinians
are concerned, we wish to reaffirm that Viet Nam
respects the choice taken by the Palestinian people
themselves and earnestly hopes that the Palestinian
parties will make efforts to settle their differences
through peaceful negotiations and continue to work
hard, with the support of the international community,
to further move the peace process in the Middle East
forward.

Finally, my delegation wishes to express its
serious concerns over the recent escalation of tension
and violence in the region. We urge all the parties
concerned to restrain themselves and to support
peaceful negotiations in order to facilitate the return of
normalcy to the region. In that connection, Viet Nam
warmly welcomes the recent high-level meetings
between Israel and Palestine. We sincerely hope that
those meetings will lead to the resumption of peaceful
negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians,
as well as the resumption of the peace process in the
Middle East.

