As co-penholder on Afghanistan with Germany, Indonesia would like to thank all Security Council members for their continued focus and support on Afghanistan and for their support to us. We also thank Ambassador Yamamoto for his service and dedication in leading the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and welcome the announcement of Ambassador Lyons as the incoming Special Representative and Head of UNAMA. We thank Ms. Ingrid Hayden for her briefing and welcome Ambassador Adela Raz to this video-teleconference (VTC) meeting. The dynamic situation in Afghanistan saw the hope of peace following the recent peace process agreements. That was marred by the brutal attack by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant last week, which claimed 25 innocent lives. We have condemned that attack in a press statement. Furthermore, the number of people affected by coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is rising in Afghanistan, making the efforts towards peace and humanitarian relief all the more difficult. We also express our concern over that situation. The role of the United Nations, along with that of the regional and international entities, remains critical at this time. However, the Afghan parties also need to come together on a comprehensive peace agreement and to ensure robust action against the challenges confronting ordinary Afghans. Ultimately, peace will depend on the willingness of Afghans to place their faith in a collective trajectory to shape their country's future. An Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process is crucial. In that regard, we would additionally underline the following points. First is the political situation and the peace process. We humbly call on the political leadership to set aside their differences, be flexible and put the interest of the people of Afghanistan first. As Ms. Hayden mentioned, now is not the time for division. Negotiations will not be easy, but with persistence, good faith on all sides, political wisdom and a reduction in violence, we are confident that concrete progress can be made. We hope that the intra-Afghan negotiation will be convened once the COVID-19 crisis is over. Indonesia stands ready to host it. In addition, we welcome the formation of an inclusive negotiating team for the upcoming intra- Afghan negotiations, in particular the inclusion of women, as an important element to achieving long-lasting peace. Secondly, the humanitarian and security situation must improve. Even before the unfolding of COVID-19, an estimated 9.4 million Afghans required humanitarian assistance, up from 6.3 million last year. Indonesia calls on all parties to fully exercise their role to ensure the smooth delivery of humanitarian support. Similarly, as over 10,000 casualties, including children, have been documented for the sixth consecutive year, Indonesia calls upon the parties to the conflict to stop harming civilians. Echoing the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, we implore all parties in Afghanistan to also end violence against civilians. As we approach the holy month of Ramadan, it is time for the cessation of hostilities and for peace in the land. Third is the role of women and human rights. Any political settlement must not sacrifice the gains made, including for the rights of Afghan women. Indonesia reiterates its support for the women, peace and security agenda in Afghanistan. Last year, we hosted a dialogue on the role of women in building and sustaining peace, in Jakarta. In follow up, an Afghanistan-Indonesia women solidarity network was launched in Afghanistan this month, whose vision will be pursued through the unity of Afghan women and a time-bound action plan. Our Foreign Minister is personally reinforcing that effort. Let me close by stressing our full support to Afghanistan's march towards the dawn of its peaceful and prosperous era. Indonesia will continue to walk the talk on Afghan women's active participation in their country's progress, along with our other efforts to foster peace there. As mentioned by our co-penholder, Germany, we have presented press elements for your consideration and support. Like previous VTC meetings of the Security Council over the last few days, we do hope that colleagues will also agree on those press elements.
