Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. This issue is indeed a major concern of the
international community, especially in an era when
intra-State conflicts stemming from ethnic, religious
and cultural differences have become more frequent
and more common than ever. My appreciation also
goes to Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for his comprehensive
presentation on this important issue.

Since the introduction of the topic of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict into the
Security Council in 1999, progress has been made on
this issue. In particular, the adoption of resolution 1674
(2006) last year was a significant step forward,
reinforcing the legal framework established by
previous resolutions on the subject. Despite the
continued efforts of the United Nations, however, it
remains a sad reality that civilians continue to bear the
brunt of armed conflict and terrorism. The world still
continues to witness massive human rights violations,
unconscionable violence and brutal killings. In both
international and civil conflicts, the international
community today has become increasingly aware of its
responsibility to protect civilian populations.

My delegation would like to emphasize three
issues that we believe are particularly important to the
protection of civilians: conflict prevention, the
development of a specific mechanism for the
protection of civilians in each armed conflict and the
elimination of the culture of impunity.

Needless to say, the best way to protect civilians
from the dangers of armed conflict is to prevent armed
conflicts from erupting. It is therefore of the utmost
importance to develop a broad strategy for conflict
prevention that addresses the root causes of armed
conflict. In dealing with these causes, the question of
good governance should be a critical concern for the
international community. Any strategy for prevention
will also need to be based on solid analysis of both
ongoing and newly emerging situations that have the
potential to develop into armed conflict. The Security
Council has a significant role to play in this regard.

Secondly, while a generalized approach is
needed, we are of the View that because each conflict is
unique, the Council should develop a mechanism for a
case-by-case analysis for the protection of civilians. A
specific mechanism should be in place to analyse the
particular characteristics of each armed conflict and
develop an individualized approach to the protection of
civilians. In our View, to be effective, such a
mechanism would require a strong system of
information-sharing among all relevant actors,
including peacekeepers and humanitarian non-
governmental organizations on the ground.

Thirdly, to deter the recurrence of crimes against
innocent civilians, the culture of impunity must be
brought to an end. The establishment and operation of
the International Criminal Court, the International
Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda and the Special Court for Siena Leone have
great significance in this regard. Also crucial to ending
impunity is providing assistance for judicial capacity-
building in war-torn societies, with a View to ensuring
that law and order are restored.

Today's topic, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, is a current and compelling security concern
that requires coordinated multilateral action from the
international community. We are still distant from
translating our responsibility to protect into adequate
action. Beleaguered communities still suffer. It is
therefore important that we build upon the progress
already made and strengthen our efforts to achieve a
more secure and orderly world in which every human
being is respected and protected within a culture of
peace.
