Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Assistant

Secretary-General Zouev for his insightful briefing on
the final progress report (S/2018/344) of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL).

(spoke in Russian)

We thank Mr. Alexander Zouev.
(spoke in English)

We would also like to express our deep appreciation
to our dear friend and colleague, Ambassador Schoulgin
Nyoni, for updating us on the work of the Liberia
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. And
we commend Mr. Chid Liberty, of Liberty and Justice,
for his efforts to provide economic opportunities for
Liberians. We would like to make four points on the
subject of today's meeting.

First, we wholeheartedly congratulate the people
of Liberia and the United Nations on the country's
successful elections, its historic democratic transfer
of power and the successful conclusion of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). We commend the
Liberian people for the fact that they have come such
a long way in restoring peace in their country. They
should be supported by the international community as
they work to consolidate their hard-won achievements.

Secondly, we are encouraged by President Weah's
determination to address the remaining challenges - including,
among other things, the economic situation, poverty,
structural inequalities and, most of all, corruption - and
to promote good governance and national reconciliation. To
achieve those goals, Monrovia will require ongoing bilateral
and multilateral political support and technical expertise
from the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and neighbouring countries. That should be
reinforced by active United Nations engagement through the
United Nations country team, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.

Thirdly, we welcome the launch of an inclusive
process for formulating a new national development
agenda for the period from 2018 to 2024, as well as
the Government's vision for addressing poverty and its
people-centred approach to development. We commend
its alignment of that strategy with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, and call on the Government
to continue its efforts to empower women and young
people and to apply a whole-of-pillar approach to the
security-development nexus, among other things. We
also fully endorse and share in the words of Deputy
Permanent Representative Pawel Radomski of Poland
with regard to the role of religious leaders in fostering
peace. We would like to remind our colleagues of the
Arria Formula meeting on that subject that my Mission
is organizing in cooperation with the Alliance of
Civilizations, to be held next Tuesday.

Fourthly, we believe that predictable and sustainable
financial assistance will be critical to rebuilding
Liberia, especially with regard to infrastructure,
development, education, health, the rule of law, land
reform and youth development. It is our earnest hope
that the international community and donors will come
forward to respond generously to the appeal for funds
for the newly established multi-partner trust fund in
order to enable Liberia's peacebuilding plan to reach
its goals. At the same time, the Government should
continue to reduce its dependency on aid and establish
an environment conducive to foreign investment and
economic and fiscal recovery. It will also be equally
important to consolidate the Government, bring about
national reconciliation and transitional justice, mitigate
humanitarian crises and respect human rights.

In conclusion, we fully support and welcome the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/8) adopted today
on UNMIL. We would like to express our appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zarif, and the Mission's personnel for their
contribution to restoring stability in Liberia. We also
pay tribute to all United Nations peacekeepers who lost
their lives in the pursuit of peace in the country. We
look forward to the results of the study of the role of
UNMIL in the resolution of conflicts in Liberia, and
believe that the lessons learned will help to improve the
effectiveness ofUnited Nations peacekeeping missions.
I would like to once again reiterate Kazakhstan's
commitment to working with members of the Security
Council and others to ensure a peaceful and prosperous
future for Liberia.

