The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

We would like to thank Mr. Said Djinnit, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region of Africa, for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Region
(8/2018/209). We are also grateful for the information
shared by Ambassador Raymond Serge Bale on the
Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework.

Peru acknowledges the efforts and the commitment
of the signatory countries to implement the Framework
and the important role of the guarantor countries. We
express our support for the efforts under way.
We highlight the importance of the regional
approach in responding to the complex and unstable
situation in the Great Lakes region. We believe that
the efforts made by the various parties in the light of
the common challenges must be consistent in order
to be complementary and to thereby bring about
more effective cooperation to the benefit of all. We
therefore support the processes of political dialogue
and mutual understanding in the region. We believe
that is necessary in order to deal with the challenges
in the areas of security, humanitarian assistance,
the protection of human rights and the promotion of
sustainable development, in short, in order to achieve
sustainable peace in the region.

More specifically, we would like to reiterate the need

to comply with the electoral calendar in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to move forward in the
inter-Burundian dialogue under the auspices of the East
African Community. We deem it appropriate that such
processes be carried out in an inclusive manner with a
view to strengthening the institutional framework and
accountability, and we call for broad participation of
the population, and especially that of women and young
people committed to sustaining peace and developing
their respective countries.

We must also express our concern about the
humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes. Violence
and insecurity generated by armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, the
Central African Republic and Burundi have produced
more than 11 million displaced persons in vulnerable
situations WHO need to be protected. We stress the
importance of prioritizing the protection of women,
girls and boys.

Peru supports the immediate priorities identified in
the report, which involve initiatives aimed at promoting
peace, including firm action against armed groups, as
well as urgent coordination to address the humanitarian
crisis and a determined fight against impunity.

The meeting rose at 12.40pm.
