Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to start by
thanking Special Representative Lamberto Zannier for
his comprehensive briefing this morning. I also
welcome the presence of the very high-level Serbian
delegation, led by His Excellency President Tadic'. We
are also grateful to Foreign Minister Hyseni of Kosovo
for his statement.

Thirteen months have passed since the
declaration of independence by the Republic of
Kosovo. In our view, the situation in the region since
then has been calm and stable. We welcome the fact
that Kosovo has built its national institutions,
ministries and agencies under the Constitution. We
hope that Kosovo will continue to strengthen its
ownership and governance capabilities.

The security situation in Kosovo has been
generally stable, although sporadic incidents arising
from ethnic discord have been noted in certain areas.
We recognize that this success is largely due to the
support of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). In particular, it is important
that EULEX has begun its deployment and expanded
its presence successfully throughout Kosovo.

We also welcome the fact that KFOR is
continuing its operations to maintain security in
Kosovo. Japan highly values cooperation among the
United Nations, the European Union, Serbia and
Kosovo, including the adoption of the presidential
statement of 26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44).
We need to support Kosovo in the area of rule of law,
including police and customs. Such support is essential
to developing Kosovo as a multi-ethnic and democratic
State and to promoting its economic development.
Japan urges all parties in Kosovo, including the
Kosovo Serbs, to cooperate fully with EULEX. We
should consider carefully the future role and size of
UNMIK in the light of progress made in State-building
in Kosovo and the deployment of EULEX.
I should like to stress the importance of an early
commencement of dialogue on the six items. Only
through direct dialogue among the parties concerned
can mutual interests be ensured and equitable solutions
found to outstanding issues, such as the protection of
the human rights of minorities, the normalization of
trade and transportation with Kosovo's neighbours, and
economic development. All international actors on the
ground should support UNMIK-led dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. In that connection, we are
concerned about the decrease, as noted in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/149), in voluntary
returns of minorities and about Serbia's refusal to
allow products carrying a Kosovo "certificate of
origin" stamp to enter or transit through Serbia.

Public services should be provided to all
populations without discrimination. Inadequate
protection of human rights and limited economic
opportunities for minorities will hinder stable
development in Kosovo and neighbouring countries.
Kosovo is a test case for proving the validity of the
human security approach to providing every individual,
irrespective of religion or ethnicity, with freedom from
fear and from want. Japan has been active in
addressing various threats to people in Kosovo, and the
western Balkans as a whole, through the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security. We have
provided assistance totalling $200 million to Kosovo
for its humanitarian economic needs. All projects are
intended to enhance multi-ethnic coexistence,
reconciliation and sustainable development in the
region. Japan decided recently to extend an additional
$3 million for a multisectoral initiative for community
stabilization in northern Kosovo in order to expand
economic opportunity and human rights protection for
minority peoples there. Japan will continue to assist
Kosovo to achieve socio-economic stability through
bilateral and multilateral channels, taking into account
its specific needs.

The development of Kosovo's multi-ethnic and
democratic State will contribute to the stability of the
entire region. We have established diplomatic relations,
and it is our intention to continue to strengthen
cooperative relations with Kosovo, as well as long-
standing friendly relations with Serbia.

