Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me to begin with the pleasant
task of expressing the satisfaction of my delegation on
seeing the Security Council led in the month of July by
the representative of the People's Republic of China, a
country with which we have excellent relations
characterized by mutual esteem and trust.

Allow me as well to acknowledge the good work
of your predecessor, the representative of the People's
Republic of Bangladesh, and to congratulate him on the
expertise and skill with which he carried out his
important duties as President last month.

My delegation would also like to thank you, Sir,
for having convened this important meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which will help us to better
assess the peace process under way and to consider the
necessary measures to end the war of aggression that
my country has experienced for three years now.

This meeting allows me to acknowledge a friend,
Mr. Kamel Morjane, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to thank him sincerely for this
morning's briefing, which gave us a clear and precise
idea of the situation currently prevailing in the region
and gave us a better grasp of the problems that still
exist, as well as the difficulties and obstacles in the
peace process, which have to be overcome urgently.
The briefing also gave us a better understanding of the
great opportunities for peace that exist, which the
Security Council and all parties involved must exploit
so that all of the peoples of the Great Lakes region can
once again enjoy the peaceful coexistence they have
been deprived of for over a decade.

Mr. Morjane, your brother and friend,
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, asked me to convey his warmest brotherly
greetings, and to assure you that my Government will
have, at the right moment in Kinshasa, the opportunity
to express its gratitude and the gratitude of the
Congolese people as a whole for the excellent work
that you have carried out at the head of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), and for your total
dedication to the cause of peace and to the restoration
of dignity for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Our Minister for Foreign Affairs has just taken
part in the Arusha summit on Burundi, in order to
thank former President Nelson Mandela for the
important recent progress made in the Arusha process,
to make my country's contribution to the peace-
building efforts in our neighbouring country, and to
deliver an important message of peace and
reconciliation to the brotherly people of Burundi, who
are still suffering the consequences of upheaval in the
region. My Government wholeheartedly supports the
Arusha peace process and urges all the parties to the
Arusha peace accord to step up their efforts with a
view to restoring lasting peace in Burundi.

I would like to welcome the excellent working
relationship that has been established between my
Permanent Mission and MONUC over the last few
months. I would also like to pay tribute, Mr. Morjane,
to your inherent leadership and diplomatic qualities,
which are, I do not doubt for a single moment, the
basis of the climate of trust, mutual respect and active
cooperation that has been established between the
United Nations and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Now that your MONUC mandate is ending, I
hope that the Secretary-General will appoint a worthy
successor with a thorough knowledge of the region and
of the mentalities of the various parts of our country,
and who, above all, will be up to the level of the high
hopes for peace that you have raised.

Major-General Joseph Kabila, President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, has at the core of
his main concerns the return to peace and the urgent
need for the economic recovery and rebuilding of our
country. The President of the Republic has spared no
effort to achieve this worthy objective, increasing
peace initiatives and constantly encouraging or even
pushing the parties to harmoniously implement the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and leading them to
strictly respect all the Security Council resolutions on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As the members of the Security Council were
able to observe themselves, and as was well
emphasized by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the relations between my
Government and the United Nations have improved
remarkably, thus giving new impetus to the United
Nations Mission's action in the field.

Everywhere, throughout the country, United
Nations civilian and military personnel, as well as
associated personnel, are warmly welcomed by the
population, the main victim of a long war that it did not
cause. This reflects the deep hope and expectations of
the Congolese population Vis-a-Vis the United Nations
action in the Congo. This also clearly reveals the
appreciation of the Congolese population for the great
work done by United Nations personnel and associated
personnel in the utmost dedication and selflessness. I
would also like to thank, from the bottom of my heart,
all those countries that allowed their sons and
daughters to come to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to serve the just cause of peace.

We can affirm with certainty that the peace
process begun in Lusaka is on the right track overall.
There is a real opportunity for peace that must be
capitalized on. There are, unfortunately, a certain
number of obstacles. These obstacles or problems must
be identified and clinically analysed, in a spirit of
impartiality, in the framework of an overall approach to
the crisis in the Great Lakes region and in the greater
interest of a return to peace and the peaceful
coexistence of our States, in order to enable us to take
concrete measures to overcome them.

To do this, it is crucial that we establish relations
of trust between our States. The Security Council must
also consolidate and solidify the partnership that it has
patiently sealed with the signatories of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, as well as with the Political
Committee and the Joint Military Commission.

At the same time as the peace process develops, a
serious and thorough discussion must begin so that, at
the right time, we can all take the necessary measures
to restore this trust, which would certainly have the
effect of ensuring a return to normalcy in the Great
Lakes region and finally doing away with chaos and
despair.
In this regard, I strongly encourage the Security
Council, particularly the permanent members, to
constantly reassess its management of the Great Lakes
crisis so that it will be able in unity to continue to
exercise influence and to have a positive impact on the
overall peace process.

With respect to the inter-Congolese dialogue,
President Masire, the facilitator of the dialogue,
informed us of his decision to postpone the pre-
dialogue, planned for 16 July, to 20 August 2001. He
gave us the reasons for this postponement. We
understand them, and we have assured him of our total
cooperation so that this meeting can take place on the
new date, being aware of its importance for improving
the prospects for peace. The Council will most
certainly have noted the link that the facilitator
establishes between the dialogue and the foreign
forces, whose prior withdrawal would greatly help to
ensure that the inter-Congolese dialogue runs smoothly.

As for the question of the defence of human
rights, the Special Rapporteur, Mr. Garreton, is
currently conducting a visit at the invitation of my
Government. It would be useful for the Security
Council to look at the Special Rapporteur's reports in
order to put an end to impunity and so that war
criminals can be held accountable for their actions. We
also hope that the Special Rapporteur will be able to
provide us with useful information as to the
implementation of the different national programmes in
this area, particularly those concerning the
demobilization and the reintegration of child soldiers
and those relating to the protection of vulnerable
persons.

I would also like to inform members that
following the national conference on human rights, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, on 30 June 2001,
adopted a Congolese Charter of Human Rights and
Rights of Peoples, which contains many relevant
provisions, on such matters as the abolition of the
death penalty, democracy as a means of access to
power, the secular nature of the State or the equality of
citizens.

As for the plundering of the natural resources and
other forms of wealth of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, in violation of its national sovereignty, this
phenomenon is continuing at an unbridled pace. My
Government urges the Panel of Experts created in this
regard to continue its investigations and to complete its
work within the scheduled time in order to allow the
Council to take all the necessary measures to put an
end to all illegal activities in exploitation of resources
that belong, in the end, to the Congolese people and
that are simply fuelling the pursuit of the war of
aggression. To this end, my Government assures the
Council of its full cooperation with the Panel of
Experts.

As for disengagement, the Council, through its
resolution 1341 (2001), had demanded that the parties
fully implement the Kampala plan and the Harare sub-
plans for disengagement and redeployment of forces,
without reservation and within the time-frame of 14
days envisaged by the Harare Agreement, beginning 15
March 2001.

There are still some difficulties in the northern
part of the country. Indeed, despite the commitment
taken at the eleventh meeting of the Political
Committee, one of the parties still has not completed
its disengagement and redeployment to its new
defensive positions as defined by the Harare sub-plans,
and this in violation of Security Council resolutions
1341 (2001) and 1355 (2001). This intentional delay
does not allow the central Government to fully assume
its responsibilities, especially through the
implementation of a civil administration in the zones to
be evacuated within the disengagement line fixed by
the Harare sub-plans. This party affirms once again that
it is completely disengaged. If this is the case, I am
pleased. But, in any case, it cannot skirt its obligation
to let the United Nations observe the extent of its
disengagement, a task that MONUC should tackle as
soon as possible.

All the speakers this morning have emphasized
the necessary demilitarization of the city of Kisangani.
Indeed, Kisangani is still not demilitarized in
accordance with resolution 1304 (2000) of 6 June
2000. What is worse, some call for strengthening the
occupation of the city. Even worse are the threats of
secession and division of the country, which are made
in contempt of the principles of national sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, principles which
have often been reaffirmed by the Security Council.

It is crucially important that the city of
Kisangani, with its population that continues to suffer
enormously from the torments and aftermath of war,
stop being the symbol of the martyrdom of an entire
nation; rather it should now become the political and
physical symbol of revival and the return to dignity of
the entire Congolese people, the symbol of hope for a
better life for present and future generations of my
country.
This is very important since the population of
Kisangani has a fervent desire to see the occupying
forces leave. The non-demilitarization of the city might
simply strengthen the Congolese people's growing
feeling of humiliation. The history of the world shows
clearly that such a feeling brings with it the serious
threat of extremist uprisings. We must avoid this
together.

As for the withdrawal of foreign forces and
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation, or resettlement (DDRRR), all the leaders
of the region have been able to confirm their
willingness to withdraw from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in accordance with
the order established by resolution 1304 (2000).
Certain parties have turned their words into deeds, and
are indeed withdrawing some of their contingents.
Others show reluctance to do so. Others combine
withdrawal with rotation and redeployment, and
express their willingness to maintain troops in border
towns of the Democratic Republic of the Congo which
are - oddly enough - located in areas that are rich in
natural resources.

All of these withdrawal and deployment
movements must be monitored, which raises the
question of the need to increase the military personnel
of MONUC devoted to this task. My Government has
already put forward a figure of 20,000 peacekeepers
and hopes that this estimate will be taken into
consideration in the upcoming deliberations of the
Council on this question.

In its resolution 1341 (2001), the Council
requested the elaboration of a plan and a specific
timetable that would lead to the finalization of the full
and orderly withdrawal of foreign troops and of plans
for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement. This has not yet been done.
It would be advisable for the Council, through
MONUC, to help the parties draw up these plans, so
that the third phase of the deployment of MONUC, as
requested by all of the parties, could become a reality.

My Government is helping to finalize many
details of the withdrawal and disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement plans. In this specific context, my
Government would like to inform the Council that it
has set up cantonment sites that MONUC and
international observers should visit, if they have not yet
done so.
With respect to the security concerns raised by
certain parties and in particular by Rwanda, there is an
acute need for trust, which we must establish at all
costs. For us, the Congolese people, these security
concerns represent yet another pretext aimed at
maintaining the Rwandan occupation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Let us recall that from 1997 to 1998, my country
benefited from cooperation with Rwanda, in the form
of technical military assistance, with a View to helping
to reorganize the Congolese armed forces. Throughout
that entire period, no one ever mentioned any security
concerns, nor any relating to the former Rwandan
Army forces (ex-FAR) or Interahamwe activities.

Nor can my country forget that it took months for
Rwanda to recognize the extent of its intervention. It
then used as a justification the need to defend those
Congolese whose nationality was supposedly being
questioned and who were reportedly being persecuted
by the Congolese authorities.

The Congolese people recall that they followed
attentively the Council's debate on 7 February this
year. They heard each member of the Council make
comments and ask relevant and specific questions of
the President of Rwanda, namely concerning the
presence of forces of aggression on the Congolese
territory, the permeability of common borders and the
need to build a free, secure and democratic Rwandan
society based on human rights, equality and respect for
diversity. From our point of view, the answers were not
convincing.

Nevertheless, my Government is aware of the fact
that security concerns - whether genuine or not -
determine the attitude of the Rwandan authorities in
formulating their foreign policy, in particular in the
region.

My Government would like to recall that these
concerns stem fundamentally from justice denied -
justice denied for the thousands of Rwandans who were
the victims of genocide; justice denied for the
thousands of Rwandans who were the Victims of human
rights violations, crimes against humanity, massacres,
summary executions and serious violations of
international humanitarian law, even if those acts are
not explicitly covered by article II of the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, adopted by the General Assembly on 9
December 1948; and, finally, justice denied for those
millions of Congolese who perished as a result of the
war of aggression.

We would like to stress that it is imperative to
address the question of impunity and bring to justice
those responsible for the most serious crimes. On their
behalf, on behalf of all the Victims, we dare to call for
this justice.

With a View to tackling the question of the
settlement of the war of aggression, my Government
has taken the initiative of beginning direct contacts
with the leaders of aggressor countries. The Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, whose presence here today
we welcome, has also become personally involved,
inter alia by organizing a tripartite meeting in Lusaka
early this month. We would like to thank him most
sincerely for this initiative and to ask him to continue
along this path, as well as to explore other paths that
would allow for the successful and early conclusion of
the peace process.

In line with its continuing quest to establish and
build confidence, my Government would like to inform
the Council of the following facts. First, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has no hidden
agenda in Rwanda. Secondly, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo believes that all Rwandans who would
like to live in their own country have the right to do so
and should be authorized to return home. The others
should seek asylum elsewhere, as my country wishes to
remain from now on a transit country.

Thirdly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which bears no responsibility for the Rwandan
genocide of 1994, will not tolerate its territory being
used as a base for the launching of operations aimed at
destabilizing neighbouring countries with which it
wishes to be on good terms. Fourthly, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is convinced that any peace will
be fragile if the peoples of the Great Lakes region have
no guarantees of lasting security.

Fifthly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
believes that these security guarantees should not come
at the expense of its sovereignty nor interfere with its
territorial integrity. Sixthly, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo believes that a just and lasting solution is
within our reach. We must seek it and find it through a
frank and sincere dialogue, in a bilateral framework, of
course, but - better still - in the framework of an
international conference on peace, security, democracy
and development in the Great Lakes region.

The establishment and the strengthening of
relations of trust must be strengthened through a
greater credibility of the United Nations and its
Security Council. Failing this, the partnership that the
Council has patiently built with the parties linked to the
Lusaka Agreement might crumble altogether.

As proof of this, the results of the Council's
mission to the Great Lakes region - which we at home
call the Levitte mission - were greatly appreciated by
our people. The promises the Council made have been
kept. The reopening of the riverine network for
humanitarian aid and trade between Kinshasa and
Kisangani is now a reality. It has also given rise to
great interest on the part of the neighbouring countries
directly concerned, whose hope it is that the opening of
the waterway could extend to the tributaries of the
Congo River, including the Ubangi River.

This represents a fresh opportunity for MONUC
to explore, inter alia by broadening the membership of
the Congo River Basin Commission, which it oversees
along with the concerned parties, to all countries that
might be interested in taking part in it.

Similarly, the 40-odd small, quick-impact projects
that were identified by the Council mission are already
beginning to be implemented. These all are tangible
actions that prompt admiration of the United Nations
and give credibility to its actions. It is in order to
strengthen this credibility that my Government has
invited the Security Council to ensure that none of the
parties falters in its determination to successfully
implement the peace process.
My Government, therefore, has questioned the
Council on three specific points: first, the lack of
willingness of one of the parties to disengage fully in
the province of Equateur; secondly, the non-
demilitarization of Kisangani; and thirdly, the orderly
withdrawal of all foreign forces.

My Government believes that the Council must,
in order to preserve its credibility and prevent the
peace process from being called into question,
implement the measures it has proposed, so that the
reluctant parties that have not yet complied with the
relevant provisions of the Council's resolutions can be
induced to do so. It must also take measures as
authorized by the Charter of the United Nations,
mainly in Articles 39 to 42.

Only in this way can we hope to attain the
immediate objective of the return of a lasting peace to
my country and to the entire Great Lakes region.

However, we cannot overlook the fact that there
are other, equally massive challenges facing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We must restore
balances that no longer exist and rebuild, practically
from scratch, an effective State that is concerned with
the most basic rights of its citizens, and we must do so
on a sound and democratic basis. It must be a State that
is capable of ensuring lasting peace accompanied by
lasting development, for both the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the entire Great Lakes region. Lastly,
it must be a State that is imbued with the highest
objectives of humankind: peace, justice and prosperity.

