Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
should like to associate myself with the remarks to be
made later by Ambassador Matussek on behalf of the
European Union.

The United Kingdom would like to place on
record our gratitude to Slovakia, which currently holds
the Council presidency, for organizing this event. Our
position on the importance of resolutions 1540 (2004)
and 1673 (2006) is well documented, as is our support
for them. We consider them to be Vital pieces of the
international non-proliferation architecture.

It is crucial that we, as States Members of the
United Nations, put in place systems that reduce the
threat of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
in particular filling the gap posed by non-State actors.

The Council has considered the threat of
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to be a
threat to international peace and security since 1992.
That underpins our continuing concern at
developments in Iran and the failure of its Government
to meet the obligations set out most recently in
resolution 1737 (2006).

The obligations under resolutions 1540 (2004)
and 1673 (2006) are clear. But equally clear is the fact
that putting in place all the legislation and systems
necessary to protect ourselves against this threat will
not happen overnight. To do so, we need to work at all
levels: nationally, subregionally, regionally and
internationally. We need a coalition of all those who
are able to help.

Many areas of the work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) relate to the same
goals as those of resolution 1540 (2004). They
contribute to the global effort to put non-proliferation
systems in place. Safeguards agreements and the
ratification and implementation of additional protocols
are all concrete steps that are necessary in their own
right, but they also represent steps towards
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). I would put the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material in the same category, and I would encourage
all States to ratify the amendments to the Convention
as a matter of priority.

These areas of work are ones of great synergy
with the work of the Security Council and its
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), not least because international organizations,
such as those represented here today - whose
briefings we very much welcome - know their
members. They know their areas of technical expertise,
and they are able, in many cases, to provide technical
assistance in a way that the 1540 Committee cannot do.

A fine example of that sort of approach is the
successful work undertaken by the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), in the form
of its action plan on national implementation. In the
View of the United Kingdom, that plan has been
absolutely key in improving rates of implementation of
the Chemical Weapons Convention. Each element of
the OPCW's success in its field is a success for the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the contribution of the Director-General. The
United Kingdom stands ready, as ever, to continue to
support him.

I should also like to mention the biological-
weapons aspect of resolution 1540 (2004) and to state,
for the record, how pleased the United Kingdom was
with the outcome of the Sixth Review Conference of
the Parties to the Biological Weapons Convention, held
last December. We welcome in particular the creation
of an Implementation Support Unit in Geneva, which
will help States parties to the Biological Weapons
Convention to ensure that they implement their
obligations under the Convention. We believe that this
small team can become a focal point where States can
exchange best practices on implementation. And -
important in the context of today's meeting - we think
that team can function as a clearing house for States to
offer and to request assistance, bringing requests and
providers together, which is very important.

I would also like to welcome the World Customs
Organization (WCO) joining up the work of
policymakers with the customs officers - who are
engaged on the front line, often taking crucial
decisions on whether to stop a shipment or whether to
allow it. Invariably, it is those experts who know best
how to detect and who are most successful at doing it.
The United Kingdom wholly endorses the WCO
Framework of Standards to Secure and Facilitate
Global Trade, known as the SAFE Framework. A
secure supply chain is one from which goods will not
and cannot be diverted to non-State-actor use.

The United Kingdom has continued to support
implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006) through our own participation in international
forums. Promoting discussion between States that can
share experience and that have similar national
situations can be a very powerful instrument. Such
occasions, when set up with clear objectives and
focused follow-up, are an important opportunity to map
the way forward on implementation. The participation
of international organizations and the opportunity to
benefit from their expertise is also a real gain at such
events.

We found the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) workshop held in
November last year useful for exactly the reasons I
have tried to set out. As a result of that meeting, the
OSCE and its members made a strong commitment to
implementing the resolutions, among other things by
developing national action plans for that
implementation. Action plans can be a useful tool for
States as they consider the top few priorities for their
next steps on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and a useful tool enabling those in the
international community that can provide assistance to
see where priorities lie and where assistance needs are
greatest.

In conclusion, I would like to make clear that
nothing in today's debate is intended to divert or alter
the mandates of the international organizations
working in the non-proliferation field. The clear
message of today's meeting is that we share the goal of
protecting the international community from the
potentially catastrophic results of the proliferation of
WMDs, specifically the ultimate nightmare of bringing
together weapons of mass destruction and terrorists.
That is why we should work together to reinforce that
international effort and to make the best use of our
respective resources. Not to cooperate would be
wasteful and short-sighted. But to really put our hearts
into productive cooperation: now, that could make a
massive difference.

