Mr. Wali (Nigeria): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, on behalf of the Nigerian delegation for
your initiative in organizing this important debate. It
affords the Security Council an excellent opportunity
to address the global threat of illicit arms trafficking.
We look forward to a successful and fruitful conclusion
of the debate under your able guidance. My delegation
also wishes to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on small arms.

Illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons
constitutes a major impediment to peace, stability,
security and economic development in many
developing countries, especially in Africa. Over the
past decade alone, the use of illicit small arms and light
weapons has caused more than 20 million victims in
Africa, many of whom were civilians - women and
children. An estimated 2 million children have been
killed, 5 million people have been handicapped,
12 million have been left without shelter and as many
as 17 million have either been displaced or become
refugees. Indeed, in Africa, the ever-expanding illicit
trade in small arms is thriving at the expense of the
continent's youth. As a consequence, a whole
generation of African children is being inducted into a
culture of violence marked by injury and violent death.

The Government of Nigeria therefore welcomes
all of the efforts made by the international community
to tackle this problem. Let me re-emphasize the
importance of the early and full implementation of the
2001 United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All its Aspects. In doing so, I
wish to underline Nigeria's commitment to the
December 2000 Bamako Declaration on an African
Common Position on the Illicit Proliferation,
Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light
Weapons. It is noteworthy that the positions expressed
in the Declaration continue to be validated by events
unfolding around the world.

Nigeria views as a positive development the
conclusion, two weeks ago, of the second substantive
session of the Open-ended Working Group mandated to
negotiate an international instrument on tracing illicit
small arms and light weapons. It is our expectation that
the Group's final session in June will result in a firm
agreement on a legally binding instrument that will
address global concerns on that important matter. That
is the only way that the international community can
demonstrate a true commitment to this problem.
Indeed, we believe that such an outcome will have a
positive impact on the forthcoming Biennial Meeting
of States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, which is to take place in
July, as well as on the review conference on the
Programme of Action that is to be held next year.

One of the greatest difficulties in controlling the
illicit proliferation of small arms is their easy
accessibility to non-State actors. In appreciation of that
problem and of the need for concerted action, President
Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria has, in clear terms and
in various forums, including the General Assembly,
drawn attention to the need for global action to control
the trade in small arms and light weapons. We believe
that the failure of the international community to hold
arms manufacturers, their agents and brokers to
account has been largely responsible for the
uncontrolled illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in Africa, with its attendant consequences on
the continent. That situation should not be allowed to
continue.

Four months ago, in the First Committee of the
General Assembly, the Nigerian delegation called on
the international community to intensify efforts to
investigate and identify the link between the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and the illicit
exploitation of natural and other resources, particularly
those of affected countries in Africa. We are therefore
pleased to see that that was one of the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2005/69). However, we urge the Security
Council to ensure the full implementation of the
findings and recommendations of its panels of experts
and monitoring mechanisms that have so far
investigated such links.

Nigeria shares the view of the Secretary-General
that the failure of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes in many post-conflict
situations is due principally to the non-inclusion of
such programmes in ceasefire agreements and in the
mandates and budgets of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We therefore urge the Council to ensure a
secure funding basis from the assessed budget for
peacekeeping that would guarantee the return of ex-
combatants to their communities under planned
reintegration activities, as required by Security Council
resolutions. That should include specific measures for
the collection and disposal of illicit and surplus arms.

In addressing the threat posed by illicit small
arms trafficking, there is a need to enhance cooperation
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
on the one hand, and the Department for Disarmament
Affairs, on the other. We believe that strengthening the
role of the Coordinating Action on Small Arms
mechanism would lead towards that goal.

