Mr. Fernandes (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. We also thank
Ambassadors Sangqu, Wittig and Singh Puri for their
briefings and for their skilful leadership of the key
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.

In the past decade, the role played by the Security
Council in the fight against terrorism has grown and
quickly involved. To continue making progress, a
stronger dialogue with the wider United Nations
membership is indispensable. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) has gone a long way in assisting
Member States to overcome their shortfalls in
implementing the measures set out in resolution 1373
(2001). We encourage the Committee to continue to
develop mechanisms to facilitate technical assistance
to countries that request it. We also commend the
adoption of a regional approach. Attention to the
specificities of each region provides us with a clear
understanding of the challenges, and results in
recommendations that are suited to each country's
reality.

Brazil gladly notes that further progress has been
made in the work of the Sanctions Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), in particular with regard to due process
and the consideration of listing and de-listing requests.
The decision taken by the Council in June to strengthen
the role of the Ombudsperson reaffirmed our common
interest in pursuing working methods that are more in
tune with human rights considerations. We encourage
the Committee to continue to reach out and take into
account the views of other Member States, especially
those of the residence and nationality of listed
individuals and entities.

Turning to the issue of non-proliferation, we
commend the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), particularly in
implementing assistance, cooperation and outreach
efforts. Brazil also believes that the Committee should
work, as much as possible, in close cooperation with
other international organizations such as the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
in order to avoid duplication of effort.

We also welcome the standing cooperation
between the 1540 Committee and the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs. At the same time,
Brazil stresses that only a world free of weapons of
mass destruction will be able to completely eliminate
the threat of the proliferation and use of those weapons.
Commitments and efforts on non-proliferation have to be
met by the fulfilment of disarmament obligations.

Brazil is confident that the subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council will continue to foster cooperation
among Member States and help them to overcome

obstacles to the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The delegations of India,
Germany and South Africa can count on our full
support of that work.

