First of all, let me thank the Force Commanders for addressing us today and, through them, I would like to thank their troops for the work they are doing to help protect civilians and support stability in some of the toughest environments in the world. I wish to join my colleagues in paying tribute to the 25 peacekeepers who made the ultimate sacrifice in the field this year, including those in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) who recently lost their lives as a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). COVID-19, of course, has posed a range of additional challenges in every mission setting. I very much welcomed the comments in the briefings on how the missions are rising to meet these new challenges and how we as individual Member States, the Security Council and the Secretariat can best support the missions. The crucial challenge is how to continue supporting the safety and security of our peacekeepers while ensuring that they can complete their important work in fulfilling their mandates, both to protect civilians and provide stability in conflict- torn environments. We cannot afford to let up on either imperative. While we address these pressing challenges, we must not lose sight of the longer-term commitments we have all made as part of the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which seeks to reform peacekeeping to make it fit for the twenty-first century. The initiative can continue to provide a solid basis for ensuring our United Nations peacekeeping missions can and do fulfil all that we ask them to, even now, in these challenging circumstances. First, a central priority when it comes to reform must be enhancing planning and improving the collection and use of data across the board, in order to support evidence-based decision-making, both at Headquarters and in all mission settings. This will help improve the analysis and recommendations provided to the Member States. Connected with that is the issue of performance and the provision of better data on both outstanding performance and underperformance. We look forward to the promised roll-out of the new United Nations integrated performance policy framework later this year to address the performance of uniformed and civilian peacekeepers and overall mission performance, as well as to enhance transparency and accountability. In addition, we note, particularly in this twentieth anniversary year of resolution 1325 (2000), that we should also continue pursuing measures to increase the numbers of uniformed women peacekeepers deployed and ensure their full effective, meaningful participation at every level. As the Council heard recently in our annual debate on the protection of civilians (see S/2020/465), civilians continue to bear the brunt of conflict worldwide. We must therefore keep strengthening our delivery on protection-of-civilians mandates, which should include full implementation of the peacekeeping-intelligence policy and the revised Department of Peace Operations protection-of-civilians policy. We should also continue to implement the latest iteration of the action plan on the safety and security of peacekeepers. Finally, we should keep working to smoothen the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in such settings as the Sudan, increase our support for the Peacebuilding Fund and ensure a joined-up approach across the United Nations system, donors and other stakeholders. Like others, I have a few questions. The first, which I think is relevant to all missions, but I address it now to the Force Commander of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), is the following. We naturally want to ensure that everything possible is done to guarantee the safety and security of all peacekeepers in the field, particularly with respect to illness and injury, but we are concerned about the impact COVID-19 is having on medical evacuation pathways. Does the Force Commander have confidence that the clinical pathways in place provide an adequate level of assurance? And if not, what can any of us do to help unblock issues and provide support? Secondly, we have noted the impact of COVID-19 on rotations with potential consequences on mission effectiveness and welfare. Bearing in mind that, in several mission environments, the virus may reach a peak in the coming months, what are the Force Commanders' expectations for the period following the 30 June, when the freeze on rotations is due to be lifted? What are the implications for mandate delivery in the second half of the year? Thirdly, this is another question for the UNMISS Force Commander, but it is also relevant for all. We have continuing concerns about sexual and gender-based violence in several missions' areas of operations, including, for instance, the recent violence reported in South Sudan. I know my Indonesian colleague asked about this, but I was wondering if the Force Commander could comment on how situational awareness and intelligence can be used in the field, both to prevent and deter sexual and gender-based violence and to respond to emergencies. Finally, I have yet another question for the UNMISS Force Commander. I would just like to hear his assessment of the impact the COVID-19 is likely to have on rates of voluntary departures of civilians from protection-of-civilians sites and whether he expects COVID-19 to have a significant impact on how the force divides its resources between static and mobile protection tasks. Let me just say that the United Kingdom is very much looking forward to the deployment of our 250-strong long-range reconnaissance forces, with a view to working under MINUSMA command late this year.
