Mr. Kombo Yaya (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): The delegation of the Central
African Republic which I am leading is pleased to see
the Security Council, under the presidency of Burkina
Faso, consider the Secretary-General's report on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) (S/2008/601). My
delegation would like to thank you, Sir, and Council
members for having been kind enough to give us this
opportunity to take the floor on a subject of such
concern for our country, namely, the presence of the
European Union-led military force in Chad and the
Central African Republic (EUFOR) in the north-eastern
part of our country.

Mr. Victor da Silva Angelo, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
MINURCAT, has just given us an excellent briefing
replete with facts that should guide the Council in its
deliberations. The vision of a stable and secure area
does credit to the Mission. MINURCAT has potential
that, if used well in eastern Chad and the north-eastern
Central African Republic, could lead to peace and
stability there.

My delegation gladly accepts the report of the
Secretary-General before us today and endorses the
recommendations that figure in it. Among those, the
analysis of data, the relationships among protagonists,
the difficult geographical conditions for workers on the
ground, the doctrine founded on the presence of
outside forces, the transitional period between the end
of the EUFOR mandate and the takeover by a
strengthened MINURCAT are issues that characterize
and require serious consideration of what is happening
on the ground. The report indicates, among other
things, that, with respect to the Central African
Republic, the Security Council should take a stand on
the recommendations to be made by the Secretariat on
the consequences of a post-EUFOR presence. In that
respect, I would like to make a few comments.

As the Council knows, the Central African
Republic is emerging from a recurring conflict that has
lasted for more than a decade. It is coming back slowly
but surely thanks to the international community. As a
result, we are now in a post-conflict period. Since last
12 June, the Central African Republic was added to the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission, which was
extremely encouraging for us. The number of hotbeds
of tension has considerably decreased and significant
progress in dialogue and in reconciliation has been
made. Public finances have been straightened out
security sector reform is in the process of being
developed, and a post-conflict programme has been
initiated. The State has set its main priorities with
regard to security sector reform, good governance, the
rule of law, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants, and projected
development plans.
Our achievements, such as the calm in north-
eastern Central African Republic, thanks to the
presence of EUFOR, must be preserved and
consolidated. Moreover, a country is rebuilt in stages,
especially when its administrative structures have been
in decline for so long.

Given the fragility of our country in terms of
security and humanitarian, economic and social affairs,
and the fact that the security sector is only in the early
stages of reform, I would reiterate, on behalf of my
Government, our hope for an ongoing presence of a
military contingent under the banner of the United
Nations in the north-eastern part of the country, as
President Bozize said when the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations visited the region
on 1 and 2 September. Such a presence is also desired
by humanitarian agencies. Accordingly, the Under-
Secretary-General also wants humanitarian actors to be
protected, with the result that a military contingent's
presence remains necessary.

I would ask the Security Council therefore to
support recommendations on maintaining a military
presence in north-eastern Central African Republic.
The return to calm, which we sought with all our heart,
should not lessen our vigilance with respect to an
unwanted spillover of conflict from elsewhere. We
must also maintain a stable and safe environment for
all United Nations personnel working in the region. To
that end, a military presence is vital.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic for all its tireless efforts to
support the Government in the reconciliation and
recovery process in my country.

