The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Burkina Faso.

I thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing.

My delegation regrets that, in spite of the
significant efforts of the entire international
community, peace has not yet returned to Darfur.
Civilians, humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel,
refugees and displaced persons continue to face daily
violence. Since 1 June 2005, the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICC has initiated three major cases
related to the conflict in Darfur. Burkina Faso reaffirms
its confidence in an independent international system
of criminal justice and acknowledges that the ICC
prosecutions were initiated pursuant to Council
resolution 1593 (2005).

Yet, like many other members of the international
community which belong to the African Union, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement, my
country is concerned by the impact of the arrest
warrant issued against President Al-Bashir. Indeed,
although it is true that combating impunity is a vital
element in the restoration of lasting peace to Darfur
and to the Sudan in general, it is also true that, in the
absence of a consensus political solution, attaining the
objective ofjustice cannot alone bring peace in such a
complex conflict. Hence, it is crucial to take advantage
of opportunities to bring about political normalization
and thus to make decisive strides towards peace, which
is a common objective of Security Council resolutions
and the relevant decisions of African Union bodies.

We therefore continue to believe that the issuance
of that arrest warrant can only further complicate the
peace process and the efforts of the Security Council
and the African Union. As we have always stressed,
that position implies no value judgement on the
substance of the issue; it is an firm invitation to give
both justice and the political process a chance. We
continue to believe that peace can return to Darfur,
especially in the light of the 30 November briefing by
the Joint African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator
for Darfur (see S/PV.6227), whom we fully support, on
the next stages of the political negotiations, and in the
light of the important report of the African Union
High-Level Panel on Darfur, chaired by President
Thabo Mbeki (S/2009/599, annex I). We shall have an
opportunity to consider that report later this month. We
also welcome the positive cooperation between those
two entities and between them and the ICC Prosecutor.

Finally, we appeal once again to the parties to
strictly respect the lives of civilians and humanitarian
20
and peacekeeping personnel and to provide unimpeded
humanitarian access to all populations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.
09-6333]
