Mr. Manz (Austria): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia -
and the Associated country Cyprus, as well as the
countries of the European Free Trade Association
members of the European Economic Area -
Liechtenstein and Norway - align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union warmly welcomes the decision
of the Security Council to establish the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL). We fully
agree that, through the deployment of military observers,
civilian police staff and human rights officers, much-
needed impetus can be lent to the vital but still fragile
peace and reconciliation process in Sierra Leone. This
process deserves the full support of the international
community.

The European Union welcomes the significant
actions taken by the Government of Sierra Leone towards
stabilization in the country. Following its restoration on
10 March 1998, the Government has moved swiftly in
order to re-establish an effective administration and the
democratic process. The European Union congratulates
President Kabbah on the nomination of acknowledged
experts in the relevant fields to his Cabinet and the
nomination of the Chief Justice, all of whom have been
confirmed by the Parliament.

The Government of Sierra Leone has also embarked
on the central task of national reconciliation,
reconstruction and rehabilitation. We strongly encourage
the Government of Sierra Leone to keep to its resolve to
adhere to international human rights standards and to
ensure that those accused of the gravest crimes against the
State and the people of Sierra Leone receive fair trials.

The European Union welcomes the recent
announcement of the Government of Sierra Leone that it
would grant amnesty to all child soldiers. In this context,
we note the important efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in
Armed Conflict to make Sierra Leone one of the pilot
projects in order to respond in a more vigorous and
concerted fashion to the needs of children in the context
of post-conflict peace-building. On the occasion of his
recent Visit to Sierra Leone, Special Representative Olara
Otunnu identified five areas which require urgent action:
the demobilization and reintegration of child combatants;

 

the resettlement of internally displaced persons; the tracing
of families of unaccompanied children; the rehabilitation
and support of victims without limbs; and the provision and
rehabilitation of medical and educational services. These
needs call for an immediate response by the international
community.

The European Union welcomes the efforts of the
Government of Sierra Leone to establish a National
Commission for Reconstruction, Resettlement and
Rehabilitation and we note that a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan - agreed with the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the
United Nations Development Programme and other donors,
and assisted by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) - has
already been adopted. In this context, the European Union
would like to commend the important role that ECOWAS
has continued to play towards the peaceful resolution of the
crisis. We encourage ECOMOG to proceed in its important
efforts to foster peace and stability in Sierra Leone and to
closely cooperate with UNOMSIL.

It is the European Union's View that successful
national reconstruction and rehabilitation have to be
accompanied by regional cooperation. The European Union
welcomes the efforts of regional leaders to promote mutual
cooperation in the subregion and, particularly, relations
between Liberia and Sierra Leone.

In spite of promising developments in the country, the
European Union remains deeply concerned about the
continued presence of remnants of the ousted junta and
members of the Revolutionary United Front in the eastern
part as well as in some areas in the north of Sierra Leone.
The European Union condemns the continued resistance of
these elements against the legitimate Government of Sierra
Leone and joins the Secretary-General in calling on them to
lay down theirs arms and to surrender immediately. The
European Union strongly condemns the mutilations, rapes,
looting and all the other atrocities carried out by the rebels.
The European Union calls for an immediate end to all
Violence against the civilian population of Sierra Leone.
Any military support being provided to the rebels has to
cease. In this context, the European Union stresses the
importance that the provisions of resolutions 1132 (1997)
and 1171 (1998) be strictly observed and that any action be
avoided that might destabilize the situation in Sierra Leone.

The European Union commends the courageous efforts
of the United Nations and other international humanitarian
personnel who are active in Sierra Leone. We remain
concerned for their safety and call on all parties
concerned to facilitate the work of the humanitarian
agencies.

During the recent crisis in Sierra Leone, the
European Union, as a principal donor, continued to
provide humanitarian assistance through non-
governmental organizations and international agencies.
Additional aid is given in the form of an emergency
agricultural recovery programme to enable farmers to
resume food production activities as soon as possible. The
European Union is also providing assistance to Sierra
Leone refugees in Guinea, aimed at facilitating the return
and reintegration of the refugees as soon as is practically
possible.

With the reinstatement of a democratic civilian
Government in March 1998, the European Union is
preparing to resume programmes suspended last year after
the coup d 'e'tat. Of immediate priority are projects related
to institutional support and rehabilitation of the country.
Special attention will be given to the reintegration of
demobilized soldiers and the demobilization of child
combatants, building upon the experience gained in other
cases.

The European Union would wish to express its deep
appreciation to the Secretary-General and to his Special
Envoy, Mr. Francis Okelo, for their tireless efforts aimed
at restoring peace and security in Sierra Leone. In this
context, the European Union welcomes the intention of
the Secretary-General to convene a special conference on
30 July 1998 in New York in order to mobilize
international assistance for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, and for the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of Sierra Leone. The
European Union will participate actively in that
conference.

