Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I would like to begin by
thanking the Dominican Republic for hosting today's
debate on this important and urgent topic, and extend
Ireland's congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
presidency of the Security Council. The voices of small
island developing States (SIDS) must be heard and
heeded in this Chamber.

Climate change is real. Its impact is global, and our
security is at risk. The denial of climate change needs
to end. The denial of the link between climate change
and the mandate of the Council also needs to end.

It is crystal clear that the international community
has struggled to coherently respond to the challenge of
climate change. While the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change are important steps, the glaring reality is
that climate-related disasters are a major threat and
will continue to occur, and the Security Council
must respond to their impacts. We know that existing
fragilities are exacerbated by climate-related disasters,
which can erode food and water security, increase
gender inequality and damage livelihoods. A growing
body of research has demonstrated the links among
climate change, conflict and displacement. Put simply,
climate change is a threat multiplier.

While the impact of climate-related disasters on
international peace and security varies across regions
and States, a global response is the only way we can
address the threat. We believe that climate and security
concerns should be considered across all country-
specific situations on the Security Council's agenda.
We want to see United Nations operations across the
peace and development nexus assessing the risks of
climate change.

We must work to identify best practices in
addressing the threat of climate to security. Success
factors can be replicated, and we must find a way to
do that, through, for example, the Security Council
finding ways to move from discussing the risks of
climate change to action. That includes working more
systematically with regional and subregional bodies to
help us better understand the challenges we face and
how to address them.

The global community should also generate
evidence-based analysis upon which to draw, in order
to better understand the links between climate and
security. That must be complemented by hearing
the testimonies of those most affected, if we are
to understand the complexity of the linkages, how
they vary across contexts and how to negate risks. A
human rights-based approach to climate policy and
the international response is important. The voices of
vulnerable small island developing States need to be
heard here, and we favour the consideration of better
representation of SIDS around this table.

The recognition of women as a resource that can
bring about transformative change is also important.
Women are those who are most directly affected by
climate change, but are also uniquely placed to generate
and lead solutions. Today we also heard eloquently
about the role of young people. Let us listen more to
those who are rarely invited to this table.

Finally, but important, the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General on climate
and security is another concrete step that we can
take to advance our work in this area. The future of
this planet and all of our futures rely on stepping up
to face the reality and the threat multiplier that we see
every day in climate change. Our peace, equality and
development depend upon it. But we will have neither
peace nor security if we fail to address the impacts of
climate-related disasters in our world.

You can rely on Ireland, Mr. President, as a
prospective non-permanent Security Council member
for the term 2021-2022, to work hard and be ambitious
for this agenda.

