Mr. Patterson (Jamaica): The United Nations is
today facing its most crucial test, that of fulfilling its
essential role in a brand new world. To fulfil its charge
to maintain international peace and security, this
Council must impact on the lives of people, changing
their despair to hope and liberating them from conflict.

The global landscape is littered with gloom,
instability and devastation occasioned by the increasing
number of unresolved conflicts, but the Security
Council has made significant strides in maintaining
stability in some areas of conflict while defusing
hostilities in others. The impact of United Nations
missions has been felt on almost every continent of the
world.

And yet, the flagrant violations of international
norms and of the rights of individuals continue
unabated in many places. The alarming increase in the
number of refugees and internally displaced persons,
and the inadequately financed operations of the
Organization in response to these threats, demand our
serious and immediate attention. Nowhere is this more
of an imperative than in Africa. Poverty and social
injustice constitute the greatest threat to global peace
and international security, and perhaps nowhere more
evidently so than in Africa.

There is now, consequently, a greater burden on
the Security Council to prove itself capable of
protecting the most vulnerable. We have to stem the
rising tide of refugees and internally displaced persons.
In so doing, we will spend less on humanitarian
assistance and more on development.

Breaches of international humanitarian and
human rights laws must not go unchallenged. The
resource needs of the United Nations must be adequate
to demonstrate the necessary political will for taking
action as and when required. Rightful concerns over
sovereignty cannot allow us to turn a blind eye to the
forces of evil, but the speed and yardstick for collective
action cannot be determined purely by strategic
geopolitical considerations.

Measures taken by the Security Council to effect
behavioural changes among those who perpetuate
conflict situations must be enforced. Such measures
must be targeted and achievable. When applied, they
must be time-bound, clear and concise. Conflict
prevention is of paramount importance in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In July, the Security Council, under Jamaica' s
presidency, reaffirmed that the United Nations system
must manage a comprehensive and coordinated
strategy to address the root causes of conflict. We
recognized the capacity given by the Charter to the
Secretary-General for a range of action in conflict
prevention. I commend him for his efforts in the face of
uncertain mandates and limited resources.

Long-term sustainable peace within the context of
conflict resolution requires that peace-building
mandates create mechanisms which foster confidence-
building between the parties and create an environment
conducive to social, economic and political
development.

Regional institutions such as the Organization of
African Unity, and some regional institutions working
in tandem with the Security Council, are essential to
this united effort for lasting peace and allow people to
develop their full potential for participating in
sustainable socio-economic advancement.

It may sound like heresy in this hallowed and
privileged Chamber, but we cannot conceive of an
effectively pursued peace and security mandate in the
absence of reform of the Security Council itself. The
Council must have the benefit of the credibility and
legitimacy derived from its Charter-given authority, the
transparency of its decision-making process and a truly
representative membership.

The existence of a veto power is anachronistic
and undemocratic.

By failing to take note of changes in the relative
standing of States in the past half century and the
expansion of United Nations membership, the Security
Council has allowed its representative character to be
diminished and its democratic legitimacy to suffer. The
Council must become more representative of the world
as it is today.

It is high time to move forward with the reform
process. Let us build now on areas of agreement and
work with determination towards early adoption of
those measures which are essential to the effective
performance of the Council's mandate in this new
millennium. By so doing, we can ensure an even more
effective role for the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

