Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): My delegation joins with
all those who have spoken before me to pay you a tribute,
Mr. President, for the magnificent and most efficient
manner in which you have handled the Council's business
throughout the month of September. I should also like to
congratulate your predecessor, the Ambassador of
Namibia, for his impressive performance in conducting
the Council's affairs in the month of August.

I should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed statement to the Council yesterday. In his
briefing, he was candid and frank about the challenges
that lie ahead in the common struggle to improve human
conditions in Africa. In this, among other things, he
struck a note of hope for the future, if only all of us, and
in particular this Council, are prepared to play our part by
living up to our commitments and obligations.

Conflict in Africa has had devastating consequences
on the lives of the African people. From Angola to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, from Somalia to
southern Sudan and from Sierra Leone to Ethiopia and
Eritrea, the story of great human suffering is the same.
Conflict has orphaned children. Other children have
become child soldiers. Economic and social
infrastructures have been disrupted by war. Hundreds of
thousands have been displaced within their countries'
borders. Millions more are living as refugees in
neighboring countries or are scattered elsewhere on the

 

continent. This situation has had a negative impact on the
economic and social fabric of host countries.

As several speakers in this debate have pointed out,
however, there is a growing realization that Africans
themselves should find solutions to these African problems.
Through the efforts of our regional organization, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), teething problems are
beginning to be amenable to solution. Sierra Leone is one
such case. Another is the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Here, the leaders of the SADC and the Central
African regions, in cooperation with the OAU and the
United Nations, have laid the foundations on which peace
can be established in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. These efforts, however, cannot succeed without the
Security Council assuming its responsibilities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In his recent briefing
for Security Council members on 21 September 1999,
President Frederick Chiluba of Zambia, in his capacity as
the SADC mediator on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, left on the Security Council table proposals that
point the way forward in the search for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The institutions created
under the Ceasefire Agreement are already in place, and a
vacuum should not be allowed to develop and be filled by
men of violence. The Security Council needs to act speedily
and send to the Democratic Republic of the Congo a
peacekeeping force with an appropriate mandate and of an
appropriate size, based on assessed needs on the ground.
The presence of peacekeepers will have a positive effect on
many other aspects of the peace process, including building
confidence among the population, thereby making the
organization of a national political dialogue much easier.

It is my delegation's fervent hope and expectation that
the Security Council will move quickly to take advantage
of the Ceasefire Agreement, an Agreement that has been
wholeheartedly supported by all the members of this body.
Collective support for the Agreement should be extended to
practical support for enforcement measures to bring peace
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo quickly and
without further bloodshed. We count on the support of the
Security Council and the international community at large,
just as we counted on them during the painstaking
negotiations that led to the Ceasefire Agreement.

While efforts at finding solutions and preventing
conflicts in Africa are gathering pace, the widespread
availability of small arms continues to cause great concern.
Conflicts in Africa are being exacerbated by the ruthless
drive for fat profits on the part of international arms
merchants. These greedy sharks must be stopped by
timely international action. The uncontrolled sale of small
arms has also contributed to undermining sanctions
regimes wherever they have been put in place. A case in
point is Angola. The loopholes in the sanctions regime
against UNITA should be closed in order to cut the
supply of arms to Savimbi's rebel movement and thereby
diminish his capacity to wage war against his own people.
In this regard, my delegation offers a special
commendation to Ambassador Robert Fowler, Chairman
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in
Angola, for the excellent work the Committee is doing in
that area.

We support stronger collaboration among African
regional and subregional mechanisms for conflict
management, resolution and prevention. In that
connection, the Security Council should work assiduously
to strengthen support for regional and subregional
initiatives as well as to enhance coordination with those
mechanisms in the areas of conflict prevention and the
maintenance of peace and security in Africa and indeed
the world over.

Africa has also taken deliberate steps to enhance
democracy and good governance as well as respect for
human rights, as part of a process of striving to achieve
durable peace and sustainable development. Africa has
determined that the only legitimate road to political power
is through the ballot box. In this regard, and as many
previous speakers have noted, African heads of State or
Government, at their meeting in Algiers in July, took a
fundamental decision, namely that they would in future
deny recognition to leaders who assume political power
through extra-constitutional means such as military coups.
However, as we all know, democratic values and
institutions do not thrive in conditions of widespread
poverty, conflict and deprivation. The international
community should assist Africa in all these areas in order
to guarantee peace and development in the continent.

