Mr. Gatkuoth: I am grateful for the opportunity
to address the Security Council and to present the
views of the Government of Southern Sudan. I wish to
convey to the Council the greetings of the Minister for
Regional Cooperation, His Excellency Deng Alor
6
Kuol, and to pass on his regret at being unable to make
the journey to New York to attend this meeting, given
recent events on the ground.

On behalf of the Government and people of
Southern Sudan, I wish to express to the Council my
appreciation for its focus on and attention to events in
the Sudan, and for its efforts to support full and final
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). In that connection, we greatly
appreciate the Council's visit to the Sudan and
Southern Sudan in the past week. We would also like to
express our sincere appreciation for the work of His
Excellency the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and his Special Representative, Mr. Haile Menkerios,
in support of the CPA process. And we are grateful for
the continued support of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel under the able leadership of
President Thabo Mbeki,

The Government of Southern Sudan welcomes
the Security Council's recent extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS).
My Government confirms its request for a continued
United Nations presence in Southern Sudan following
our declaration of independence on 9 July 2011. In that
regard, we welcome the recent special report of the
Secretary-General on Sudan (S/2011/3l4*), as well as
the work that has so far been done by the United
Nations to plan for the establishment of a new mission
to succeed UNMIS in Southern Sudan.

It is impossible to consider the question of the
structure of the United Nations presence in Southern
Sudan after independence without looking at the
context in which the new State will be born, including
regional dynamics. The internal issues in Southern
Sudan referred to by the Secretary-General cannot be
analysed or addressed separately from the state of
North-South relations. As the Secretary-General noted,
that relationship remains the overarching factor
impacting peace and stability on both sides of the
border.

My Government concurs with the
Secretary-General that many of the security issues that
affect South Sudan are directly related to the bilateral
security issues between North and South. Our goal is to
see peaceful coexistence between the two neighbouring
States of South Sudan and the Sudan. Recent events
have demonstrated how great a challenge this will be,
11-35810
and that continued third-party support will be critical if
it is to be achieved.

With that in mind, the overriding priority for the
Government of Southern Sudan is to ensure ongoing
support by the United Nations for North-South security
arrangements, especially at the border. We welcome the
progress made by the parties in Addis Ababa yesterday,
establishing an agreed security framework governing
the North-South relationship after 9 July.

Yet as the Secretary-General himself noted in his
report, implementation of the security agreements
during the interim period has proved challenging, and
any future agreements will thus require external
support. We believe that the United Nations is best
placed to provide such support and that the United
Nations must have freedom of movement and the
ability to monitor both sides of the border. This is a
requirement of the CPA and is also in the interests of
both parties.

In that context, we note and welcome the offer
made to the parties by the Government of Ethiopia.
The Government of Southern Sudan has accepted the
offer, and we encourage the Government of the Sudan
to do the same.

We suggest that the main objective of the United
Nations should be to avoid a security vacuum after
9 July. Should UNMIS have to be drawn down on that
date without an agreed mechanism mandated to
monitor and observe the situation at the border, the
international community would be left unable to
respond effectively to threats to international peace and
security in those border areas. The United Nations may
need to plan for the possibility that peacekeepers might
have to be deployed only on the southern side of the
future border.

The Secretary-General's current proposal for a
mandate for a military force in South Sudan after
9 July would only address issues within the borders of
the new State, with a focus on helping the Government
to extend the rule of law and protect civilians.
Monitoring the border would require more troops than
the 7,000 recommended by the Secretary-General and
would have a different focus from that suggested in the
report. The United Nations must do what is necessary
to promote the security of both States, and the United
Nations mission, or another agreed mechanism, will
require appropriate military resources.
11-35810

The role of the United Nations in border security
is paramount, given the situation in Abyei, about which
the Government of Southern Sudan is extremely
concerned. The recent occupation of Abyei by the
Sudanese Armed Forces is a serious violation of the
CPA. Khartoum's actions over the past week represent
a grave escalation that risks provoking a resumption of
armed conflict between the two parties. The Security
Council must intervene swiftly and decisively. We call
on the Security Council once again to condemn
unreservedly this move by Khartoum to take Abyei by
force, and to demand that the Sudanese Armed Forces
withdraw from Abyei immediately and unconditionally.
UNMIS and the humanitarian agencies must be
allowed full access to the area, consistent with
Khartoum's international obligations.

The Government of Southern Sudan regrets the
shooting incident that led to an exchange of fire
between the two sides on 19 May, threatening a United
Nations convoy in the Abyei area, and deplores the loss
of life that resulted. We support the call by UNMIS for
a joint investigation into those events, and we will
cooperate fully in the process. Those responsible must
be brought to justice, including by criminal
prosecution. But that unfortunate event is not
connected with, nor does it in any way justify, the
excessive use of force by Khartoum in seeking to
occupy Abyei and to prejudice full and final
implementation of the CPA. Khartoum's irresponsible
actions have put all progress under the CPA in serious
jeopardy, and they threaten to unravel six years of hard
work at the most decisive moment.

This invasion has also had serious humanitarian
consequences. The full impact of the violence in
Abyei - including civilian casualties and the number
and whereabouts of persons displaced - is not yet
known. We regret that the United Nations
peacekeeping forces, which have a robust mandate to
protect civilians in imminent danger, reportedly
remained inside their compound during the military
attacks by the Sudanese Armed Forces. The Sudanese
Armed Forces and their proxies have now torched
Abyei town and have facilitated the influx of nomadic
Arab Misseriya people into the area.

Thousands of civilians have fled the area. This
attempt to alter Abyei's demography by force should be
condemned by the Council in the strongest terms. By
burning Abyei and forcing the civilian population out,
the National Congress Party (NCP) has in effect sought

to repudiate its obligations under the Abyei Protocol of
the CPA and has made it very difficult to hold the
required referendum in the short term. We call on the
NCP to reopen the border so that the people who have
been displaced from their homes can return, and to
allow humanitarian organizations to deliver the
assistance required.

We also reject and condemn in the strongest
terms the issuing of decrees by President Al-Bashir
attempting to dissolve the Abyei Administrative
Council and dismiss the Council's staff. The Abyei
administration must be reinstated immediately and the
special administrative arrangements for Abyei must
remain in place until a mutually acceptable solution is
found.

Until such a solution is found, Abyei belongs
neither wholly to the North nor to the South. We
therefore reject the National Congress Party (NCP)
claims that Abyei is part of the North. The parties'
obligations with respect to Abyei were very clearly
spelled out in the CPA, including in the Abyei
Protocol. This required the holding of a referendum to
determine whether Abyei should remain in the North or
return to the South, from where it was transferred for
administrative reasons in 1905. We believe in the
internationally accepted principle that the transfer of
administration does not entail the transfer of territory.

The implementation of the terms of the Abyei
Protocol and the holding of the referendum were
delayed by Khartoum, which has been allowed over
time to shirk its legal obligations with respect to Abyei.
In an attempt to find a peaceful solution, the
Government of Southern Sudan accepted referral to
binding arbitration. The 2009 award of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration (PCA), setting out the boundaries
of Abyei, is binding upon the parties and must be
implemented.

The Government of Southern Sudan remains
committed to the negotiation process led by the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel and to
reaching a political agreement that is consistent with
the terms of the PCA award, as the Security Council
itself has recently called for. This means that the
integrity of Abyei's borders as defined by the PCA
must be respected as the foundation of any solution.
The negotiation process must be supported and
accelerated. The Council must understand and
acknowledge, however, that Khartoum has a history of
making agreements over Abyei and then later failing to
honour them. We appeal to Council members to use
their good offices to urge the NCP to reach a definitive
and binding agreement, and to work with the
Government of Southern Sudan to finalize the
implementation of the CPA.

We also reject unequivocally any suggestion by
Khartoum that the CPA has been fully implemented.
The CPA is a legal agreement binding on the parties,
and crucial obligations remain to be fulfilled, for
example relating to Abyei, Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile. The North cannot unilaterally withdraw
from these outstanding obligations. Further, the parties
agreed in the CPA to a United Nations mission to
monitor the Agreement's implementation, and the
North cannot withdraw its consent for this United
Nations mission before the CPA obligations are
fulfilled and no longer relevant.

We note that, in accordance with the provisions
of the CPA, an independent State in Southern Sudan
will become a reality on 9 July. The Government of
Southern Sudan welcomes the Secretary-General's
proposals for United Nations support to the new State
to meet political, security and protection challenges in
a way that will build its authority and create an
enabling environment for State-building and socio-
economic development. We believe that the United
Nations should move forward with the establishment of
a peace consolidation mission in South Sudan as of
9Ju1y. If there is no agreement between the CPA
parties on a continued international presence in the
border areas, the mandate of that mission may need to
include a border-monitoring component in the South.

We welcome the Secretary-General's intention to
establish an advance team composed of a senior
management group with the required specialized
expertise to set up the core capabilities of the new
mission, and encourage the advance team to start its
work immediately. The Government of Southern Sudan
looks forward to consultations with the United Nations
on the appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and of other senior United Nations
officials to the new mission.

We note that the protection of civilians is first
and foremost the sovereign responsibility of the
Government, as the Secretary-General notes in his
report. The Government of Southern Sudan accepts
fully its responsibility for the protection of civilians in

South Sudan. We also agree with the recommendation
that external support to the Government to build its
capacity to protect civilians should be primarily a
civilian activity. The Government of Southern Sudan
welcomes the Secretary-General's recommendation of
a mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter to provide,
within capabilities, physical protection to civilians
under imminent threat of physical danger, including
through the use of force as a last resort.

The Government of Southern Sudan welcomes
the Secretary-General's recommendation that the
Government and local stakeholders be assisted in
preventing conflict, consolidating the peace,
strengthening the multi-party system and addressing
issues related to peace, governance and reconciliation.
In this context, we would like to reaffirm the
importance of national ownership and to express our
desire to work in partnership with the United Nations
system. We note that a drawdown of the mission would
be based on benchmarks agreed together by the
Government of Southern Sudan and the Security
Council, and would welcome early consideration of
such benchmarks.

Lastly, we welcome the suggestion that the
mission play a coordination role in bringing together
international actors to speak with one voice in helping
the new Government to address the challenges of peace
consolidation.
11-35810
Obviously many details regarding the structure of
the United Nations presence remain to be worked out.
We would welcome frequent and detailed dialogue
with the Council and the Secretariat over the coming
weeks.

I would like to close by repeating the words
spoken by His Excellency President Salva Kiir in Juba
last week. We remain committed to peace, but this
should not be interpreted as cowardice. We will not go
back to war because we have fought enough. We refuse
to be provoked. Southern Sudan will become
independent on 9 July, and we look forward to the
Council quickly recognizing this in the days thereafter.
But we must also ensure that the new State is stable,
secure and at peace with its neighbours. This is our
common challenge and our common responsibility.

