Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Mr. James Swan and Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira for the valuable and detailed information they provided. The Dominican Republic welcomes the resumption of dialogue and collaboration between the Federal Government and the leaders of the federal member states in July and the agreement to establish a technical committee to make recommendations on the modalities of the upcoming elections. In this regard, we commend the efforts of the United Nations and international partners aimed at fostering political consensus among Federal and state leaders in order to advance the implementation of national priorities in Somalia. A key element in achieving that objective is the adoption of the reformed constitution. We therefore urge the parties to continue to make the necessary efforts for the resumption of a constructive, inclusive and transparent dialogue in order to reach the political agreement that will make it possible to conclude the review process. Similarly, we commend the meeting between the Presidents of Puntland and Galmudug and their commitment to cooperating in the maintenance of peace, security and economic development, in particular in Mudug Region. We also commend the initiative of the President of Djibouti, Mr. Ismael Omar Guelleh, to facilitate the resumption of dialogue between Somalia and "Somaliland". We are convinced that achieving consensus through dialogue among political actors in Somalia will be the driving force for unifying the country and making the upcoming elections viable and based on electoral modalities acceptable to all Somalis. We express our concern about the security situation in Somalia and condemn the attacks perpetrated by the Al-Shabaab terrorist group, some of which were carried out using improvised explosive devices. We particularly condemn the attack on 16 August on the Elite Hotel in Mogadishu. We extend our condolences to the families of the victims and hope that those responsible will be brought to justice. In addition, we recognize the efforts made by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations Development Programme to train and raise awareness among the population on gender issues and on the women and peace and security agenda. Similarly, we welcome the establishment by the South-West state assembly of a parliamentary committee on women, human rights and humanitarian issues that could spearhead the promotion of legislation that empowers women and promotes gender equality. We understand that greater participation by women in the various areas of public and political practice is vital. Women have the power to change communities. Their representation in the political system is key to achieving sustainable peace. Similarly, the participation of young people is necessary to help overcome the challenges in Somalia. That is why care must be taken to ensure an enabling environment for their development. We also express our concern about the fragile humanitarian situation in Somalia resulting from the triple threat posed by coronavirus disease, the desert locust infestation and the floods that have affected thousands of displaced persons in recent months. In this regard, we would like to acknowledge the tireless efforts of humanitarian partners in Somalia despite the difficult situation in the country. Accordingly, we also encourage the international community to contribute to the humanitarian assistance fund for Somalia in order to save lives and alleviate the needs of the most vulnerable. In conclusion, we would like to highlight the role that the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and UNSOM have been playing. At the same time, we recognize all the actors whose actions promote peace and stability in the country.
