Mr. Oshima (Japan): I would like, first, to thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence and for his statement on the situation in
Darfur, which is, indeed, very alarming. The Japanese
delegation also welcomes the participation of the
representatives of the Government of the Sudan, as
well as of the African Union, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the League of Arab States at
this Council meeting, and thanks them for their
statements. Their presence and their participation in the
debate today is important as we look at the grim
situation facing Darfur and consider how the
international community can improve the situation
there and promote the implementation of the Darfur
Peace Agreements (DPA) following the adoption of
resolution 1706 (2006) on 31 August.

It is disturbing that the achievement of those two
common goals - improving the situation on the
ground and promoting the implementation of the
DPA - appears, unfortunately, to be becoming more
problematic, by all accounts. The Secretary-General's
statement made that abundantly clear once again. The

position of the Government of the Sudan is centrally
important in addressing those problems. But there are
other key actors whose voices must also be heard. We
therefore attach importance to today's briefings and
exchanges, not least in order to promote dialogue and
to arrive at a better understanding in a climate where
such essential things seem sorely lacking.

The worsening security situation on the ground in
Darfur and the well-documented continuing atrocities
and large-scale humanitarian disaster affecting people
in the millions are matters of deep concern to all of us.
We are also disturbed that this deplorable situation
continues to create conditions that could lead to serious
consequences that threaten peace and security in the
entire subregion. In the face of this harsh reality, it
must be emphasized once again that the
implementation of the DPA needs to be accelerated and
that parties non-signatory to the accord need to be
brought on board. All the efforts of the international
community, including those organizations represented
at this meeting, must be redoubled towards that end.

It was precisely in order to find a way out this
dire situation that resolution 1706 (2006) was adopted
at the end of August, after considerable consultations
and exchanges involving all parties, including the
African Union and the Government of the Sudan. We
consider that the transition from the African Union
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) to an expanded United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) is the only
realistic solution to address the situation. We see no
other realistic option - certainly not a military
solution.

It is clear that, in order to achieve the envisaged
transition from AMIS to a United Nations
peacekeeping mission, it is critically important to
secure the consent and cooperation of the Government
of the Sudan. As the Government of the Sudan
unfortunately does not yet appear to have
acknowledged that, we would like to urge it to
reconsider its position, taking into account resolution
1706 (2006). At the same time, the international
community must respond - as called for by the
resolution - to the urgent need for prompt support for
maintaining the African Union forces on the ground, as
well as to the enormous humanitarian requirements.

It is also necessary to ensure that there is no
security vacuum during the transition. To that end, we
call for much closer cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations. In this context, we will
follow with interest the discussions of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union at its meeting to
be held on 18 September.

With regard to the plan for the restoration of
stability and the protection of civilians in Darfur
presented to the Council by the Government of the
Sudan, we listened carefully to the statement by the
representative of the Sudan, and we have also taken
note of the analysis and comments of the Secretary-
General. As has been observed, some of the proposals
are in line with the Darfur Peace Agreement. For
example, we note in the plan some welcome proposals,
including measures for ending violence against women
and children and an information campaign for the
Darfur Peace Agreement, which we expect will be
elaborated further through consultations between the
Government of the Sudan and the United Nations.

But on the other hand, there are other issues that
can clearly not be considered compatible with the
Darfur Peace Agreement. The proposed unilateral
deployment of Sudanese troops to Darfur is worrying,
and, as pointed out, would be in breach of past
resolutions and would contravene both the letter and
the spirit of the Darfur Peace Agreement.

In conclusion, Japan would like once again to
urge the Government of the Sudan to exercise prudence
in dealing with this matter and to reconsider its
position, keeping in mind the decision of the Council
in resolution 1706 (2006). Japan believes that the
Council should adopt an attitude of continuing the
necessary dialogue and consultations with the
Government of the Sudan to that end.

Finally, on this sad anniversary day, my
delegation joins other delegations in expressing our
sympathy to the people of the United States and our
solidarity with them in fighting terrorism.

