Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this briefing.
We would like to thank the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009), concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, which you, Sir, preside over, for
the excellent report you presented. We assure you, Sir,
of our full support.

At the outset, I would like to convey to the Egyptian
delegation the sympathy and heartfelt condolences of
the Senegalese delation on the death of His Excellency
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, a well-known Egyptian
of Africa and the Arab world, who was an excellent
Secretary-General of the United Nations. Thanks to his
talent, rigour, vision and, above all, commitment, he
made a significant contribution to the development of
multilateralism, including in the Chamber in which we
are gathered today.

My delegation would also like to thank the Somalia
and Eritrea Monitoring Group for its high-quality report
(see S/2015/802) and encourage it to continue to work in
collaboration with the entire international community,
United Nations agencies in Kenya and all stakeholders
in the region to ensure the full implementation of its
mandate. With regard to Somalia, I wish every success
to the meeting of partners to be held next week in
Istanbul.

My country continues to be concerned about the
differences between the Federal Government and the
regional administrations with regard to the management
of the mining resources of the country, which are
subject to the growing covetousness of international
companies, and with regional administrations tending
to sign contracts directly with those companies. In that
regard, Senegal condemns the ongoing Violations of the
ban on the export of charcoal from Somalia, even though
there has been a slight lull in those activities since the
withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from the export sites. In that
regard, my delegation calls for better coordination of
the efforts among the Federal Government, the federal
member states, international organizations and the
forces on the ground to create a viable and effective
mechanism to combat illicit trafficking in Somali
charcoal.

My delegation reiterates the need to uphold the
charcoal ban and fully implement resolution 2195
(2014), on the links between transnational organized
crime and terrorism. Cooperation should also be
bolstered to prevent Al-Shabaab militias from financing
their activities through trafficking in charcoal. Senegal
would like to encourage the ongoing efforts deployed
by maritime forces to fight against the illicit trafficking
in natural resources and the cooperation of those forces
with the Monitoring Group.

On the security front, Senegal remains deeply
worried by the ongoing threat of Al-Shabaab
throughout Somalia, including in the liberated areas.
My delegation is also concerned about intercommunal
tensions and the growing entrenchment of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in the region. Facing these
ongoing threats, my delegation is pleased to note the
cooperation of the Monitoring Group with the Federal
Government on notification to the Committee of
imported weapons, and appeals for the arms embargo
in Somalia and Eritrea to be upheld. Along the same
lines, my delegation encourages the finalization of an
implementation assistance noticee to provide guidelines
and operational recommendations to Member States,
the Somali Government and other relevant entities for
the full implementation of the arms embargo.

As you stressed in your briefing, Sir, Senegal
invites Member States to carefully consider the letter
dated 9 September 2015, in which the President of
the Somali Federal Government requested support
for rapid financing and technical assistance for the
security sector. Regarding attacks on humanitarian
personnel, the diversion of assistance and impediments
to its delivery, my delegation firmly condemns all such
attacks, whoever the perpetrators may be.

Senegal reiterates its support for the people and the
Government of Somalia in the electoral consultations
to take place in 2016, in particular with respect to
women's representation at a level of 30 per cent in the
two parliamentary chambers.

Regarding Eritrea, we note that the Monitoring
Group found no proof that the Eritrean Government
is supporting Al-Shabaab. Regarding allegations that
the Government alledgedly supports armed groups in
Ethiopia, in violation ofparagraph 16 ofresolution 1907
(2009), the Monitoring Group could give us further
information with a view to promoting transparency. We
also call on the Eritrean authorities to cooperate more
fully with the Monitoring Group. My country alsonoted
that the report of the Monitoring Group indicates
the presence of Eritrean soldiers in Yemen, who are
alledgedly fighting on behalf of the Arab coalition.
That raises legitimate questions for Senegal. We would
like further clarification of that situation.

Finally, we regret the lack of progress in resolving
border disputes between Djibouti and Eritrea.

