Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome this open
debate on the Middle East and the Palestine question.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela associates itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Our delegation expresses its deep concern at the
humanitarian crisis and the deterioration of the living
conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied
territory. The brutal and systematic aggression of the
occupying Power, Israel, against the Palestinian people
will make their development and self-determination
impossible and hinders efforts to achieve peace in the
Middle East.

The repeated violation of the human rights of the
Palestinian people by the forces of the occupying
Power through the excessive use of force, collective
punishment, the confiscation of land and the
establishment and expansion of illegal settlements are
flagrant violations of international law, including
international humanitarian law and the Geneva
Conventions.

Operation Cast Lead and the criminal attack
perpetrated by Israeli military forces in international
waters against the freedom flotilla en route to Gaza
have been condemned by the Human Rights Council in
various resolutions. On 29 June 2010, the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, Richard
Falk, condemned the expansionist plans of the State of
Israel in Jerusalem, including the plan put forward by
the Mayor of that city to demolish dozens of buildings
that are home to hundreds of Palestinian families. The
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Robert Serry, expressed his concern at the decision of
Israel to demolish more Palestinian homes and expand
the settlements of Pisgat Ze'ev.

The political and military elite of the occupying
Power is promoting all kinds of illegal activities in the
aim of changing the geographic nature and the
demographic composition of the Palestine territory,
including the urban character and Arab and Islamic
identity of East Jerusalem. These carefully planned
activities constitute flagrant violations of international
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan and calls for
the immediate withdrawal of Israeli troops. My
Government also rejects the construction of the wall in
the occupied Palestinian territory, which is intended to
fragment the unity, integrity and territorial contiguity
of Palestine, including East Jerusalem. As is well
known, in an advisory opinion the International Court
of Justice declared this measure to be illegal.

In its presidential statement of 1 June
(S/PRST/2010/9), the Security Council took note of the
call of the Secretary-General for a "prompt, impartial,
credible and transparent investigation conforming to
international standards" into this reprehensible
incident. One month and 20 days have passed since
then. It is a matter of concern that the panel to carry
out this investigation has not yet been established.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, as a State
Member of the United Nations, expects the
investigation to be genuinely impartial, credible and
transparent and conforming to international standards,
in contrast to the sham investigation that was carried
out by the State of Israel to cover up the proof of its
reprehensible crime.

The situation of the Palestine population in the
Gaza Strip is a humanitarian catastrophe. As a
consequence of the Israeli aggression known as
Operation Cast Lead and the blockade of the Gaza
Strip, 85 per cent of the population depends on
humanitarian aid.

Preventing by force, as Israel is doing, the
realization of cooperation in solidarity with the
Palestinian people is an act of an unquestionable
criminality. Venezuela demands once again an
immediate and unconditional end to the Israeli
blockade of the Gaza Strip and the opening of all the
border crossings, thus allowing for the freedom of
movement of goods and people and access for
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people.

The Secretary-General of the United Nations has
said that "the long-running closure imposed on the
Gaza Strip is counterproductive, unsustainable and
wrong. It punishes innocent civilians. It must be lifted
by the Israeli authorities immediately". Why does the
Security Council, which is mandated to address matters
related to international peace and security, not adopt
concrete and credible measures to bring to an end this
genocidal blockade repudiated by all the peoples of the
world?

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reaffirms it full support for the creation of a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State within
internationally recognized borders that guarantee the
full exercise of the right of this heroic people to self-
determination. This is an indispensable element for
achieving peace and stability in the Middle East.

Israel's possession of nuclear weapons is a threat
to international peace and security, in particular for the
Middle East region. Its militaristic policies continue to
ignore the repeated calls of the international
community for Israel to adhere to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to open its
facilities to the International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards system.

In this context, Venezuela supports the decision
adopted at the Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
recently held in New York, which resolved to call for
an international conference on the creation of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East on 2012
in order to ban the development, possession and
utilization of these weapons in the region.

The failure of the Israeli Government to comply
with the resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly must be addressed by this Council,
including through the possible adoption of sanctions to
persuade the Israeli political and military elite of their
obligations to comply with the rules and principles of
international law enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and other international instruments in order to
achieve a solid and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The State of Israel repeatedly violates the Charter of
the United Nations and refutes through its actions the
very nature of this Organization.

If the Security Council wishes to preserve its
legitimacy as guarantor of peace and international
security, it should adopt the measures necessary to
achieve the end of the systematic slaughter of the
Palestinian people by the State of Israel.

In conclusion, I wish to affirm that Venezuela
supports the request made by the Prime Minister of
Malaysia for the convening of an emergency special
session of the General Assembly to consider the issues
under debate in the Security Council.

