Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, Mr. Ivan
Simonovie, for their briefings.

I do not wish to reiterate the contents of the report
before the Council (S/2014.276, annex), but I shall
explain Argentina's position on this issue.

Argentina is following with deep concern the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
It has voted in favour of each of the resolutions adopted
by the competent forums, both the Human Rights
Council and the Third Committee of the General
Assembly vote, including the most recent, resolution
25/25 of the Human Rights Council and resolution
69/ 188 of the General Assembly. Both condemn in the
strongest terms the serious, widespread and systematic
violations of human rights committed in that country.
However, we wish to stress that Argentina considers the
inclusion of this issue on the agenda of the Security
Council to be of an exceptional nature.

Argentina believes that the Security Council
must carry out its specific mandate under the
Charter of the United Nations, which is a response
to the strategic vision of a clear delineation of tasks
among the different organs of the United Nations.
Thus, it is stipulated that the Security Council has a
responsibility to address matters pertaining to peace
and international security. It does not contribute to the
proper and effective functioning of the United Nations
system when the Security Council extends its range of
action. Today's exceptional decision, based on previous
recommendations of the Human Rights Council and the
General Assembly, should not constitute a precedent to
encourage the extension of this practice.

Nonetheless, as it did in the Human Rights Council,
the Argentina expresses its concern at the conclusion
reached by the commission of inquiry that systematic,
widespread and grave violations of human rights, which
we deplore, have been and are being committed in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We are also
concerned by the commission's conclusion that crimes
against humanity have been committed.

At the same time, Argentina has maintained in the
Council and in various forums that we are concerned
about the threat that the nuclear and ballistic missile
programme of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea poses to the stability of the peninsula and the
region, and their implications for international peace and
security. Such situations remind us of the importance
of diplomatic means and political negotiations, and
we therefore urge all parties, including the Security
Council, to redouble their efforts to restart the dialogue
with a view to reaching a definitive solution to the issue
and to declaring the peninsula free of nuclear weapons
as a matter of priority. We also reaffirm that the
Government of that country must protect and guarantee
the human rights of its people.

