Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the most recent developments
in the situation in Darfur, in particular those that
have occurred since the issuance of the report of the
Secretary-General (8/2015/1027), on 24 December last.

The developments centre mainly on the resumption
of armed conflict in the Jebel Marra region as well as
clashes in West and North Darfur. This marks the end
of the brief period of relative calm that was observed
during the reporting period. In North Darfur, where
Zaghawa villages were attacked by Arab militias on
27 November and 3 December, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) came
under fire on two occasions: on 1 January by the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid, as it was attempting to
recover a truck that had been stolen from the World Food
Programme; and, on 7 January, when it was surrounded
by some 60 Arab militia members as it was heading
to Anka to protect the Deputy Special Representative,
who was visiting the area.

The first incident, on 1 January, did not result in
any fatalities; it was described by the local commander
of the Abdul Wahid faction as a misunderstanding.
The second attack, however, injured a UNAMID
peacekeeper. Owing to the security situation on the
ground, the Deputy Special Representative had to
turn back, and an inter-organizational mission was
preventing from getting to Anka. That led us to deliver
humanitarian assistance by air.

Two days later, on 9 January, tensions rose in East
Darfur when armed members of the Beni Halba tribe
attacked and looted Massalit villages in the south of
El Geneina, following the discovery of the death of a
member of the tribe. The next day, residents of Mouli
demonstrated against the attacks in El Geneina, forcing
their way into Government buildings. Six people were
killed by security forces in the scuffle. During the burial
ofthose people on 11 January, the convoy was attacked
by Arab militias, resulting in two more Massalit deaths.

In total, according to Sudanese authorities, 5,000
people - exclusively from West Darfur - have been
displaced by the violence and reached the town of
El Geneina. We are not in a position to confirm that
figure as Sudanese authorities have not granted access
to either UNAMID or humanitarian organizations. It
appears that in recent days the situation in the city of
El Geneina has been stabilized by the deployment of
the military and additional police forces. But it should
be pointed out that crimes continue to be committed by
armed groups in the villages surrounding the city.

As we know, on 1 January President Al-Bashir
announced the extension of the unilateral ceasefire in
the region of Jebel Marra. It must be noted, however,
that incidents have occurred, aerial bombardments
have resumed and clashes between Government forces
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid have
actually intensified during the month of January. In
Central Darfur, after the clashes in Guldo and G010 on
31 December and 1 January, and following the 2 January
attack by members of the Abdul Wahid faction against a
Government convoy near Nertiti, UNAMID witnessed
the dropping of three bombs on 14 January; six bombs
on 19 January in Sortoni in North Darfur; and five
bombs near Nertiti in Central Darfur on 16 January. The
Mission has received reports of four other air raids in
North and Central Darfur on 16, 17, 22 and 23 January.
Since 15 January, clashes between Government forces
and elements of the Abdul Wahid faction in South and
Central Darfur have also been observed.
These clashes have caused casualties on both sides.
The United Nations is unable to verify the number
of victims or to conduct a humanitarian assessment
due to the restrictions imposed by the Government
on access to conflict areas. In anticipation of a
potentially large-scale displacement of the population,
humanitarian organizations and the Mission have begun
to develop an emergency plan. To date, 8,400 civilians,
mostly women and children, have taken refuge around
the UNAMID camp in Sortoni in North Darfur. In
the other affected areas, the Mission has fortified its
presence by increasing protection patrols, day and
night, and has pre-positioned equipment and supplies.

(spoke in English)

Against the backdrop of renewed military
confrontation, the political process to resolve the conflict
through dialogue remains fragmented, and progress
thus far has been limited. Major armed movements
and opposition parties continue to boycott the current
national dialogue framework. These groups continued
consultations on the next steps, with the support of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel.
With respect to the Darfur peace process, the Justice
and Equality Movement and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Minni Minnawi held a meeting with the Deputy
Prime Minister of Qatar in Paris on 11 January, and
they pledged to develop a joint position paper on their
concerns with respect to the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, in particular in relation to compensation,
disarmament and land ownership. There was also an
informal meeting between the Government and the
two groups that started on 23 January in Debre Zeit,
Ethiopia, but thus far the parties seem to remain
divided on the role of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur and the High-level Implementation Panel in
future negotiations. It is regrettable that Abdul Wahid
Al-Nour has been absent from these talks. We call upon
him to participate constructively in the efforts to find a
resolution to the conflict.

The Darfur peace process remains inconclusive,
and members will have heard that the Darfur
Referendum Commission announced on 12 January that
the referendum on the administrative status of Darfur
would be conducted between 11 to 13 April 2016, in
accordance with the terms of the Doha Document. Voter
registration will commence on 8 February for those
who have resided in Darfur for three months prior to the
registration. While we welcome the preparations to hold
the referendum, we note that the proposed timeline and
eligibility criteria will most likely make it challenging
for a large number of internally displaced persons and
refugees to actually participate in the process.

These security and political developments point to
a stark contrast between the views of the Government
and those of the majority of the armed movements and
their constituencies on the current situation in Darfur.
In a similar vein, the Vice-President of the Sudan has
indicated the closure of internally displaced person
camps by the end of 2017. During his visit to North
Darfur at the end of December 2015, he stated that
Darfur had recovered from the war, but in reaction to
the statement, the situation in the internally displaced
person camp of Kalma actually deteriorated in January.

I regret to inform the Council that the visa situation
remains precarious, with no major improvement in its
overall status. Since the issuance of the previous report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/729), the Government
has rejected another seven visa requests, including four
that involved substantive civilian functions, and one
for the post of Senior Joint Operations Officer. As a
result of visa denials, there is a high vacancy rate in key
substantive sections, which has been noted in previous
briefings and in the report of the Secretary-General.
And I must inform Council members that things have
not really changed. The resultant loss of capacities in
those sections of the Mission directly related to the
strategic priorities of UNAMID, such as the protection
of civilians, is of particular concern in light of the
evolving situation in Jebel Marra and other areas.

With respect to progress relating to customs
clearance, the Ministry of Finance and National
Economy has released 195 containers that had been held
in Port Sudan since 15 April 2015. Currently, UNAMID
is seeking the urgent release of 108 containers ofrations
held in Port Sudan, for which the Ministry of Finance
and National Economy needs to issue a tax exemption
certificate for 2016. UNAMID submitted a request for
the yearly renewal of that certificate in November 2015.
We are now almost at the end of January.

In order to resolve these support-related issues, the
United Nations and the Government of the Sudan held
a technical meeting in Khartoum on 13 January. It was
agreed that subcommittees would be established on the
pending issues, such as visas and customs clearance,
and that further technical-level meetings be convened
on a monthly basis to unblock the bottlenecks relating
to these logistical and administrative concerns.
With the new leadership of UNAMID on board, we
hope that the Government will indeed extend its full
support and cooperation towards the implementation
of the strategic priorities of UNAMID. As mandated
by the Security Council and by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, we remain committed
to developing the exit strategy for UNAMID on the
basis of concrete and tangible achievements against
the benchmarks. A strategic-level meeting among the
United Nations, the African Union and the Government
of the Sudan is anticipated to take place by the end of
this week in the margins of the forthcoming Summit of
the African Union in Addis Ababa. We look forward
to the full commitment of the Government of the
Sudan to making measurable progress against key
benchmarks - such as the cessation of hostilities,
an inclusive peace process, and unhindered access
and movement of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel - as the starting point for further discussions
on the phased drawdown of UNAMID.

Let me close by reiterating my concern about
the impact of the renewed upsurge in fighting on the
civilian population in Jebel Marra, and express my hope
that the cessation of hostilities negotiations - with
the participation of all the non-signatory movements,
including Abdul Wahid Al-Nour- will come to a
positive conclusion and bring to an end the suffering
of the population caught up in the fighting between
Government and rebel forces.

