Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, who has
been carrying out a very important mission. We would
also like to welcome the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, to whom we are
grateful for his substantive, in-depth and objective
statement. We agree with what he said.

The situation in Afghanistan remains complex.
We are concerned by the ongoing deterioration of the
situation in its northern provinces. The seizure of
Kunduz by insurgents and its being held for more than
two weeks confirms the high risk of terrorism. We note
the unwavering efforts of the Afghan National Security
Forces to free that region. Since 2001, the time of the
start of the international Operation Enduring Freedom,
there had been no provincial capitals captured. The
Afghan National Security Forces suffer significant
daily losses in clashes with the opposition. We hope
to see a report on the implementation of the Security
Council mandate on the NATO operations in that
country. Indeed, we have been asking for such a report
for a long time now.

We are concerned by the high number of civilians
in Afghanistan who have been terrorized by this war
for such a long time. The violations of international
humanitarian law, such as the air strike attack against the
hospital in Kunduz, are unacceptable. The possibility
of such actions taking place again needs to be totally
eliminated. Unfortunately, the predictions previously
made in the Security Council on the possible spillover of
instability from the south and the south-eastern regions
to the north, which was relatively calm in the past, have
come true. These worrying data are confirmed in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/942), and there
can be no doubt that the forces of the so-called Islamic
State, which are gaining more supporters, including
from the Taliban, are systematically strengthening their
positions. They study the situation, stockpile weapons
and recruit extremists from competing terrorist groups.

Narcotics, whose production in Afghanistan has
reached industrial levels, pose a serious threat to
peace in Afghanistan the region. Drugs fuel terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Narcotics serve to
intensify the turf war among various groups for control
of drug-trafficking routes, which leads to an increase
in instability in Afghanistan itself and in neighbouring
States. In that regard, we believe it is important to step
up the international community's efforts to combat
narcotics production.

We do not agree with the optimistic assessment
of the current drug situation in Afghanistan. Recently
published official statistics that show a significant
decrease in narcotics production in 2015 were
calculated after significant changes were made in the
way data were collected. As a result, they need to be
cross-checked.

Apart from having a direct, harmful impact, drug
production is a major source of terrorist financing.
In that regard, we think it is necessary to step up the
international community's efforts to combat Afghan
drug trafficking. We believe today's depressing
situation with regard to the drug threat in Afghanistan
to be due to a large extent to the passivity of the
International Security Assistance Force. However,
Russia drew attention to this serious problem and
proposed constructive solutions. The military presence
now has a good opportunity to address the problem, but
it is paying scant attention to combating that evil.

We believe in the need to further promote and
bolster cooperation in Afghanistan within existing
regional organizations. We welcome the official
statement made by Afghanistan announcing that it
had become a fully fledged member of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. That statement was made
by President Ghani during his meeting with President
Putin on the sidelines of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization Summit at Ufa in the Russian Federation.
In the light of the emerging new threats in Afghanistan
and the region, we are banking on the involvement
of our Afghan partners in the provision of practical
assistance to the Shanghai Cooperation Organization's
regional counter-terrorism structures.

In our opinion, international efforts to combat
narcotics from Afghanistan must be comprehensive
in nature and present throughout the entire illegal
drug-trade supply chain. Such efforts should involve
destroying drug crops and drugs laboratories, marking
precursors and arresting drug lords and including them
on sanctions lists. The work of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization is also significant. It has solid
counter-narcotics and counter-terrorism potential.
That was successfully demonstrated during the one-off
military exercises of the Organization in Tajikistan in
May this year.

We support the line taken by the Afghan Government
aimed at achieving sustainable, long-term national
reconciliation. We believe that all States must work
along those lines to help Afghanistan finally achieve
internal peace and stability. The United Nations has
approved the basis for national reconciliation. The well-
known principles of such reconciliation stipulate that
everyone must recognize Afghanistan's Constitution,
refrain from having any contact with terrorists and stop
fighting against the Government.

Russia has historic links with Afghanistan. We have
friendly ties with that country, and Russia will continue
to provide assistance to Afghanistan, its Government
and its people by strengthening the Afghan National
Security Forces. By the end of the year, we hope to
have carried out cost-free delivery to Kabul of some
large shipments of weapons for the Afghan police. We
have been developing trade and economic links and, by
the beginning of next year, we plan to hold a meeting
of the joint intergovernmental commission on trade
and economic cooperation. We are sure that that will
provide new impetus for our economic cooperation
with Afghanistan.

There can be no doubt about our humanitarian
assistance. On 23 November, we provided the World
Food Programme in Afghanistan with 57 Kamaz
vehicles worth $2.5 million, and they were provided
free of charge. We are ready to continue to build a
peaceful, independent, self-sufficient and economically
prosperous Afghanistan. We are convinced that
Afghanistan can overcome its current challenges.

