Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
should like to join our colleagues in paying tribute
to Ambassador Samantha Power for her dedication,
commitment and contribution to peace and security.
We wish her every success in her future endeavours.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman, European Union observer De Almeida and
Permanent Representative of Italy Sebastiano Cardi for
their briefings.

Our gratitude also goes to the Security Council
secretariat for its support to the Council in implementing
resolution 2231 (2015).

My country has always supported the process
of international negotiations on the Iranian nuclear
programme and made a practical contribution to it.
Two rounds of talks on this matter in Kazakhstan in
2013 contributed to creating an atmosphere of trust
and confidence that facilitated further fruitful rounds
of negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran, and paved
the way for the agreement. As part of the agreement,
in 2015 and 2016 Kazakhstan supplied Iran with
natural uranium on commercial terms in compensation
for the removal of low-enriched uranium from that
country, as specified in the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA). We are ready and willing to
continue our supply, if necessary, in accordance with
the requirements of resolution 2231 (2015) and other
documents related to the Iranian nuclear programme.

For the past thee years, Kazakhstan has
contributed $650,000 to the Nuclear Security Fund
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, some of
which have been allocated to support monitoring and
verification activities in Iran in relation to the Joint
Plan of Action.

As noted in the second report of the Secretary-
General (S/2016/1136), over the past year there has
been no report of Iranian violations of the provisions
of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015). In this regard, we
commend the strong commitment of Iran to complying
with resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA, which
is very important to the further implementation of
the Agreement.

At the same time, we note that in the past reporting
period only five additional nuclear-related proposals
have been submitted through the procurement channel,
three of which were approved by the Security Council.
These statistics, in our view, suggest the need to
maintain ongoing transparency, with practical guidance
and outreach as a priority. That is important in view of
the need for a proper understanding and implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015).

Implementing the JCPOA has had a significant
impact on normalizing the situation in the region as
a whole. The JCPOA will have a positive effect on
the revitalization of economic activity in the region.
In that context, the expansion of economic relations
between Iran and regional countries, including the
Central Asian States, will promote business activity
and economic development in the region. As evidence
of this, I would cite the mutual visits of the heads of
Kazakhstan and Iran in the past year. In April 2016,
President of Kazakhstan Nazarbayev paid a visit to
Tehran, which resulted in 51 commercial agreements
and contracts worth more than $1 billion. In December
2016, Iranian President Rouhani made a return visit to
Astana, during which further agreements were reached
to strengthen mutually beneficial trade, economic and
investment cooperation. Kazakhstan, as a land-locked
country, gained the opportunity to enter the world
markets and export its products with the launch of
the Kazakhstan-Turkmenistan-Iran railway. Thus, the
JCPOA has brought positive changes and, consequently,
the revival of economic relations among the countries
of the region.

In conclusion, I wish to underline that Kazakhstan
will continue to support and to implement strictly
resolution 2231 (2015), and express the readiness of my
Government to cooperate with Iran in the framework of
implementing the JCPOA.

