Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed and Mr. John Ging for their briefings,
and we commend Mr. Ahmed for his work in his post
and his contribution, as well as his efforts to reach a
settlement to the conflict in Yemen. We also want to
thank the Permanent Representative of Peru for his
work as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014).

We felt it was important that yesterday we succeeded
in extending the mandate of the Panel of Experts on
Yemen in a largely technical and apolitical manner.
That has helped us preserve a window of opportunity
for further non-confrontational cooperation with the
aim of making progress towards a settlement in Yemen.
The Yemeni conflict is exceedingly difficult and
complicated. We must find ways to launch the peace
process without preconditions rather than looking
for scapegoats and creating the results desired for
geopolitical agendas.

We listened attentively Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed's
analysis ofrecent events in Yemen, leaving us a singular
historical legacy of the attempts to establish a political
process. We hope the new Special Envoy will draw the
requisite conclusions from the work that has already
been done. We are obliged to conclude that so far we
have been unable to get an effective process going. At
the same time, the situation on the ground, particularly
on the humanitarian front, has all the appearances of
a disaster. The official statistics from the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs suggest
that 22 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance, although in reality things are far worse.
Millions of Yemenis are starving. The country is in the
grip of cholera and diphtheria epidemics. The estimated
numbers of casualties of the conflict are more than
9,000 dead and 52,000 wounded. Some 1.5 million
Yemeni civil servants in the north and south have not
been paid for more than a year and a half.

We see and note the fact that a great deal is being
done to improve the humanitarian situation. We
commend the efforts of the United Nations, as well as
the individual contributions of a host of Member States,
including Yemen's closest neighbours, Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates. However, the characteristics
of such regional conflicts lead us to believe that
humanitarian assistance alone cannot deliver viable
long-term solutions. It is essential to immediately shift
the current situation onto a track leading to political
dialogue. In this critical situation, it will be important
for the United Nations to have a clear plan for further
action. Martin Griffiths, the new Special Envoy, will
have a key role to play in that, and we wish him every
success. We hope that in his consultations with all the
parties to the conflict he can come up with a plan of
action and present it to the Council in his next report.

