Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): In recent months there have been crucial
developments in Liberia. The signing of the Abuja
Agreement was an essential step in the return to peace in
Liberia. In that agreement the parties agreed to implement
the peace process according to a timetable agreed upon by
all. The establishment of a cease-fire and the installation

 

of the Council of State were the first positive steps under
the Agreement.

We all know that the hardest tasks remain to be done.
The disarmament of troops and their cantonment in
assembly sites, and the reintegration of former combatants
are elements essential for the success of the entire process.
To ensure this success, several conditions must be met.

First of all, peace can return only if the factions fully
abide by the commitments they undertook at Abuja. We are
therefore disturbed at cease-fire violations noted recently
and at delays with respect to the disengagement of forces.
It is understandable that after five years of war it will not
be easy to restore trust. Yet everything possible must be
done to ensure that yesterday's rivalries are overcome. The
Liberian National Transitional Government has a special
responsibility in this area.

Secondly, it is necessary for the United Nations to
continue, along with the Monitoring Group of the Economic
Community of West African States, to support the
completion of the peace process. The peace agreements
provide for a sharing of tasks between the United Nations
and the African force. The resolution we have just
adopted - which we would have liked to adopt sooner -
is aimed precisely at clarifying this division of tasks with
a View to enhancing the effectiveness of the personnel on
the ground who will ensure a return to peace. That is why
the French delegation voted in favour of the resolution.

Finally, the international community must continue to
support those who are working for peace in Liberia. Here,
the convening by the Secretary-General of the Conference
on Assistance to Liberia, held in New York on 27 October,
was a major initiative. A number of countries, including
France, clearly stated their intention to provide assistance
to Liberia. Liberia must be given the means to succeed; and
additional Member States must therefore be encouraged to
join those countries already committed to a solution to the
conflict in this African country.

The civil war that has raged in Liberia for over five
years now has had catastrophic consequences in both
human and economic terms. The Abuja Agreement is
designed not only to restore peace in Liberia but also to
enable 1.5 million refugees and displaced persons to return
home and in due course to rebuild the country, which has
been completely ravaged.

The French delegation hopes that all those involved
that have means available to them in these areas - States,
international organizations and especially international
financial organizations - will demonstrate generosity and
responsibility in order to enable not only this country but
this entire region of Africa to return to stability and the
path of progress. The French Government is prepared to
participate actively in this undertaking, which must
succeed.

I welcomed the fact that this important and decisive
agreement was signed at Abuja, a name we had hoped
would become synonymous with respect for human rights.
We can only, therefore, express our alarm at the tragic
reports mentioned by various speakers on the fate of the
prisoners on whose behalf the European Union has
expressed its concern, should those reports be verified.

