Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is my pleasure, Sir, to congratulate your
friendly country, Ireland, and to congratulate you
personally on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We thank you for
providing this opportunity to Member States to
deliberate once again on current developments in
Somalia with a View to finding a solution to the tragedy
of the Somali people, who for so long have suffered
war and its destructive effects.

Allow us also to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Levitte, the Permanent Representative of
France, for his presidency of the Security Council last
month. Allow us also to express our pleasure at the
presence of the Prime Minister of the Transitional
National Government in Somalia and his delegation,
who are with us.

All statements before the Security Council today
have been unanimous in stressing the need for more
attention on the part of the international community,
and the United Nations, in particular, to the continuing
difficult situation in Somalia.

The Syrian Arab Republic believes that the
ongoing tragedy of the brotherly Somali people ought
to have come to an end long, long ago. The ciVil war
visited upon Somalia for so many years has led to
devastation in all fields: humanitarian, security,
economic, social and cultural. While the international
community and the United Nations have made
strenuous efforts to find solutions to similar problems
in other parts of the world - Africa, the Balkans and
Asia - we note that the situation in Somalia has not
received the necessary attention over the past decade.

The Somali people continue to suffer the scourge
of war and its destructive effects. Dozens of resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations addressing other
conflicts and wars were not reduplicated in the case of
Somalia. Where was Somalia when the United Nations
and its various organs set out their positions on
peacekeeping, post-conflict peace-building and the
need to end massacres and violations of human rights?

In all the devastation Visited upon Somalia, there
was a glimpse of hope in the success of the Conference
held in Arta, in the sister Republic of Djibouti, and
presided over by President Ismail Omar Guelleh. The
Conference drew together broad segments of Somali
society. The Syrian Arab Republic welcomed the
achievements of the representatives of the Somali
people, who created the Transitional National
Assembly and elected Mr. Abdikassim Salad Hassan
President of the Somali Democratic Republic.
In his statement during the general debate of the
General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session, Mr. Farouk
Al-Shara', Minister for Foreign Affairs of Syria, stated
that these two achievements were major pillars for the
restoration of Somali state institutions. He called on the
international community to redouble its efforts to help
Somalis carry out the tasks of reconstruction and
rehabilitation.

In solidarity with our brothers, the Somali people,
the Arab Summit held in Amman on 26 and 27 March
adopted a resolution calling on all factions and sectors
of Somali society to cooperate to their utmost ability
with the elected President and his Government to
achieve security and stability and to ensure the
territorial integrity, reconstruction and rehabilitation of
Somalia. The Arab Summit set aside $54 million to
reintegrate and resettle militia members and to restore
state institutions. The Transitional National Government
has made great efforts at various levels to ensure
national reconciliation and to attract regional and world
support for its work. In this context, the 37th Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), held in Lusaka, reaffirmed the
commitment of the OAU to Somalia's territorial
integrity, independence and unity. The OAU Council of
Ministers stressed its support for Somalia's
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity and for all
efforts to create a National Commission for
Reconciliation and Property Settlement.

My delegation has considered the Secretary-
General's report on the situation in Somalia, contained
in document S/2001/963 of 11 October 2001. We thank
the Secretary-General and his Representative for their
efforts in support of the Somali people. The report
includes a great deal of information on the various
developments that have taken place in Somalia since
last year. It accurately reflects the deteriorating
economic and humanitarian situation, as well as the
dire need of tens of thousands of Somalis for speedy
humanitarian assistance to save them from certain
death. In several paragraphs, the report stresses that
dire poverty, the lack of employment opportunities and
the total destruction of infrastructures and social
services cannot be addressed in the absence of
appropriate material and financial resources. The report
states that many programmes linked to the Transitional
National Government have obtained no assistance from
international donors, including United Nations agencies.

In the light of the importance of achieving peace
in Somalia and of preserving its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, the Syrian Arab Republic is
following with satisfaction the efforts of the
Transitional National Government in Somalia. We call
on all factions and sectors in that country to cooperate
with the Government through a constructive national
dialogue aimed at restoring peace, security and stability
to Somalia. Syria appeals to all donor States to provide
all forms of assistance to that Government in order to
enable it to revitalize the institutions that were
demolished in the civil war and to rebuild the country's
infrastructure in order to achieve normalcy in the lives
of the Somali people.

Syria believes that a Security Council mission to
evaluate the situation on the ground and to prepare
specific proposals would help to ensure a more
effective role for the United Nations and the Security
Council in helping the Government to extend its
control over all Somalia. We believe that such
assistance includes the deployment of an international
peace-building mission to help the Transitional
National Government, which would make a real and
effective contribution and demonstrate the international
community's resolve to end the crisis in Somalia.

The Somali people has suffered for a very long
time. The Security Council must not stop at merely
hearing reports and statements or at adopting
resolutions that remain dead letter and unimplemented
on the ground. The time has come to act stoutly by
adopting positions that can attain the fundamental
objectives and fulfil the task of the Security Council:
the maintenance of international peace and security
throughout the world, including Somalia.

