Mr. Covic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Croatian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I
would like to echo the gratitude expressed by Mr.
Mirko Sarovie for the invitation to participate in
today's meeting and for the assistance that the Council
has for years been extending to Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its path towards peace and the building
of a sustainable State.

In order to ensure a brighter future for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we are firmly committed to European
integration and to the application of European
standards at all stages of democracy-building, on the
basis of internationally recognized norms, especially in
the field of human rights.

The creation of a politically stable country that
fully respects human rights must be based on equality
for all peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Bosnia and Herzegovina we all wish to see
must ensure sovereignty and constitutionality for
Serbs, Bosnians and Croats throughout its territory as
well as ensure that their rights are protected. Only in
this way can a multi-ethnic State become a community
of equal citizens working together to achieve common
goals.

Full institutional legal protection for all ethnic
groups is a requirement in order to ensure political
freedom for each and every citizen.

Our economic and financial reforms will be
achieved through the harmonization of tax rates and
customs regulations. Other reforms will also be
undertaken on our path towards European integration.

The creation of a unified economic space and the
finalization of bilateral agreements on the promotion
and protection of investments, the agreement on free
trade, the reform of the financial sector and efforts to
attract direct foreign investment are not merely election
promises, but rather the strategy we are using to join
the ranks of those countries that are not only
economically sustainable but also able to attract
investments.

The implementation of educational reform and
the promotion of scientific, cultural and technical
cooperation are preconditions for the creation of
opportunities that will keep young people in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and enable them to become active
players in their own development and future. The
achievement of peace, development and stability in this
part of Europe is closely linked to the rebuilding and
restoration of the infrastructure in this field.

The Presidency supports the strategy of "First
justice, then jobs, through reform" set out by the High
Representative. Bosnia and Herzegovina therefore
remains fully committed to cooperation with the High
Representative, primarily through dialogue. As the old
proverb says, "Agreement builds a house".

Therefore, I would stress once again our
readiness to reform the legal system, establish the rule
of law, create economic sustainability and new jobs,
promote the return of qualified young people from
abroad, improve the educational system and promote
scientific, educational and cultural cooperation with
other countries in the region and in the world.

I would like to inform the Council that important
progress has been made with respect to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's accession to the Partnership for Peace
and to NATO. We are also working actively to finalize
the process of joining the World Trade Organization.
We are currently working to fully and unconditionally
fulfil our obligations under the road map, which will
enable us to begin preparations for Bosnia and
Herzegovina's admission to the European Union.
The existence of a large number of mine fields is
a tremendous problem for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is working to implement and strengthen the
Ottawa Convention on landmines.

We are also endeavouring further to reduce
military expenses and to effect further reform in the
armed forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially
with respect to the establishment of civil control over
the armed forces, which is a precondition for Bosnia's
accession to Partnership for Peace and to NATO.

Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
universal implementation of the Programme of Action
agreed upon at the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects.

Our relations with neighbouring countries are
based on equality, full independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. In this regard, the goal of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina is to ensure that
the ongoing process of the establishment of good-
neighbourly relations with Croatia and Yugoslavia
takes place on the basis of mutual trust and assistance.
We support full and open cooperation, in particular on
such important issues as the struggle against the traffic
in human beings, organized crime and terrorism.

We in Bosnia and Herzegovina believe that
regional cooperation is a key factor in the
establishment of peace in the region and an
indispensable element of our efforts towards European
integration.

I should like to thank Mr. Klein and the Security
Council for all of their efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

