Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
important briefings by Special Representative Leila
Zerrougui and Ms. Josephine Mbela. We would like
to highlight the efforts being made by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Independent National Electoral Commission to comply
with the electoral calendar and hold on 23 December
transparent, free, credible and inclusive elections.

In that regard, we must reiterate the importance
of ensuring that citizens exercise their electoral rights
by giving all candidates and their parties full and
equal opportunities to promote and advertise their
proposals and platforms. That means, among other
things, guaranteeing the full exercise of the freedoms
of association, expression and the press. We also
underline the crucial importance for all political actors
to remain committed to the 31 December 2016 political
agreement and the subsequent implementation of
confidence-building measures.

We urge the political actors to maintain close
coordination with the Government and the Electoral
Commission, with a view to resolving any concerns
on logistical issues such as the use of voting machines
and voter registration, so as to prevent any possible
challenge to the results and ensure a normal electoral
process. In that regard, we also consider it necessary to
have in place contingency plans for possible incidents.
We deem essential the constructive involvement of all
actors in supporting security measures that may be
necessary to ensure a normal electoral process. We note
with particular concern the situation of insecurity in
the east of the country. In addition, we highlight that
the outbreak of the Ebola virus makes addressing the
serious challenges the country is facing even more
complicated. We must condemn the latest attacks in
Beni and lturi perpetrated by armed groups against
civilians and health personnel, as well as the kidnapping
of minors, and express our solidarity with the victims.

In that connection, we would like to highlight
the work carried out in such difficult conditions by
Government health personnel, with the vital support of
the World Health Organization and the United Nations,
as well as the protection provided by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We underscore the importance
of the international community redoubling its efforts
to address the grave humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Finally, we wish to
stress the importance for the international community,
including the relevant regional and subregional
organizations, to continue to closely monitor the
electoral process and the post-election period, with a
view to supporting and accompanying the process of
building sustainable peace in the country.

