Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to start
by expressing my delegation's appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to participate in the
Security Council discussion of an issue of the utmost
concern to us. I also thank all our briefers - Mr. Jenca,
Ms. Mueller, Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik - for
their inputs. We are profoundly grateful for their devoted
efforts to assist my country. We would also like to
express our gratitude to all Security Council members,
in particular the new members, who spoke in support of
Ukraine's territorial integrity and sovereignty.

Since we cannot exclude the fact that the Russian
delegation may make it a customary practice to call for
thematic meetings related to the Russian-Ukrainian
conflict based on the dates of certain significant events,
let me try and put together an indicative list of dates,
which is by no means exhaustive, for Council members
to keep in mind while making preparations for the
upcoming months. It is as follows.

On 20 February 2014, Russia started its invasion
of Crimea. A week from now there will be a General
Assembly debate on that date, but perhaps someone
will come up with the idea of having a discussion also
in the Security Council. It is better to be prepared, just
in case. The day of 16 March marks the holding of the
infamous so-called referendum in Crimea. On 27 March
2014, the General Assembly adopted resolution 68/262,
asserting that the so-called referendum had no validity
and could not form the basis for any alteration of the
status of Crimea.

Incidentally, the Russian side is consistently
pushing the narrative of the peaceful nature of events
in Crimea. I will cite just one episode from 2014 for the
Council's consideration. On 18 March, the Ukrainian
warrant officer Serhiy Kokurin, a native of Crimea, was
shot in the heart by two bullets during an assault by the
Russian special forces on the Ukrainian cartographic
station near Simferopol. He was the very first Ukrainian
soldier killed by Russia in this war.

On 14 June, the Russian forces shot down aUkrainian
transport aircraft over the Luhansk airport, killing 40
Ukrainian paratroopers and nine crew members.

The day of 17 July marks the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, which was another terrorist
attack by Russia. All 298 people onboard were killed.

On 23-24 August, four battalion tactical groups
of the Russian armed forces invaded the territory
of Ukraine.

The day of 5 September marks the signing of the
Minsk Protocol, which, together with the Memorandum
outlining the parameters for the implementation of
commitments of the Minsk Protocol, constitutes the
core of the Minsk agreements, with the package of
measures for their implementation. For the record,
on the Russian side, the document was signed by the
Ambassador of the Russian Federation to Ukraine,
Mikhail Zurabov. That is with regard to the issue as to
whether Russia is a party to the conflict or whether it
has nothing to do with the conflict in Ukraine.

On 22 October, at a meeting of the Permanent
Council of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, Russia blocked the adoption
of the decision to extend the mandate of the OSCE
observer mission at the Russian checkpoints Gukovo
and Donetsk to the entire uncontrolled part of the
Ukrainian-Russian border. Incidentally, paragraph 4 of
the aforementioned Minsk Protocol reads as follows:

"Ensure permanent monitoring on the
Ukrainian-Russian state border and verification by
the OSCE, together with the creation of a security
area in the border regions of Ukraine and the
Russian Federation".

On 2 November, illegal elections were held in the
occupied areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
That was yet another violation of the Minsk Protocol,
of which paragraph 9 reads:
"Ensure the holding of early local elections
in accordance with the Law of Ukraine 'With
respect to the temporary status of local self-
government in certain areas of the Donetsk and the

Lugansk regions .

Worse, the recent holding in late November 2018 by
the administration of the Russian occupation of another
illegal so-called election in the occupied areas added
insult to injury. It was a clear and deliberate provocation
to undermine the Minsk agreements.

The day of 25 November 2018 marks another
significant development, when the Russian navy
attacked Ukraine's two armoured boats and a tugboat
in the Azov Sea.

On 13 January 2015, the Russian forces shelled
a checkpoint near the town of Volnovakha. Twelve
civilians were killed and 18 more were wounded. Later
the same month, on 24 January, the Russian forces
randomly shelled the outskirts of Mariupol, killing
31 civilians.

Let me now answer the question of the colleague
from Germany about the Stanytsia Luhanska crossing
point, which, by the way, was visited a couple of
days ago jointly by the Foreign Minister of Ukraine,
Mr. Klimkin, and the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office,
Slovak Foreign Minister Lajcak. Our Minister of
course repeated the commitment of the Ukrainian side
to the opening of the checkpoint but, unfortunately, that
is not enough because, as members may know, there
is a bridge connecting the two sides. The bridge is
almost completely destroyed. It needs to be repaired.
The Ukrainian side needs access to the area and to the
bridge for that, but to date that has unfortunately been
denied by the other side.

I now turn to the subject of today's meeting. I
must immediately ask my colleagues around the table
for indulgence, since even an abridged account of the
state of implementation of the Minsk agreements is
quite extensive and, in all probability, my statement
will last more than five minutes. I count on the
Council's understanding.

Today we heard an already well-known
interpretation - or, to be more precise,
misinterpretation - of the implementation of the Minsk
agreements by the Russian representative. But the
reality is quite different. All daily developments prove
that it is only Russia and its ongoing military activity
in the occupied territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions of Ukraine, as well as in Crimea, that for now
constitute an unsurmountable obstacle to the peaceful
resolution of the conflict. The Russian side proposes a
very selective approach to the implementation of the
Minsk agreements, emphasizing the political elements
in its own interpretation. However, it completely
ignores its own obligations in the security and
humanitarian spheres. Let me start with some numbers.

As of the beginning of February, the Russian armed
formations in Donbas have in their possession 496 main
battle tanks - comparable to the arsenals of countries
such as Germany, France and Indonesia- 938 armoured
combat vehicles - similar to Peru and Kuwait - 128
multiple launch rocket systems - somewhat less than
Indonesia - 776 artillery systems, including self-
propelled ones - again, comparable to the numbers
of such former Council members as Kazakhstan
or Ethiopia.

The armed force of 35,000 in occupied Donbas
is supported by over 2,100 Russian regular military,
mostly in key command and control positions. Many of
them already have a lot of experience in Syria. The total
number of the Russian offensive strike group personnel
along the Russian-Ukrainian border, including the
groups adjacent to the occupied territories of Donbas
and Crimea, is 87,750 military. Those are quite some
numbers, are they not? Now the question: what do these
numbers speak of in terms of Russia's real intentions?
Do they show that the party in question wants to
de-escalate the situation? I will let the Council draw its
own conclusions.

Since the Russian representative decided to quote
some of the provisions of the Minsk agreements, but not
as many as during the most recent meetings, I would also
like to remind him that it was Russia that violated its
commitments almost instantly following the signing of
the Minsk documents. In particular, the Russian forces
attacked and seized the city of Debaltseve on 16 to
18 February 2015, immediately after the Minsk package
of measures, which established the comprehensive
ceasefire as of 15 February, had been signed by the
leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France.

The logic of the Minsk agreements envisages
the immediate implementation of initial security
provisions a ceasefire and heavy weapons
withdrawal. From 2015 on, Russia has effectively
sabotaged the implementation of ceasefire agreements

18 times - I repeat, 18 times. During this period
there were over 54,000 cases of ceasefire violations.
In almost 6,000 cases the Russian forces used weapon
systems prohibited by the Minsk agreements.

Now, with regard to the heavy weapons withdrawal,
Ukraine has withdrawn all the prescribed weapons as
per paragraph 2 of the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. We regularly
provide the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission with
detailed inventory lists of such weapons. The most
recent list was sent to the Mission on 9 February. There
are numerous and regular cases of blatant violations
of stationing heavy weapons by the other side in the
immediate vicinity of the actual contact line, not
the withdrawal line. There has been no progress in
negotiations about creating a heavy-weapon-free area
near Mariupol. Do I need to say that it is the Russian
representatives that block any discussion of the issue?

What about the withdrawal of all foreign armed
formations, military equipment and mercenaries from
the territory of Ukraine, in accordance with paragraph
10 of the package of measures? The picture is crystal
clear. Reports of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission offer an additional insight into the presence
of the Russian weapon systems and, by extension, of
the Russian military, including radio reconnaissance
systems, four different distinct electronic warfare
systems, the latest radars and jamming stations in the
occupied territories of Ukraine.

Let us now have a look at how the sides implement
the provision relating to the monitoring and verification
by the OSCE Mission, as referred to in paragraph
3 of the package of measures. Ukraine provides the
maximum support possible to the work of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission, which is deployed in
Ukraine at the invitation of its Government. Again, I
will let the numbers speak for themselves. During the
latest ceasefire period the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission reported just one case of a Mission convoy
being stopped by the Ukrainian forces. What do we have
on the other side? There have been 37 cases of limiting
the freedom of movement of the OSCE monitors.

In 2016 and 2017 all OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission long-range unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV)
were shot down over the occupied territories. In 2018
the Mission restarted their use for monitoring purposes.
The latest long-range UAV downing was on 27 October
2018. As a result, all UAVs are under constant threat.

In 2018 alone, the Special Monitoring Mission
encountered over 900 restrictions of access in the
Russia-occupied parts of Donbas, especially near the
State border and in southern parts of the Donetsk region
adjacent to the Sea of Azov.

Again, some facts: in 2018 there were 153 cases
of illegal crossing of the Ukraine-Russia border by
automobile and rail transport carrying military goods,
fuel, arms and weapons, armaments and munitions.
There have already been 19 cases in 2019, in just over
one month.

That is why we still believe that a peacekeeping
operation under United Nations auspices can bring
peace to Ukraine. We are ready for constructive
discussions on this initiative. For Ukraine it is a
matter of principle that any decision on establishing a
peacekeeping operation in Donbas extend its mandate
over the entire occupied territory, provide for the
withdrawal of all foreign troops and mercenaries and
their weaponry from the territory of Ukraine, as well
as the dissolution of all illegal bodies and structures. It
no less important that any peacekeeping operation be
based on key United Nations peacekeeping principles,
first and foremost, impartiality, even-handedness
and neutrality.

We call on Russia to give up its attempts to misuse
the United Nations peacekeeping toolbox in order
to legitimize the gains of aggression in Donbas. The
only way for Russia to prove its declared willingness
towards de-escalation is to stop the talk and walk the
walk - and to join Ukraine and partners in constructive
work on a peacekeeping operation. It must be a full-
fledged mission, deployed to all Russia-occupied areas
of Donbas, including along the uncontrolled segment of
the Ukrainian-Russian State border.

Having discussed in detail the implementation ofthe
Minsk agreements and the respective Security Council
resolution, I would also like to bring to the attention
of Council members another document of this body,
that is, the statement by the President of the Security
Council S/26118, of 20 July 1993, which was adopted
following the Council's consideration of the agenda
item entitled "Complaint by Ukraine regarding the
Decree of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation
concerning Sevastopol". That is not a forgotten story.
The document contains the following words:

"The Security Council reaffirms in this
connection its commitment to the territorial
integrity okaraine, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. The Security Council recalls
that in the Treaty between the Russian Federation
and Ukraine, signed in Kiev on 19 November 1990,
the High Contracting Parties committed themselves
to respect each other's territorial integrity within
their currently existing frontiers."

The Russian representative at that time said at that
Council meeting:

"As we remain dedicated to the principle
of the inviolability of the borders within the
Commonwealth of Independent States, inter alia
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine, Russia
intends strictly to abide by the fundamental norms
of civilized behavior for States in the international
arena, based on the firm ground of international
law, respect for the Charter of the United Nations
and the principles of the Conference on Security
and Cooperation in Europe." (S/PV3256, pp. 14-15)

As we see, the Russian firm intention of 1993 to
conduct itself as a civilized State has not, unfortunately,
evolved into a principled and consistent policy, as
its invasions in Georgia in 2008 and in Ukraine in
2014 clearly reveal. And that is the State that is fond
of accusing others of "Henorosopocnoco6Hocrs",
which is a Russian word that means being incapable
of fulfilling one's contractual obligations. It can be
quite fascinating to see the Russians declaring one
thing, doing the complete opposite and simultaneously
attempting, figuratively speaking, to turn the tables
and convince everyone that black is white and white is
black. At this point, I would like to cite Matthew 7:16:
"Ye shall know them by their fruits". The Russian fruits
are rather obvious.

In conclusion, as our rhetorical exercise here has
continued for nearly three hours already, and as our
friends have already reminded us, I would like to
remind the Council that tomorrow the Trilateral Contact
Group will hold what is already its 103rd meeting. For
many months, the Minsk process participants have
desperately tried to convince Russia to at least agree
to the exchange of prisoners, based on any formula
agreeable to them, including all for all. Ukraine has sent
13 official written proposals with different formulas
for exchanging Ukrainian prisoners and detainees in
Russia and the occupied territories for Russian citizens
in Ukraine who have been sentenced for crimes against
my country's territorial integrity and sovereignty. We
have received no response. We care about our people,
and Russia is sending a clear signal to all its soldiers
fighting in Ukraine that it will do nothing to bring them
back home. The issue at stake in Minsk tomorrow is
the fate of three Ukrainians who have been captured
and held in Donetsk for nearly four years now. Their
names are Bohdan Pantyushenko, Oleksandr Korynkov
and Serhiy Hlondar, whose three-year-old daughter has
never seen him. Let us make our meeting meaningful
andjointly call on Russia to release them.

