I would like to join others in welcoming Defence Minister Annegret Kramp- Karrenbauer to the Security Council and thank her for presiding over today's open debate on peacekeeping operations and human rights. I also thank all briefers for their insights on the issue. The promotion and protection of human rights are part of the mandates of most peacekeeping operations in the field today. As the largest troop- and police- contributing country among members of the Security Council, with more than 2,800 personnel serving in eight missions, Indonesia has always emphasized the imperative of making peacekeeping mandates clear, specific and focused. This is to ensure that peacekeeping operations dedicate their resources to tasks that matter the most for the people. After all, the primary objective of peacekeeping operations is to promote peace through political solutions. In fostering measures to achieve the goal, allow me to focus on three pertinent points. First, I would cite the importance of strengthening national capacity. The primary responsibility of promoting and protecting the human rights of citizens rests with the host country. We need to ensure that the host country has adequate protection-capacity to prevent the risk of human rights violations. The United Nations should therefore assist conflict-affected countries to strengthen their capacities. Today, peacekeeping can play an important enabling role by providing technical assistance and support to relevant institutions in host countries. Indonesia has rigorously prepared and trained its peacekeepers, including in the area of human rights, and these peacekeepers stand ready to assist host countries in building their protection-capacity. However, realizing the culture of respect for human rights is a long-term endeavour. Efforts in that direction should therefore be part of holistic peacebuilding efforts that go beyond the life of peacekeeping operations. Secondly, the implementation of human rights mandates requires a whole-of- mission approach. The delivery on a human rights mandate, particularly during the coronavirus disease pandemic, is not easy. Close coordination between human rights officers in a mission with the military, police, other civilian components and the United Nations country teams is key. Moreover, engagement with relevant national stakeholders and civil society is also crucial. While fulfilling human rights mandates, it is also our task to ensure the safety and security of our peacekeepers. Not only should our peacekeepers be well equipped with relevant knowledge and capacity, but they should also be supported with the equipment and infrastructure they need. Thirdly, with regard to the role of women peacekeepers, it is evident that women peacekeepers have made valuable contributions to mission performance, including in the promotion and protection of human rights. Their unique approaches in engaging the local community, in particular the women and children of those communities, enable them to prevent and address human rights violations more effectively. For Indonesia, community engagement is crucial to winning the hearts and minds of the population, which is key for the success of peacekeeping. We are proud to be among the top contributors of women peacekeepers. Currently, we have 159 women peacekeepers serving in seven missions, including in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This number represents an increase of more than 50 per cent compared to last year. We are also committed to preparing and training them with necessary skills and knowledge, including on human rights. Going forward, as part of our strong commitment to advancing the role of women as agents of peace, Indonesia will continue to advocate greater participation of and an increased role for women peacekeepers. We underscore the responsibility of the Security Council in enabling lasting solutions to conflicts. The more a society is helped to move away from violence and conflict, the stronger its commitment to peace and human rights protection will be. Before I conclude, I wish to convey our condolences to the family of the Indonesian peacekeeping staff member in the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), who recently passed away. On behalf of the Government of the Republic of Indonesia, allow me to express my sincere condolences to the family of Warrant Officer Rama Wahyudi, who lost his life during his service in MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He will be remembered as a hero, not only for Indonesia, but also for the world.
