Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/721)
and Special Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin for his
important statement today.

I would first like to join with others in expressing
our sadness at today's crash in southern Afghanistan
in which six United States soldiers of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) were killed, and to
pay tribute to the work of ISAF's service personnel for
their tireless efforts to build peace in Afghanistan in
the face of danger.

My statement today will focus on five key areas:
security, the peace process in the region, elections,
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework and
the future engagement of the United Nations in
Afghanistan. First, concerning the security landscape,
the determination and dedication of ISAF and the
Afghan national security forces have allowed the
Government of Afghanistan to build the foundations
of a stable and democratic country. The Afghan
national security forces have proved themselves this
fighting season, their first in the lead. But the gains
they have made are fragile, and the insurgency remains
resilient. The support of NATO and the international
community will be vital to ensuring long-term stability
in Afghanistan. We welcome the loya jirga's decision
last month to endorse the bilateral security agreement,
and we hope it will now be signed without further delay.
NATO will be able to plan properly for a long-term,
sustainable and balanced relationship only once the
bilateral security agreement between the United States
and the Government of Afghanistan is in place, as the
representative of Australia said before us.

The second key issue is work towards a stable
and prosperous region. A political settlement remains
the best way to security and sustainable peace in
Afghanistan. We welcome the weeks of dialogue
between the leaders ofAfghanistan and Pakistan, which
has delivered tangible results. The United Kingdom is a
strong supporter of that vital relationship. Afghanistan's
other close neighbours will also be central to that effort.
We welcome the support of those countries engaged
in the Heart of Asia process and other initiatives to
promote trade, economic prosperity and security.

Third is preparations for elections. Afghanistan
is entering the final phase of preparations for the
presidential and provincial council elections, which
are just four months away. Technical preparations are
proceeding well. The new legal framework is being
implemented. Over a third of those taking part in voter
registration so far were women. That is good news.
Alongside support to the United Nations Development
Programme Enhancing Legal and Electoral Capacity
for Tomorrow - the ELECT II programme - in recent
months, the United Kingdom has pledged a further
$11 million to build the capacity of women elected to
provincial councils next year and to ensure that their
voices are heard in the democratic process.

The United Kingdom encourages the Government
of Afghanistan to give election observers the access
they need to the electoral process so that when the time
comes, they can report credibly to the Afghan people
on how inclusively the election has been conducted.

The fourth key issue concerns our challenge to
deliver on the commitments we made at the Tokyo
Conference in 2012. The Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework remains the blueprint for the international
community's development efforts in Afghanistan. The
priorities of the Government of Afghanistan next year
are to maintain economic stability, to deliver credible
and transparent elections and to consolidate the gains
made in human rights, particularly women's rights, as
our colleague from Luxembourg underlined earlier.
A Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board meeting,
scheduled for January 2014, will provide an important
opportunity for the international community and the
Government of Afghanistan to review progress, set
post-election priorities and plan for the ministerial
development conference later this year. The United
Kingdom looks forward to co-chairing that conference.

Finally, on the future of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, the United Kingdom is firmly behind a
strong United Nations presence in Afghanistan. The
United Nations will have a central role next year,
working with the Government of Afghanistan to lock
in the gains made over the last decade. To deliver that
objective, the Council will need to deliver a mandate
next March that gives the Special Representative
and his team the clear steer on what we see as their
priorities for 2014 and beyond and the tools to execute
that mandate effectively.

We agree with the priorities identified in the
Secretary-General's quarterly report. We also agree
that a country-wide presence is essential for the United
Nations to carry out its responsibilities. To do that
effectively, the United Nations must have the resources
it needs as well as the backing of the host Government.
We also want to see the United Nations country team
step up its activities, particularly on the rule of law.

The year 2014 will be challenging. We pledge to
continue our support to the Government of Afghanistan
as it seeks to build a more peaceful, democratic and
prosperous future for all Afghans. That is in our
common interest here today.

