We remain concerned at the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories. COVID-19 is a common threat that knows no boundaries and endangers Israelis and Palestinians alike. We therefore call on both parties to enhance their coordination and cooperation in order to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak in Israel, the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip. Recalling their respective responsibilities and obligations under international law and international humanitarian law, we call on Israel and the Palestinian Authority to ensure the delivery of COVID-19-related aid and to facilitate the access and movement of medical supplies, equipment, materials and personnel, in particular to the vulnerable population in the Gaza Strip. We commend the United Nations for its efforts to support Israeli-Palestinian coordination and to respond to the humanitarian consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic in the occupied Palestinian territories. Germany has made an early disbursement of unearmarked funding in the amount of €18 million to provide the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) with more financial flexibility to tackle pandemic-related challenges. We have also made available funding for the Gaza Strip, in the amount of €19 million, and the Syria emergency appeal, in the amount of €14 million. As UNRWA plays a critical role in the current pandemic, Germany is currently considering how we can support specific COVID-19-related appeals. We call on other international donors to provide similar support to the Palestinian Authority, the United Nations Inter-Agency Response Plan and UNRWA. However, international donor support alone will not suffice to effectively address the socioeconomic consequences of the COVID-19 crisis in the Palestinian territories. It is also of utmost importance that the Palestinian Authority be able to count on a regular, sufficient and predictable transfer of clearance revenues from Israel. We therefore call on both parties to renew their efforts to agree on the unresolved fiscal files, in accordance with the Paris Protocol. We express our full support for the joint appeal of 11 April by the Secretary- General's Envoys to the Middle East. The parties to the conflict and all international stakeholders must exercise maximum restraint and refrain from taking any measures that may lead to a further deterioration of the situation on the ground and risk undermining the viability of a negotiated two-State solution. Germany remains convinced that a negotiated two-State solution based on international law and on the internationally agreed parameters is the only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs, fulfils Palestinian aspirations to statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in 1967, resolves all permanent status issues and guarantees equal rights for all inhabitants. We have to find ways to revive the political process and to resume direct and meaningful negotiations between the parties in order to resolve the final status issues, including the issues related to borders, the status of Jerusalem, security and refugees, and achieve a just and lasting peace. Germany firmly believes that the format and the basis of such direct and meaningful negotiations must be agreed by both parties. That said, we consider reviving a multilateral format, such as the Middle East Quartet, and using Security Council resolutions, international law and the internationally agreed parameters as the basis for any discussions or negotiations to be the most promising way to advance towards a negotiated, just and viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that is acceptable to both sides, the Israelis and the Palestinians. Unilateral actions creating facts on the ground will not lead to sustainable peace and security but to perpetual instability and insecurity. We have taken note of the coalition agreement in Israel, intended to end the stalemate following three rounds of national elections. We are extremely concerned about its provisions with regard to the application of Israeli sovereignty to parts of the occupied Palestinian territories. We strongly advise any Israeli Government against the annexation of occupied Palestinian territories. This would constitute a clear violation of international law and have serious, negative repercussions not only for the viability of the two-State solution and the entire peace process, but potentially also for regional stability and Israel's standing within the international community. Germany will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, unless agreed to by both parties, and we will continue to distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. In this context, we reiterate our position that Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under international law and severely undermine the prospects for ending the occupation and achieving a negotiated two- State solution. We call on Israel to end the expansion of settlements, including the recent construction plans for Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and the E-1 area, the legalization of settlement outposts, and the ongoing demolition and confiscation of Palestinian structures and land. Resolution 2334 (2016) needs to be fully implemented, with regard not only to settlement activities, but also to acts of terror, violence against civilians, incitement, provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric, which also constitute obstacles to achieving peace. Germany condemns all attacks on Israel in the strongest possible terms, including the repeated firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel by Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad. Germany aligns itself with the statement submitted by the Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations on behalf of the European Union.
