Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to welcome Mr. Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. However,
once again, we must note that his report (S/2014/3l4, annex), which we have studied carefully, reveals a trend
with regard to Bosnian Serbs, that is, they are blamed
for all the political ills in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
a downplaying of the adverse impact of the Muslim
Croatian clashes in the country and an ongoing denial
of the legitimate rights of Bosnian Croatians under the
Dayton Agreement. We reject that unilateral and harsh
approach. In order to have an objective picture of what
is taking place in the country, we would recommend
that Council members also read the eleventh report of
the Republic of Serbia to the Secretary-General and the
Security Council, in which the commitment of Bosnian
Serbs to international law and the letter of Dayton is
clear.

We call on the High Representative to act consistent
with the "5+2" programme agreed in 2008 by the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board, which sets out
conditions for drawing down the protectorate in Bosnia
an Herzegovina. Unresolved problems in that regard,
as well as other fundamental questions for the future of
the country, should be resolved by Bosnians themselves
through inclusive dialogue and on the basis of the
consent of all constituent peoples. The task of the High
Representative is to promote those efforts and find
common denominators, not focus on a Euro-Atlantic
agenda, domestic affairs or the country's decisions on
international affairs.

We agree with the appropriateness of improving the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina in accordance
with the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights
in the Sejdie-Finzi case. A compromise decision on
that issue is possible if it is arrived at in an inclusively
manner. However, we cannot agree with the broad
interpretation of the Court's ruling in an attempt to

use it as a pretext to reopen the question of the entire
Dayton structure. We note that, in contrast with the
well-articulated position of the Republika Srpska on
the issue, to date representatives of the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have been unable to agree on a
single approach - mainly owing to the unwillingness
to take into account the legitimate interests of Bosnian
Croats.

We are closely following developments in the
domestic political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is of course being impacted increasingly by the
general elections scheduled for October. At the same
time, see no reason for dramatizing the situation, as the
report of the High Representative does.

There are concerns about the situation in the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but the High
Representative for some reason does not dwell on
that and instead focuses his main criticism on Banja
Luka. Moreover, when protests arose in February 2014
in Bosnian-populated areas of the country - some
of which resulted in violence, including the seizing
and burning of administrative buildings and the
forced resignation of cantonal authorities - the High
Representative shifted the blame to the Republika
Srpska and Croatians. It has to be acknowledged that
Serbian entities are essentially free of social unrest.
That is due to the active cooperation between the
Government, unions and employers, as well as the
timely, successful measures taken to resolve business
issues and encourage the private sector.

The mass protests that took place in February were
a manifestation of the far-reaching crisis in the Muslim
Croatian entities. While the unrest was due to the
worsening socioeconomic situation, the main reason
goes far deeper: the absence ofa balanced multi-ethnic
policy at the federal level, ignoring the legitimate rights
of Croatians and the failure to resolve ongoing tensions
among the main Bosnian parties. All of that has an
adverse impact not just on the Federation, but also the
whole country. We are convinced that the usefulness
of external supervision of the situation, along the lines
of the Office of the High Representative, has run its
course. The crisis in the Federation is just an additional
argument for the need to draw down the personnel
and for an inclusive internal dialogue to resolve the
country's problems. There is no need to create artificial
reasons to retain the apparatus.

Unfortunately, the High Representative was again
silent concerning the alarming fact that members
of the military opposition in Syria are being helped
by mercenaries who are citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which potentially threatens stability in
that country and region. Here we welcome the efforts
of Sarajevo to strengthen criminal accountability for
fighters and illegal armed groups outside the country
and their accomplices.

Overall, since the devastating armed conflict ended
in 1995, Bosnia and Herzegovina has achieved concrete
results. I do not agree with Mr. Inzko's conclusions in
the report that the February protests demonstrated the
fragility of the security situation. Quite to the contrary,
the vast majority of the population, authorities and
law enforcement have demonstrated their ability to
act in a legitimate manner. We hope that the High
Representative, our partners in the Security Council
and the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council together will uphold the need for dialogue
between the Bosnian parties in the run-up to the October
elections. The way forward for the peace process should
continue to be the transfer of responsibility to Bosnians
themselves.

