Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa welcomes
the convening of this special and crucial open debate
on children and armed conflict, particularly given
the increase in Violations of the rights of children, not
only in armed conflict but also in terms of emerging
asymmetrical threats to global peace and security, such
as terrorism. We also welcome the briefings by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, and
commend Mr. Mubin Shaikh for his brave testimony
and the advocacy role he has played in preventing
children from being recruited into terrorist groups.

South Africa echoes the Secretary-General's
concern about the severity of the violations against
children in situations of armed conflict. We are deeply
concerned and appalled that more than 8,000 children
were killed or maimed in conflict situations in 2016.
Children are indeed the most vulnerable members of
our society, as even in times of peace they require care,
security and a stable environment to ensure they reach
their potential as positive contributors to society. The
question that we ought to ask ourselves in this debate
is, Are we doing enough? Are the initiatives we are
taking sufficient? What more should we do to ensure
that we take on the responsibilities to protect the most
vulnerable in our societies?
The work of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict is admirable. We applaud the delegation
of Sweden, as Chair ofthe Working Group, for injecting
much-needed impetus into the Group's conduct and
completion of its work. South Africa calls for greater
resources to be devoted to the issue, especially with
regard to assisting the Working Group in handling the
volume of reporting and incidents in order to enable it
to report back effectively in a timely manner.

We condemn in the strongest terms all violations
of commitments related to the protection of children in
armed conflict, including those against recruitment, the
use of sexual violence, killing and maiming, attacking
schools and hospitals, and abductions. We also call on
all countries to work to ensure humanitarian access to
civilians affected by violence. While we support the
efforts of Member States that have taken measures to
address their inability to adhere to these commitments,
we also fully support accurate and credible reporting
mechanisms, including the listing of those who
commit Violations, in order to dissuade them from
such practices. Nevertheless, the main challenge lies
not in our ability as Member States to adhere to these
commitments, but rather how we address the issue of
non-State actors who violate the rights of children and
often do not respect the principles and goals of States
Members of the United Nations in their pursuit of a
peaceful and prosperous world. New strategies must be
developed to counter this threat.

South Africa has been at the forefront of processes
aimed at strengthening the commitments to the
protection of children in armed conflict. The Cape
Town Principles and Best Practices on the Prevention
of Recruitment of Children into the Armed Forces and
on Demobilization and Social Reintegration of Child
Soldiers in Africa, which were adopted in 1997, are
indicative of our long-standing support for this process.
They formed the basis for the Paris Commitments to
protect children from unlawful recruitment or use by
armed forces or armed groups and the Paris Principles
and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups, and we therefore call on all
parties to pledge their firm and unwavering commitment
to the Paris Principles. My delegation also reiterates
its support for resolution 1612 (2005), on children and
armed conflict.

We welcomed the findings ofthe report ost. Graca
Machel on the impact of armed conflict on children (see A/51/306), in relation to General Assembly resolution
51/77, on the rights of the child. It signalled the start of
a new consensus among Member States on the need for
dedicated attention, advocacy and coordinated efforts
to address the particular vulnerabilities and violations
faced by children in conflict-related situations.

South Africa welcomes the recommendations
and focus of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/821) on cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in coordinating efforts to
address violations ofthe protection of children in armed
conflict. In that regard, we also welcome the Secretary-
General's call for Member States and regional and
subregional organizations involved in negotiating the
cessation of hostilities or peace agreements to include,
from the outset, specific child-protection provisions in
order to prioritize the prevention of grave violations.
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union
has held a number of open sessions based around the
theme of children and armed conflict, and has called
for collective security efforts to deal with the scourges
of terrorism, Violent extremism and radicalization
in Africa, with a View to ensuring respect for child
rights and welfare. In our own subregion, South Africa
will be hosting a capacity-building programme for
young leaders in the Southern African Development
Community, as part of South Africa's contribution
to youth development in line with Security Council
resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security,
which focuses on the role of young men and women in
peacebuilding and countering violent extremism.

In conclusion, as our late President Nelson
Mandela once remarked, "The true character of society
is revealed in how it treats its children". We believe
the Security Council should take a firm and concerted
stance in ensuring that our children, and young people
in general, are shielded from the horrors of conflict and
other Violations that threaten to undermine our future
prospects for the maintenance of international peace,
security and development.

