Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Before
turning to my statement on the draft resolution before us,
may I just say with what sadness the people and the
Government of the United Kingdom heard the news of the
passing of Shaikh Isa Bin Salman. He was a man who
guided his people well after independence in December
1971. I believe that many may have forgotten the
uncertainty with which we regarded the future of the Gulf
emirates at that time. Shaikh Isa made a notable
contribution to the stability and success not just of Bahrain
but of the Gulf States during the 19705 and beyond. He will
be very sadly missed.

I shall now turn to my statement on the draft
resolution before us.

The crisis in Sierra Leone matters deeply: although it
is a small country, the emergency there is complex, the
humanitarian problems horrifying and the message of risk
for African development generally is graphic. The gravity
of this situation demands a response of appropriate
magnitude from the Council, the wider United Nations
system and the international community as a whole.

Against this background, the United Kingdom
recognizes the important progress that has been made on
the ground since the security crisis of late December. We
warmly welcome the planned return of United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) to
Freetown, demonstrating the stabilization of the situation
there. We believe that this redeployment will help bolster
confidence in Sierra Leone and send the right signals
about international engagement. But it will also reinforce
the United Nations efforts to promote a ceasefire and
dialogue with the rebels and to monitor the fragile human
rights situation.

Relative stabilization in Sierra Leone has come only
after the concerted efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) since the turn of the year to push back the
rebels from the Freetown peninsula after their wanton
violence and destruction there. ECOMOG is the sole
means of protection for ordinary people from rebel
atrocities and presents the only hope in the short term of
bringing peace and security to Sierra Leone. The courage,
determination and sacrifice of the ECOMOG soldiers
from Nigeria, Ghana, Guinea and Mali deserve our praise
and gratitude. ECOMOG's deployment in Sierra Leone
has represented a milestone in the development of
regional peacekeeping, which the Council has rightly
commended.

This improvement has been heavily dependent on
international support for ECOMOG. The draft resolution
before us, enshrining the judgements of the Secretary-
General's fifth report on UNOMSIL, urges the need for
continued international financial and logistical support for
ECOMOG.

A large part of the new United Kingdom assistance
package of 10 million pounds, announced by Foreign
Secretary Robin Cook on 2 March, will again go to
ECOMOG. Our funds will be used to match new
contributions from others, so we urge others to play their
part. The international community cannot expect the
current ECOMOG contributors to continue to bear the
human and financial costs of the operation in Sierra
Leone without significant levels of assistance. The
Secretary-General was right to draw attention in his report
to the possible consequences if ECOMOG forces were to
withdraw or scale down through lack of adequate support.
There is a material and collective responsibility here
which the United Nations and, specifically, the Security
Council, must live up to.

The stabilization of Sierra Leone also depends on
continuing international pressure on those providing

 

support to the rebels. In this regard, much of our attention
has rightly focused on support coming from Liberia and
through the involvement of Liberian nationals. Pressure
there seems to be paying dividends, and the draft resolution
recognizes certain proposals made by the Government of
Liberia to address this problem. But we need to check that
President Taylor's assurances will be translated into
concrete action. For example, we expect the Government of
Liberia to meet its commitment to arrest and prosecute any
Liberian citizen found to be still engaged in the armed
conflict in Sierra Leone after the 45-day amnesty that began
on 19 February.
The draft resolution and the report also highlight the
need to help Sierra Leone ensure its own security when
ECOMOG eventually leaves. This is the only way the
country can look forward to lasting peace and stability. Part
of the United Kingdom funding will address this through a
training programme for a new, democratically accountable
and effective national army. We urge others to consider
what help they too can contribute in this essential area.

While the United Kingdom has paid much attention to
the urgent requirement for financial, logistical and material
support to shore up security in Sierra Leone, we are
conscious of the need to pursue the search for a peaceful
solution of the conflict as a matter of urgency. Special
Representative Okelo, to whose efforts we pay tribute, has
called for a significant and forceful push towards dialogue
and a settlement. He and others in the region involved in
these mediation efforts have our strong support. When
Foreign Secretary Cook met President Kabbah in Abuja on
9 March, he pressed him to develop dialogue with the
rebels. We recognize the difficulties which this presents,
but are convinced that political exchange is necessary to
pave the way to a better future for Sierra Leone and its
people.

Success in Sierra Leone is achievable, but it needs
hard work and hard cash. Ultimately, it lies in hands of the
people and Government of Sierra Leone. But it will only be
possible with the continued commitment of the international
community to give vigorous support, on both the security
and the political tracks, to a lasting solution. I trust that the
Council's unanimous support for the draft resolution before
us will mark that commitment.

