Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Allow me, first, to
congratulate the Republic of Korea on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, and to thank
you, Madam President, for convening and organizing
today's meeting. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his briefing to the Security
Council today.

I would like to align my statement with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union earlier
this morning. In my national capacity I would like to
make a few points that are particularly important to
Slovenia.

Slovenia is a staunch supporter of resolution 1540
(2004), its effective implementation and the follow-up to
resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008). From the very
beginning, my country has supported the objective of
strengthening global efforts to prevent the acquisition
and use by non-State actors of nuclear, biological
and chemical weapons and materials, as well as their
means of delivery. Slovenia has adopted the necessary
legislation, established an effective national control
system and engaged in regional and global endeavours.

We note with satisfaction that, after 10 years,
resolution 1540 (2004) is a success story. Much has been
achieved over that period. Hundreds of projects have
been launched and many Member States in need have
been assisted. Today, the world is better equipped to
counter the proliferation ofweapons ofmass destruction
to non-State actors. I would especially like to commend
Ambassador Oh Joon of the Republic of Korea for
effectively chairing the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). Furthermore, I would like to
commend all Committee members and experts for their
work. Slovenia is pleased to note that 172 countries
report on the implementation of the resolution. However,
we should not be complacent. We should strive for
universal reporting and urge the remaining States
to submit their reports to the Committee as soon as
possible. Reporting lies at the heart of all international
instruments and demonstrates their efficiency and
health. The same applies to resolution 1540 (2004).

Let me also credit international efforts to
strengthen export control. Such efforts, notably those
of the international export regimes, and initiatives such
as the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism
and the Proliferation Security Initiative are vital for the
success of the resolution. Slovenia actively engages in
the activities of all those regimes and initiatives, except
the Missile Technology Control Regime. Slovenia urges
all States Members of the United Nations to establish
and ensure the effective functioning of their national
export controls.

There is still a great deal of work ahead of us. The
time is limited. The year 2021, when the Committee's
mandate expires, is not far away. We should use the
remaining time effectively and enhance our cooperation
within international and regional organizations, such
as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, and work together for better implementation
of the resolution. One of the key issues that we have
to thoroughly address is the challenge of proliferation
financing. We have to work closely with the financial
institutions that control international transactions.
At times, such institutions do not know for what
kind of transactions their money is used. Sometimes
it is channelled through complicated transactions
to proliferators. We should also engage our national
financial intelligence units in our activities. They
should work closely with export-control authorities and
law enforcement agencies.

Finally, Slovenia welcomes presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/7, adopted earlier at today's meeting.

