Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. Allow me also to
commend and thank Manju Gurung, a Nepalese former
child soldier, for her presentation on this topic, which I
am sure touched everyone in the Chamber and
highlighted vividly the plight of children affected by
armed conflict. We also express our gratitude to
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her commitment, tireless
efforts and outstanding work to ensure that children
live and grow in peace and dignity.
Armenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the European Union earlier
today. I would like to make some additional remarks in
my national capacity.

Conflicts have devastating consequences on
children. Their protection deserves the utmost attention
of the international community and should be a
primary responsibility of all of us, because it is a
serious humanitarian concern and a significant security
issue. The protection of children therefore requires a
multidimensional approach.

Armenia takes note of some positive trends in
recent years in the area of the protection of children in
armed conflict. A set of legal instruments has been
adopted that provide a comprehensive framework for
addressing the issue. As a country that has already
acceded to the Optional Protocols to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, Armenia welcomes and
strongly supports the Special Representative's
campaign for the universal ratification of those
important international instruments, which can bring
about positive change in the process of uniting our
efforts to protect children.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his recent report (S/2010/181) and its
recommendations, and we commend the work of the
Security Council Working Group on the issue, which
has earned sound public and political acknowledgment.

It is unfortunate that, despite the existence of
international legal instruments and normative
mechanisms, children continue to suffer in conflict
situations. I come from a region that, over the past two
decades, has witnessed a number of armed conflicts. As
mine a country that has hosted tens of thousands of
refugee children, the issue on today's agenda is of
particular concern for the Government of Armenia.
Despite past and current socio-economic hardships in
our country, the post-conflict rehabilitation of
children- in particular issues of health care and
education - continue to be at the centre of the
Government's attention.

Today, a final resolution of the conflicts in the
South Caucasus is still pending. A no-war/no-peace
situation cannot ensure a safe and decent future for
children and young people who have already witnessed
atrocities of war. It is our belief that only a
fundamental and comprehensive political settlement of
the current disputes can bring long-lasting peace and
stability to the region, thereby securing the rights of
our children to a peaceful future.

Having had the privilege of chairing the
Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-fourth
session, in March, I would like to emphasize that
special attention needs to be paid to children who are
victims of rape and other forms of sexual violence,
especially girls, who are usually the largest group of
victims in armed conflicts. In addition to physical
damage, sexual violence often leaves lasting harm and
stigma.

This year again, by recalling the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council on children and armed conflict, as well as
relevant provisions contained in the instruments of
international humanitarian law relative to the
protection of civilian populations, the Commission on
the Status of Women expressed grave concern about
the continuation of armed conflicts in many regions of
the world and the human suffering and humanitarian
emergencies that they had caused.

To that end, efforts to address sexual violence
could greatly benefit from more collaboration among
various United Nations and regional organizations that
are focused on the protection of children, as well as
those working on issues relating to gender equality and
empowerment and the rights of women and girls.

Armenia commends the work of civil society in
developing effective policies for the protection of
children in armed conflict and the direct help that many
non-governmental organizations provide on the
ground, sometimes in the most dangerous situations.
All relevant stakeholders should continue to work
closely and actively on the issues of gender-based
violence in armed conflict, and we encourage similar
cooperation between non-governmental organizations
and the Security Council and other international
organizations working on the protection of children in
armed conflict.
Child protection is everyone's responsibility, and
the future of children is dependent on the actions we
take today. Armenia has worked and will continue to
work closely and constructively with the United
Nations and other interested institutions and
organizations concerned with bettering the situation of
children around the world, including those affected by
armed conflict.
