Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate. We appreciate the fact
that the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Korea is
personally presiding over today's meeting. I also wish
to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his
briefing.

Brazil firmly believes that the mere existence of
weapons of mass destruction constitutes a threat to
humankind and therefore to international peace and
security. Throughout the past 50 years, the international
community has succeeded in agreeing on multilateral
legally binding instruments that ban some categories
of these lethal armaments, such as biological and
chemical weapons. We remain frustrated, however, by
the absence of political will and leadership on the part
of States possessing nuclear weapons to initiate similar
negotiations aiming at the complete elimination of
these weapons, with clear benchmarks and timelines.
The possibility that weapons of mass destruction could
fall into the hands of non-State actors, particularly
terrorists, is a matter of additional concern.

Circumscribing our efforts only to fighting
proliferation amounts to a limited perspective, however.
There is an urgent need for concrete action towards
effective disarmament by States possessing weapons
of mass destruction. Also, we remain convinced that
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction has
to be tackled in all its aspects. The risks of vertical
proliferation, especially of nuclear weapons, cannot be
left aside. Today, cuts in nuclear arsenals are quickly
offset by qualitative improvements in nuclear forces,
by the modernization of nuclear weapons and their
delivery systems, and by the roles ascribed to nuclear
weapons in the national defence doctrines of States
possessing these arsenals.

As long as weapons of mass destruction, in
particular nuclear weapons, continue to exist, there will
be States and non-State actors interested in acquiring
and developing them. Let me recall the Secretary-
General's words, issued at a conference in Monterey,
California, in 2013, that "there are no right hands for
wrong weapons". That statement has also been quoted
by previous speakers today, including in particular the
Ambassador of Argentina.

Despite the shortcomings of any strategy that does
not contemplate the linkage between disarmament and
non-proliferation efforts, Brazil is fully committed to
its obligations in this field, including those arising from
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1977 (2011). The Brazilian
Federal Constitution already forbids the conduct of any
non-peaceful nuclear activity in Brazilian territory.
Furthermore, my country is a party to all major
treaties and conventions in the field of disarmament
and non-proliferation, such as the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We are also one of the
promoters of the idea of a nuclear-weapon-free southern
hemisphere and, in the framework of the zone of peace
and cooperation in the South Atlantic, we have been
highlighting the benefits of a zone free of nuclear
weapons in the southern Atlantic.

We have incorporated into our national legislation
all obligations deriving from those instruments, as
well as those from resolution 1540 (2004), and we
have submitted national reports to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). In this
context, we value the important work that has been
carried out by the 1540 Committee and its Group of
Experts in assisting States to promote match-making in
cooperation and assistance, and other activities related
to the implementation of the resolution.

The tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004), which falls close to the seventieth
anniversary of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings,
as well as the forty-fifth anniversary of the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty, provides an opportunity to
reflect on the achievements and challenges still ahead
in the promotion of a safer world In this context, we
reiterate our concern over the lack of consensus that has
prevented us from further advancing in the disarmament
forums, such as the Conference on Disarmament, for
18 years now, and in the United Nations Disarmament
Commission for a whole decade.

The NPT review cycle, for its part, has been
characterized as a rolling-over exercise every five
years by the nuclear-weapon States with respect to the
implementation of their disarmament commitments.
Brazil also expresses disappointment over the
postponement of the conference on the establishment
of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East, which should have
taken place in 2012, and supports its convening at the
earliest possible date.

In conclusion, no effort on the non-proliferation
front, valuable as it may be, will suffice without further
steps in disarmament as regards all weapons of mass
destruction. These processes are mutually reinforcing
and must all be pursued with the same vigour by the
international community.

