Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I should like to
say that we are very pleased, Sir, that you have
included this important topic in your programme, since
it is our belief that a briefing by the High
Commissioner for Refugees is not only timely, but also
necessary if the Security Council is to have a real
measure of the importance of the problem of refugees,
internally displaced persons and security. This is no
longer a simple humanitarian problem; it is a real
security problem. I can attest to that, coming from a
country which has been affected and where the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees has been playing a very important positive
role in assisting my Government in the post-conflict
area.

On the other hand, Africa as a whole - as has
been reported by the High Commissioner - is a
continent where this problem is real. It is a problem
that we live with every day in every single region of
the continent, be it North Africa, West Africa or
southern Africa. This is a problem that needs to be
tackled and has to be considered also in conjunction
with the security analyses that we make, particularly
here in this Chamber.

I would therefore like to thank High
Commissioner Lubbers for the very interesting and
comprehensive briefing he has presented and for
raising some of the main issues that are still
confronting the Organization.

I would also like just to raise a couple of
questions, since this is the format we have agreed on.
First, I should like to hear a further elaboration on the
problem of interconnections in the work of
coordination with other agencies within and outside the
United Nations system. We have the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS and the United Nations
Children's Fund. How can we have a real coordination
of these various agencies so that we can deal
effectively with the problem? Again, we come back to
the fact that this is not just a simple humanitarian
question - it is a security problem.

Secondly, I would appreciate some further
comments on financial support. I know that this is one
of the main bottlenecks in the programmes. I would
like to hear from the High Commissioner how his
Office intends to tackle some of the challenges that the
financial bottlenecks are raising.

