Mr. Valle (Brazil): Let me begin by once again
paying a sincere tribute to the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre Blondin
Beye, for his sustained efforts to keep the Angolan peace
process on track. The important role of the observer
countries of the troika is also duly acknowledged.

Our debate today takes place in the midst of
particularly worrisome developments in the beleaguered
sister nation of Angola. The report of the Secretary-
General on Angola contained in document S/1997/640
sets the appropriate tone for this debate, and it is a very
sombre one indeed.

For the past three years the United Nations has been
investing a considerable amount of political and material
resources in Angola with a view to implementing the
Lusaka Protocol. Brazil has been an active participant in
such endeavours and has remained deeply committed to
the peace process throughout this entire period. We were
present at the signing of the Lusaka Protocol and became
a principal troop contributor in the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. II) since its very
inception. Our involvement in MONUA provides further
evidence of an unwavering engagement in multilateral

 

efforts to settle the Angolan crisis through peaceful means.

The conflict has already imposed an intolerable level
of violence and brutality on the Angolan people, and those
responsible for prolonging the suffering in Angola must
face the consequences of their wanton behaviour. We are
convinced that the Angolan nation is more than ready to
overcome the traumas left by years of war, and we believe
that the unjustifiable creation of obstacles to peace must
meet with the firmest reproof of the international
community.

The patience of the international community has been
tested to the limit, leaving the Security Council no choice
but to resort to the measures which are prescribed in the
text before us.

The Brazilian position on sanctions is well known.
Sanctions must not be seen as an end in themselves. They
are a serious expedient which must be reserved for
situations of extreme gravity. The imposition of sanctions
can result in deleterious effects on innocent populations and
neighbouring countries, and utmost restraint must be
exercised when it comes to contemplating any action under
Chapter VII of the Charter. Sanctions must be regarded as
an instrument of last resort when the prospects for
diplomatic efforts yielding results no longer seem viable.

However, it has become apparent that in Angola we
are now faced with such a situation. The framework
provided by the Lusaka Protocol is being systematically
eroded by the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total
de Angola (UNITA), and, as the party responsible for
thwarting the major steps taken towards the establishment
of peace, UNITA must be held accountable; Mr. Savimbi
must be held accountable.

The draft resolution before us would not have been
necessary had the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol been
duly observed. These provisions would not have seen the
light of day had the breaches been of a lesser nature. The
resolution may still not come into force if UNITA, even at
this late hour, demonstrates a truly unequivocal disposition
to honour its commitments to the people of Angola and to
the international community. If these measures do become
effective, UNITA will have only its own shortsightedness
and greed to blame.

Although any demonstrations of optimism at this point
might seem unwarranted, we continue to believe that peace
and prosperity for all Angolans is within reach. Momentous
events have been taking place in southern Africa which
seem to herald a new era of reconciliation among past
belligerents. In the light of events in neighbouring
countries it is possible today to nurture the hope that
oppression, civil war and institutionalized discrimination
can be replaced with democracy, development and a true
renaissance of African culture. As a country with a
profound sense of pride in its African heritage and strong
historical ties to Angola, our solidarity towards all those
genuinely searching for peace in that nation is a strong
and permanent commitment. Peace in Angola is a priority
for my Government.

