Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for the report. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
presence here today and for all the work that he and his
team have done to bring about normalization in
Kosovo. I would be grateful if he would convey our
thanks to the members of his team. I also wish to join
others in welcoming the Serbian Foreign Minister,
Mr. Jeremie, back to the Chamber, and Foreign
Minister Hyseni of Kosovo, who is here in his official
capacity. It is very good also to see him back in the
Chamber.

I would like to say at the outset that our view is
that Kosovo independence is irreversible. It is also
indivisible. I think one of the important things about

08-6204]
the proposals set out in the Secretary-General's report
today is that they show that the risk of partition is
receding. I think that is something that all members of
the Council would wish to join me in applauding.

I deliberately asked to speak last - or near the
last, saving yourself, Mr. President - because I
wanted to hear what other Council members had to say.
I am very pleased to hear such clear support from
Council members for the Special Representative's
intentions, for the reconfiguration that the Secretary-
General has set out, and also the clear support for full
deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission (EULEX) throughout Kosovo. That is very
welcome news to those of us in the European Union
who have Kosovo and Serbia as our neighbours. As a
number of speakers have noted today, we hope to adopt
the presidential statement later today.

In June the Secretary-General decided that, given
the changed situation on the ground in Kosovo, it was
right to reconfigure the international civilian presences.
I think events have borne out that that decision was the
right one. We are very pleased that the reconfiguration
is now properly under way. We note that the Special
Representative says that when EULEX fully deploys,
UNMIK will be able to review its tasks. That is very
welcome. The Rule of Law Mission is set to reach
initial operating capacity in early December. With the
Secretary-General's report envisaging an acceleration
of reconfiguration in the coming period, it is very
important, as a number of colleagues have made clear
today, that the European Union and the United Nations
continue to work closely together. EULEX will
implement its mandate as set out in the relevant
European Union Joint Action, while operating under
the overall authority of the Untied Nations.

I wanted to say two particular things about the
report. The first is factual and for the record. I just
wanted to note that there is a factual error in paragraph
21 of the report. It refers to the executive authority of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
That does not, in fact, derive from resolution 1244
(1999). It derives from the later, constitutional
framework, which was not endorsed by the Security
Council, and there is no provision in the new Kosovo
constitution for the constitutional framework.
The other thing I wanted to say is that in
paragraph 27 of the report the Secretary-General makes
clear that the dialogue and consultations set out in the
report have been conducted with Belgrade and Pristina
without prejudice to their positions on the status issue
and in the spirit of the United Nations Charter. I think
we should all bear that in mind as we move forward.

The United Nations is engaged with both Pristina
and Belgrade on the so-called six points, the
transitional arrangements in areas important for
Kosovo's Serbian community. We also know that there
have been differing views on those transitional
arrangements and concerns, particularly in Pristina, as
to their implications. We are very pleased to see that
the Secretary-General's report acknowledges those real
concerns and provides reassurance that the
implementation of transitional arrangements will be on
the basis of continuous consultation and coordination
and that commitment to consultation and coordination
constitutes a strong assurance to Pristina. At the same
time, the commitment to the transitional arrangement
also provides a strong assurance to Kosovo/Serb and
other minority communities.

Mr. Jeremie gave us his interpretation of the
report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission (EULEX) deployment. Mr. Hyseni gave us his.
I want to be clear in the light of some views expressed
in the Council: it is from the European Union (EU) that
EULEX derives its mandate. It will implement its
mandate as set out in the relevant European Union joint
actions while operating under the overall authority of
the United Nations. EULEX also constitutes the EU's
largest ever civilian mission. Its work will be to the
benefit to all of Kosovo's people and those United
Nations Members who sit on the Peacebuilding
Commission will note the value of integrating missions
between justice and police sectors. And that is
something that EULEX will do. So its work will be
important in terms of lessons learned for the wider
United Nations community.

EULEX will support multi-ethnicity, and we
welcome Kosovo's cooperation with EULEX
deployment throughout the whole of Kosovo. We also
welcome the Government's assurances that it will
continue to take into account the concerns of all of
Kosovo's communities. Obviously, that is extremely
important.
We welcome what Foreign Minister Hyseni said
about cooperation with Serbia, and we welcome what
Foreign Minister Jeremic' said about welcoming

EULEX's deployment throughout Kosovo. As EULEX
deployment continues, we look forward to that Mission
having a constructive relationship with all the relevant
actors, including Belgrade and Pristina, on the ground
in Kosovo. We hope that Serbia will be able to join us
in explaining the strong benefits of EULEX to Kosovo
Serbs. Embedding the rule of law, ensuring an effective
and multi-ethnic justice and police system across
Kosovo, making sure corruption and organized crime
are tackled: these should be measures on which we can
all unite. And, with its increased outreach among
Kosovo's communities, I am confident EULEX can be
a huge success, one that will help the Republic of
Kosovo and the region on the path towards the EU.

I had wanted only to look forward today in the
spirit of the Secretary-General's report and the
cooperation that we have had on this issue within the
Coordination and Drafting Group. But I need to
respond on the record to certain assertions that we have
heard from Mr. Jeremie today. I am not going to
rehearse how we got to where we are on Kosovo's
sovereignty and independence; suffice it to say that it
did not come about through light and transient causes. I
am not going to go into the detail of what resolution
1244 (1999) does or does not say; we have debated that
many times in this Chamber. If anyone wants to know
the United Kingdom's positions on these issues, they
can be found on the website of my Mission. But I
would like to say that we do not share Mr. Jeremie's
account of how Kosovo's independence came about.
The Security Council did not take a view on Kosovo's
status. It had no vote and it issued no statement. The
best one could conclude is that it was neutral on the
issue, though it is worth noting that a majority of its
members have recognized Kosovo. So I do not think
there can be any question of defiance of the Council.

I would also like to talk briefly about minority
communities in Kosovo. All the minority communities
except the Kosovo Serb community have supported
where we are on status. I think that it is incumbent on
all of us who worry about minority communities in
Kosovo to uphold the rule of law in the north of
Kosovo. We must do everything we can to ensure that
the deplorable attacks that we witnessed on
international officials of the UNMIK police and on the
Kosovo Force in March of this year are never repeated
and that the perpetrators are brought to justice.

The other point I would like to make concerns
Mr. Jeremic's reference to General Assembly

resolution 63/3, requesting an advisory opinion from
the International Court of Justice. It is not the case that
the General Assembly approved Serbia's position on
Kosovo's status in adopting the draft resolution
submitted by Serbia requesting the advisory opinion.
The General Assembly merely agreed that the
International Court of Justice should be asked to opine
on the question which Serbia had asked and this does
not prejudge the answer to that question, on which the
United Kingdom's views are well known and were set
out in the document that the United Kingdom
circulated at the time (A/63/46l).

I would like to conclude on a positive note, on
which both the Republic of Serbia and the Republic of
Kosovo agree. The countries of the Western Balkans all
belong in the European Union and we, the United
Kingdom, and all our partners in the EU and NATO,
are committed to helping them join on the basis of
conditions that the EU has laid down. But those who
cite EU treaties and aspire to EU futures must follow
EU values. And these values include the strongest
possible commitment to building peaceful, prosperous,
tolerant and multi-ethnic societies.

