Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like other speakers, let me begin by thanking the briefers, Under-Secretary- General DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for their comprehensive presentations. Indonesia is encouraged by the achievements of the Government of the Sudan, especially the historic comprehensive peace agreements with armed groups in Darfur and the Two Areas. We commend the Sudan on reaching yet another important milestone on its journey towards peace, stability and prosperity. We therefore need to remain vigilant in order to ensure that those achievements can be sustained and further enhanced. In that regard, I would like to underline three important points. My first point concerns strengthening intercommunal dialogue. The intercommunal tensions in the east, west and south of the country must be addressed effectively. Indonesia firmly believes in the virtue of sustained and owned dialogue towards a lasting reconciliation. We call on the Government of the Sudan, in coordination with the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), to intensify dialogue and community engagement in response to the clashes. Indonesia joins the Secretary-General in commending the Government of the Sudan's prompt response to the clashes, particularly through the national committee for the protection of civilians and the facilitation of reconciliatory dialogue among the communities. My second point is on enhancing humanitarian assistance. As reported by the Secretary-General (see S/2020/912), intercommunal clashes, the economic crisis and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have exacerbated the humanitarian situation in the Sudan. We strongly believe that the improvement in the general well-being of all the Sudanese is inseparable from the country's political transition. Political progress should be experienced by all Sudanese people in their daily lives. The presence of UNAMID remains crucial to ensuring the provision of humanitarian assistance and basic services to the Sudanese. We call on UNAMID to enhance its cooperation with the Government to ensure the delivery of humanitarian and medical assistance, including to bolster the Sudan's efforts to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic. My third point concerns ensuring a smooth transition to the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS). Indonesia welcomes the establishment of the Executive Committee for Coordination with UNITAMS. We believe that the smooth transition to UNITAMS can be achieved only through close coordination between the United Nations and the Government of the Sudan, as well as the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, in the UNITAMS planning process. Indonesia emphasizes the need for close cooperation and collaboration among all relevant parties in the UNITAMS planning process, especially on the transfer of assets. As an inseparable part of the Sudan's transition, the success of UNITAMS should be the priority of all parties. Let me conclude by reiterating Indonesia's deep commitment to supporting the Sudan in this new chapter of its journey towards an enduring peace, security and prosperity.
