Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I too thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her comprehensive briefing, and
reassure her of the full support of France for her work
on the ground.

I endorse the statements to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union and the representative
of Peru on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.

I will address three points in my statement: our
strong concern over the interruption of the ongoing
electoral process; our desire to revive consideration,
in due course, of the reconfiguration of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH);
and France's support for the development of Haiti.

France is deeply concerned over the interruption
of the electoral process in Haiti and by its resulting
uncertainties. More than ever before, Haiti needs stable
institutions that are vested with democratic legitimacy
so as to be able meet the many economic, social and
humanitarian challenges the country faces. The Haitian
people must also be able to see that the choices they
make through the ballot box are properly reflected
and respected.

France has taken note of the inter-Haitian political
agreement of 5 February. It is a compromise in the
right direction that prevents a vacuum of governance
and lays the foundations of a continuation of the
electoral process. The success of the agreement
remains nonetheless closely linked to the effective
implementation of all its provisions as soon as possible.
We call on all Haitian political actors, including the
Provisional President, to do their utmost to make that
happen and to ensure the restoration of constitutional
order as soon as possible. Everyone must demonstrate
responsibility and restraint and comply with the spirit
of compromise of the agreement of 5 February.

It is particularly important that the necessary
measures be taken to enable the conclusion of the
electoral process in accordance with the agreed
timetable. The timely operationaliztion of an inclusive
transitional Government confirmed by Parliament, as
well as the reactivation of the Provisional Electoral
Council, are essential and urgent steps in that regard.
The Election Observation Mission of the European
Union has concluded that, despite some irregularities,
mostly due to the inadequate training of election
officials, there was no significant alteration of the
outcome of the first round of presidential elections.
Nothing therefore precludes the results proclaimed by
the Provisional Electoral Council from forming the
basis for the organization of the second round.

More than 11 years after the creation of
MINUSTAH, the conditions on the ground have
changed significantly, as has the form of the United
Nations presence that the country needs. We have
gradually moved on from a peacekeeping situation
to a context in which the United Nations contribution
is needed in development assistance and the building
of a robust State of law. It is by recognizing this new
reality that we will be able to deliver the most effective
assistance possible to the Haitian people. Long-term
security and stability in Haiti depend above all on the
Haitian authorities shouldering their responsibilities
and on the island's sustainable development.

France is pleased to note that the security situation
is generally stable. According to the latest statistics
issued by the United Nations system, the homicide rate
in Haiti is now among the lowest in the region. While
the situation remains precarious, due to the political
tensions raised by the interruption of the electoral
cycle, these tensions have been managed competently
by the Haitian security forces. We welcome the
ongoing strengthening of the Haitian National Police,
as demonstrated by its ability to control recent events
successfully and with relative autonomy.

We support the continuation of discussions on the
future of MINUSTAH, based on the recommendations
of the Secretary-General announced in his latest report
(S/2016/225). We look forward to the presentation of
those recommendations before the current mandate
expires in October. To that end, we believe that it is
important to underscore that the resumption of the
mission-reconfiguration process cannot be delayed
indefinitely by the current political stalemate, because
that might jeopardize the United Nations capacity to
best respond to the needs of the Haitian people.

France is a longtime friend of Haiti and was one
of its first partners in development assistance, both
bilaterally and through the European Union. The
President of the French Republic recently recalled the
priority of our commitment to Haiti and announced,
during his visit in May 2015 to Port-au-Prince, a
bilateral contribution of €50 million for the education
sector over the next five years.

We remain concerned about the many challenges
facing the country, in particular in terms of child
protection. At the request of the Haitian authorities, the
French President announced in May 2015 the launch
of an ambitious bilateral cooperation programme for
Haitian young people in general and for the Haitian
education system in particular. However, France is
also working to combat food insecurity and sanitation
issues, given the resurgence of cases of cholera in 2015.
On that point, France fully supports the efforts to that
end undertaken by the Haitian authorities with the
support of the United Nations, and has contributed to
several projects on the ground in that area since 2010.
France echoes the call of the Secretary-General for the
international community to strengthen its engagement
on that theme, including financially. We must do more
as an international community to eradicate cholera in
Haiti once and for all.

The support of the international community and
the commitment of the United Nations remain more
important than ever in Haiti. However, our responsibility
in the Council is to do everything to ensure that that
commitment be as relevant and effective as possible.
The challenges that Haiti is encountering and the
expectations of its people mean that we must take the
necessary decisions. Haitian political stakeholders must
be fully aware of that fact today.

