Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to the delegation of Panama for convening
this open debate on children and armed conflict. I
would also like to thank France for its strong
leadership in chairing the Security Council Working
Group on this subject. My appreciation goes also to
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive Director of
UNICEF, and Ms. Jo Becker for their respective
presentations, which have enriched our debate.

We are encouraged by the finding in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2007/757) that noticeable
progress has been made in the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism established by
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005). Important
steps have been taken by the International Criminal
Court and the Special Court for Sierra Leone to end
impunity for crimes against children, particularly with
regard to the recruitment and use of children by armed
forces or armed groups.

The Paris Commitments and the Paris Principles,
both adopted in February 2007, are two milestone
documents in that they reaffirm our commitment to
prevent the unlawful recruitment of children and
provide model guidelines for protecting children from
being forcibly associated with armed groups.

The 10-year strategic review of the Graca Machel
report (A/51/306), convened jointly by
Ms. Coomaraswamy and UNICEF, offered an excellent

08-2361]
opportunity to examine issues related to children and
armed conflict.

Japan supports the full implementation of
Security Council resolutions on children in armed
conflict, particularly resolution 1612 (2005), as well as
of the monitoring and reporting system. We welcome
the information that has been properly collected
through the mechanisms on the violations being
committed against children.

The recommendations made by the Working
Group have contributed significantly to efforts to
remedy such situations. It is an encouraging
achievement that Cote d'Ivoire has been removed from
the annex of the report since four militia groups have
implemented action plans to cease the recruitment and
use of child soldiers.

Certainly, progress has been made with respect to
protection. However, the overall situation of children
affected by armed conflict in the world remains very
grave. Today, the use of over 250,000 child soldiers,
the killing and maiming of children, rape and other
forms of sexual exploitation and abductions still
continue. It is essential that the international
community continue to support the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and extend cooperation to United
Nations activities, such as the deployment of child
protection advisers, as appropriate, to other
peacekeeping missions and political missions, as has
been done in the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone.

Japan believes it is indispensable for the Security
Council and the Working Group to give equal attention
to children in armed conflict in all situations of
concern and to give equal weight to all six categories
of grave violations.

Children are the ones who are most vulnerable
when conflict breaks out. The concept of human
security, focusing on the safety and security of
individuals, provides a vitally important perspective
for the protection and empowerment of children
affected by conflict. A comprehensive and integrated
approach based on such a concept is highly relevant to
the entire process of protecting and empowering
children who are caught in armed conflict. It must start
with the prevention of recruitment of child soldiers and
must include their release, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration into normal social life.
Japan, as an initiator of the Friends of Human
Security in New York, will work with other interested
countries to operationalize the human security
approach in all the policies and programmes of the
United Nations system in tackling this problem.
Ensuring the protection and empowerment of children
affected by armed conflict is an important challenge in
successful post-conflict peacebuilding efforts as well.

The promotion of human security through the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals
and the consolidation of peace will be one of three
priorities for the coming Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD IV),
which will be held in Yokohama in May of this year.
Japan has paid high attention to the plight of child
soldiers in supporting peacebuilding efforts and has
extended assistance to programmes to provide support
to former child soldiers in many countries, including
Liberia and the countries of the Great Lakes region,
such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda.

In closing, I would like to reiterate Japan's
commitment to realizing a world where children are
free from conflict. We will continue to cooperate
closely with other interested partners to advance the
protection and empowerment of children affected by
armed conflict and to allow them to realize their many
dreams, as they are supposed to.

