Mr. Locsin (Philippines): Within this Chamber, we
talk about the human rights of children - the right to
life, to a name, to education and to health, inter alia.
Today I want to mention another right - their right
not to know. Children have the right not to know at
first hand the horrors of war. They have the right not to
know the weight of a rifle or the sharpness of its edges
as it strikes them. They have the right not to know
fear, particularly the fear they must feel when they are
staring down the barrel of a gun aimed at them. They
have the right not to know hate, the tempestuous hate
that is assuaged only by murdering its object. Except
perhaps on the screens of their Xboxes and Nintendos,
children have the right not to know what the battlefield
looks like. It is one place where they do not belong
within the militant's malignant embrace.

The Philippines shares the United Nations profound
desire to keep children away from armed conflict
and - should it be unavoidable that they find themselves
in the middle of battle - to keep them safe. The depth
of our disdain for armed groups recruiting children
and using them as human shields can be measured
only by our grim determination to fight them. Such
armed groups are beneath contempt. Our country has
suffered human, social and economic costs from armed
conflicts waged by them. The suffering is multiplied
when children and youth are involved because of the
psychological cost of war, which is immeasurable, as
it is borne by the children as they grow into adulthood,
and impacts the nation's future.

In May 2017, militants affiliated with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham took Marawi, a city in the
southern part ofthe Philippines. After five long months
of fighting, Government forces took back the city, but
not without huge costs in terms ofthe casualties that they
suffered and damage to the city. Regrettably children
recruited by the militants were hurt in the fighting.
Schools occupied by militants were taken back. The
city was destroyed, thereby confirming the irony that
sometimes a village must be destroyed in order to save
it because it cannot be left in militant hands behind an
advancing army's back. But one could always surround
or go around a school and leave it behind.

Rebellion and armed conflict are complex issues, but
they do not defy solutions. My Government is tirelessly
seeking a resolution to those conflicts. Achieving
peace remains at the core of the Philippine President's
agenda. The six-point peace and development agenda
aims to bring about new peace agreements, always
and consistently in compliance with human rights
and our democratic Constitution, while diametrically
opposed to the tyranny of terror and forever adamant
in enforcing the civil and human rights found in
political constitutions familiar to the civilized world. It
is designed to promote a culture of peace and conflict
sensitivity, and achieve a peace that fosters catch-up
economic development in conflict areas.

Earlier this year, the President ordered his Peace
Secretary to resume talks with the communist rebels.
They rejected it. The armed forces of the Philippines
are mandated to be a primary duty-bearer not only
of peace, but especially of the safety of children in
armed conflict. Under its regulation called "children
protection during armed conflict situations", children
are afforded special protection in armed-conflict
situations. Those rescued or recovered, including those
apprehended for alleged association with rebel armed
groups, are handed over to the local social welfare
officer for processing and psychosocial services. Both
the armed forces and the commission for the welfare
of children work with UNICEF to end child rights
violations. For that, the Army has received scant credit,
while enemies of the State are repeatedly eulogized for
their repeatedly avowed and never-fulfilled intention to
end their recruitment of child soldiers.

Childhood should be the most cherished stage of
a person's life. All are entitled to know the innocent
joys from which we are all compelled to graduate into
the world that adults make. We are committed to the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Optional Protocols to uphold children's rights
and welfare. That commitment is guided by the third
national action plan for children in the Philippine
plan of action for the elimination of violence against
children. Executive order 138 strengthens the children
in armed conflict programme which involves human
rights training, monitoring, reporting and responding
to violations of children's rights in situations of armed
conflict. The militants are not bound by any of those
conventions, protocols or plans in their predation, and
their vision of society is never hospitable to the idea
that children are outside the scope of war as opposed to
one of its spoils.

