Mr. Arriola Ramirez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me
the floor and for convening this open meeting on the
situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

The Republic of Paraguay reaffirms its commitment
to the principles of international law and to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and
regrets the breakdown of the rule of law, democracy and
respect for fundamental human rights in Venezuela, as
well as the humanitarian crisis it has generated.

The new presidential term of Mr. Nicolas Maduro
Moros is the result of an illegitimate electoral process,
which did not include the participation of all Venezuelan
political actors, nor the presence of independent
international observers, and lacked the international
guarantees and standards of a democratic, free, fair and
transparent process. For this reason, the Paraguayan
Government was the first to break off diplomatic
relations with regime of Nicolas Maduro on 10 January.

Paraguay has been denouncing the deterioration
of the political, economic, social and humanitarian
situation in Venezuela since its very beginning, and has
led support for the innumerable initiatives, appeals and
efforts for an effective dialogue between Government
of Nicolas Maduro and the various political sectors
that make up the opposition, in coordination with
the member countries of the Lima Group and the
Organization of American States. Accordingly, I would
like to emphasize that Paraguay was one ofthe six States
that last September requested the Prosecutor's Office
of the International Criminal Court to commence an
investigation into the commission of possible crimes
against humanity in Venezuela.

Paraguay reaffirms today in the Chamber of the
Security Council its full support for and recognition
of the National Assembly, legitimately elected in
December 2015. The Paraguayan Government reiterates
that it recognizes Mr. Juan Guaido as interim President
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in accordance
with the constitutional provisions of that sister country.
We trust that President Guaido will begin the process
of democratic transition in Venezuela within the
framework of its Constitution, with the participation of
all political actors and with the necessary international
guarantees and standards for a democratic process, thus
calling for new elections as soon as possible.

In conclusion, we urge the regime of Nicolas
Maduro to avoid all acts of violence and reiterate our
admiration for the courage of the Venezuelan people, as
well as our unconditional solidarity and support for that
suffering people. Paraguay will continue to advocate
in all multilateral forums a peaceful and democratic
solution to the crisis in Venezuela. Our commitment
to continue working for the full restoration of the rule
of law, democracy and respect for human rights in the
sister Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela remains firm.

