Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I wish to thank you, Sir, for having arranged this
open debate. I want to make a few brief points. First,
the issue of an exit strategy mainly concerns the
connection between a peacekeeping operation and post-
conflict reconstruction and the transition from one to
the other. An exit strategy has a direct bearing on
whether a peacekeeping operation is able to fulfil its
mission successfully.

In recent years the United Nations has established
peace-building support offices in some countries, so as
to continue to provide help to the countries concerned
in their efforts to consolidate peace and for their post-
war reconstruction efforts after the termination of
relevant peacekeeping operations. However, on the
whole, the formulation of practical and operational exit
strategies will require more experience on the part of
the United Nations in peacekeeping.

Secondly, the formulation of an exit strategy and
whether this strategy can be implemented depend to a
large degree on whether a realistic and practical plan
can be formulated when deciding on a peacekeeping
operation. This includes an accurate analysis of the
situation in the country or region where the
peacekeeping operation is to be deployed, an
assessment of various possible factors that might
disturb or interrupt the peace process and of the
corresponding coping strategies, an explicit goal for the
peacekeeping operation and a guarantee that the
resources required to achieve this goal are available.

Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
should from the beginning be aimed at supporting the
peacekeeping capabilities of the countries concerned.
Fundamentally speaking, the affairs of a country should
ultimately be handled by that country's own people and
Government, and the international community can only
play a promoting and facilitating role. In the process of
assisting a given country, the United Nations should
take care to respect the views and opinions of that
country. We cannot envision letting the United Nations
reform a given country in accordance with a
pre-established model or letting the organization
impose a pre-established model on a given country.
Such a practice would give rise to a great deal of
difficulties and problems and would even harm the
credibility and image of the United Nations. It is
therefore something that an exit strategy should avoid
by all means.

Fourthly, the United Nations should enhance its
coordination and collaboration with regional
organizations and truly allow the regional organizations
to play their role. It should also strengthen coordination
and cooperation among the relevant United Nations
system entities, such as the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank. This is
also very important for exit strategies.

