Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I,
too, warmly welcome you back, Madam, and
congratulate Spain, our European partner, on its
handling of the presidency so far this month.

I want first to commend the very interesting and
widely welcomed report presented to us last week by
the Secretary-General, and to thank him for his brief
but telling statement this morning. The United
Kingdom is grateful, too, for today's presentation by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Sergio Vieira de Mello, whose work so far in Iraq has
shown how valuable the input of the United Nations
can be.

We are witnessing an already impressive United
Nations effort across a range of activity on the ground
in Iraq. European ministers yesterday expressed their
confidence that the United Nations will continue to
make an important contribution in Iraq, and reiterated
their readiness to support the efforts of the Special
Representative. The United Kingdom believes in an
increasingly important United Nations role, and wishes
to see that role extended along the lines proposed in the
Secretary-General's report.

I warmly welcome the presence here this morning
of Mr. Adnan Pachachi, Mr. Ahmad Chalabi and Ms.
Aqeela al-Hashemi - members of the Governing
Council - and I thank all three of them for their
presentation through the experienced voice of Mr.
Pachachi.

In line with resolution 1483 (2003), we need to
ensure that the day the Iraqis govern themselves comes
quickly. The Governing Council is the key element in
the Iraqi interim administration, and the first step in a
process that will lead back to an internationally
recognized representative Government and an Iraq run
by Iraqis in the interests of all Iraqis.

The Secretary-General's report welcomes the
creation of the Governing Council and highlights the
real powers it will have from the outset. The report also
makes clear that the Governing Council will provide a
broadly representative Iraqi partner with which the
United Nations and the international community at
large can engage. We agree that the subsequent process
of constitutional reform should be owned by the Iraqis
and that there should be a clear sequence of events
leading to a fully representative Government as soon as
possible. We hope that the Governing Council will
soon come forward with ideas on that, and that the
Coalition Provisional Authority will work closely with
it in developing those ideas. Our function is to create
conditions under which the Iraqi people can determine
their own future, not to impose a blueprint or a
timetable of our own. The role of the neighbouring
countries and the region is especially important. The
United Kingdom will encourage the fullest possible
consultation and cooperation in this respect.

The British Government recognizes the special
obligations on us as a Power in the Coalition
Provisional Authority. We take the current security
situation very seriously. Iraqis want and must have the
rule of law established. We need to be clear that the
minority of Iraqis who, with some outside assistance,
are attempting to sabotage this prospect, are, as
Mr. Pachachi has said, undermining the interests of the
civilian population of Iraq. They will not succeed.

We also have to improve essential services and
set the economy on a path of sustainable growth. We
have been taking concerted and effective action in
these areas in ways which Ambassador Negroponte has
already set out. We will go into more detail when, with
the United States, we present our own comprehensive
update to the Council within the next month, as
requested in resolution 1483 (2003).

I want, however, to say a word today about the
importance we attach to urgent progress on justice and
human rights and on improving the role of women in
society, both at national and local levels. Iraq suffered
decades of brutality and political coercion during
which its justice system was severely corrupted and
distorted. We welcome the proposals to increase the
United Nations role in aiding reform of the justice
system and the protection of human rights. The
international community has a key role to play in
assisting Iraqis to re-establish a fair and transparent
system of justice under which the rights of its citizens
are properly protected. At the same time, we can help
the development of a new culture in which human
rights are always respected, rather than systematically
abused.

The Coalition Provisional Authority is already
fully engaged in the process of helping the Iraqis to re-
structure their justice system. Much of our effort is
focused on the practical issues of repairing courts,
assessing which judges and prosecutors were too
deeply implicated in the crimes of the Ba'ath party to
be allowed to continue in office and setting up training
for those that remain. It will be for the Iraqis to decide
how they want to continue this work in the longer term.
But there is much expertise in the United Nations and
other international organizations in this area on which
they can call and which we should be ready to provide.

One of the most difficult issues faced by any
country which has suffered oppression and abuse is
how to deal with the legacy of past crimes. Again, this
will be a matter for the Iraqis themselves to decide. We
look forward to seeing the product of the special group
of the Governing Council mentioned by Mr. Pachachi
this morning. Regrettably, there is no shortage of recent
international experience in this field. The Authority has
set up an office of human rights and transitional justice
to help this process. It is working on collecting witness
testimony, identifying missing persons, addressing
property disputes and dealing with the examination of
mass graves and the preservation of evidence.

There is a huge task ahead. New mass graves are
being identified in Iraq practically every day. We have
so far received reports of 115; more will be discovered.

It has been estimated that they contain the bodies of
over 300,000 victims of the Saddam regime. Helping
Iraq deal with that grim legacy will take many years. A
United Kingdom team of forensic experts has produced
recommendations for the exhumation of mass graves
and the preservation of evidence. We are about to send
a second team to help coordinate what will need to be
an international effort, and we hope that other Member
States can send forensic teams to Iraq to assist. But in
the longer term this will be a task for the Iraqi
authorities. They will need training and technical
advice, and that is a further area in which the
international community has much to offer.

On the promotion of human rights, we again
welcome and support the recommendations made by
the Secretary-General, including on the provision of
advice and assistance on capacity-building and
training. The development of a strong civil society will
be an important part of a new democracy. The United
Nations Development Programme will have a valuable
role to play. We welcome the decision of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to send human rights monitors to Iraq. The
United Kingdom has allocated $650,000 towards
funding these monitors, thus providing 60 per cent of
the immediate start-up costs of deploying them and
supporting their work.

In both these areas the Authority has been aiming
to lay some of the groundwork for the development of
sound judicial and human rights structures. It is a long-
term and vital task in which the United Nations has a
key role to play. But it is important that the
Organization and the Authority work together
effectively and in a coordinated way so that we can
give the Iraqis the support that they need. Sergio Vieira
de Mello's dual role is especially significant in this
respect.

We fully support the comments of the Secretary-
General on the inclusion of Iraqi women in the
transitional, constitutional and political processes now
under way in Iraq. They were, above all, the silent
victims of the former regime. Now we should help
them to find their voice. We supported at the
ministerial level the women's conference in Baghdad
on 9 July, at which a wide range of issues was
discussed. This was a good start, but more needs to be
done to encourage Iraqi women to organize and express
themselves. We would urge the United Nations
Development Fund for Women to continue its work in
Iraq and hope that it will be able to go ahead with its
plans to host a national conference in the coming
weeks. We have encouraged the leaders of Iraqi
political and other groups to include women
representatives at both the national and regional levels
and we hope that these leaders will view this as an
important part of the reintroduction of democracy in
their country.

The United Kingdom is also helping to set up an
independent media commission to support the
development of a robust and professional independent
media sector, and we welcome the United Nations
willingness to consider where and how it can add value
to building the institutions of a civil society in Iraq;
electoral processes; constitutional, judicial and legal
reform; and reform of the public administration and the
security sector. Dismantling the previous regime's
infrastructure of oppression was a necessary first step,
but not a sufficient one.

As the interim administration gets to grips with
these and other issues in the months ahead, it and the
Iraqi people may look to the international community
for support and practical assistance, the potential range
of which has been well expressed by the Secretary-
General and the Special Representative today.

The creation of the Governing Council marked a
pivotal moment for Iraq. For the first time in decades,
Iraq now has an administration - a powerful voice
which we have heard today - broadly representative
of its diversity and in a position to serve the interests of
the Iraqi people as a whole. Iraqis can at last sense the
prospect of realizing their full potential and creating a
brighter future, but they need immediate international
support for this. That is why the United Nations
contribution at this time is so valuable and so welcome.

The fundamental criterion guiding our work in
Iraq over the coming period - the cornerstone, as
Sergio Vieira de Mello has said - is the need to bring
Iraq back into the hands of Iraqis as soon as this can be
done in a framework of stability and security through a
constitutional reform process owned by the Iraqi
people. I hope that the broad international community
will continue to increase its involvement in helping to
build a better Iraq. Resolution 1483 (2003) called for a
genuine international partnership, asking Member
States and other organizations to assist the people of
Iraq to reform their institutions, rebuild their country
and contribute to stability and security. Essential to that
partnership is the role of the United Nations in the
areas mapped out in resolution 1483 - a role which
the Special Representative is judiciously constructing
as the weeks go by.

As I come to terms with the inexplicable
postponement of my retirement, I look forward to
working with him and the whole United Nations team
in the months ahead, conscious as I am from my
experience on this Council that the regeneration of a
free and stable Iraq is in all respects a collective
enterprise of the international community.

