Ms. Taehco (United States of America): I should
like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule
of Law and Security Institutions, Mr. Zouev, as well
as Ambassador Schoulgin Nyoni of Sweden, for their
remarks today. I would especially like to welcome
Mr. Liberty to the Council today and to thank him for
his briefing and for telling us about his very inspiring
work on the ground in Liberia.

Today we reflect on the history of a more than
l4-year-long peacekeeping mission that made an
invaluable contribution to peace and security in
a country racked by years of civil war, chaos and
hopelessness. In the 14 years before the arrival of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) in 2003,
Liberians endured a horrific civil war that killed up to
a quarter million men, women and children, and left
half of Liberia's population displaced. Throughout the
fighting, human rights violations and abuses, including
torture, rape, sexual slavery, summary executions and
the unlawful use of and recruitment of child soldiers
were prevalent.

A comprehensive peace agreement finally brought
the calm that allowed for the arrival of UNMIL.
UNMIL has played an indelible role in Liberia's return
from devastation through the application by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of good
offices, the reporting of its political and human rights
units, the mentorship of its police units to their Liberian
counterparts, its capacity-building of Liberia's courts,
and at times its very physical presence. UNMIL has made
a difference. It helped Liberia navigate the challenging
days that come with any overwhelming transition.

Last month, a Mission that had more than 15,000
military personnel at its height saw the last of its
military, police and civilian numbers depart. The
United States commends the personnel and leaders of
UNMIL for their service and sacrifice in establishing
peace and security, and remembers those who lost
their lives in its pursuit. UNMIL's personnel should
never forget that their presence really changed lives.
The Council's action has had tangible impact as well,
and as penholder the United States thanks past and
present Council colleagues for their collaboration and
commitment to Liberia over all these years.

At UNMIL's 30 March closure, we were able to
look back and see that it was able to achieve so much.
Many of its achievements reflect the success that is
possible when certain factors are in place. One year
ago, Ambassador Haley outlined a set of peacekeeping
principles as a pathway to more efficient operations
and successful outcomes. For UNMIL, many of the
conditions outlined in those principles were in fact in
place, and we believe they played a significant role in
the Mission's success and its eventual ability to close.

First, UNMIL enjoyed strong relations in
collaboration with the host country Government.
From its earliest support to elections to its recent
collaboration on the peacebuilding plan for Liberia,
the Mission and the Government were real partners
working towards a common goal - peace and security
for Liberians. Secondly, UNMIL's mandate was
realistic and achievable. It was called on to support
political solutions, help the country recover from total
devastation, build the capacity of its core institutions,
and consolidate democracy through elections and the
democratic transfer of power. The conduct of elections
is a challenging enterprise no matter where they
happen, and UNMIL worked with the Government and
regional and international partners to contribute to their
successful execution. During the contentious challenge
in 2017, the Mission engaged stakeholders to ensure
they employed legal channels. After the challenges had
run their course and elections resumed, we understood
just how far Liberia and its institutions had come.

The United States also commends the leadership
of UNMIL's last Special Representative, Mr. Farid
Zarif, and mission personnel who worked arduously in
preparation for the conduct of elections. We commend
the leadership of Presidents Johnson Sirleaf and
Weah and the candidates in the elections for finding a
resolution that put the people of Liberia first and that
brought about the first democratic transition of power
in over 70 years.

Finally, we want to address the issue of
reconciliation and human rights. In any post-conflict
setting, the complex challenges of reconciliation and
healing can linger. However, despite the passage of
time and positive momentum, addressing them remains
critical. As former South African President Nelson
Mandela once said, "true reconciliation does not consist
in merely forgetting the past". In that spirit, we strongly
commend the national reconciliation conference led
by the Liberian Government last month. We applaud
President Weah's call for inclusiveness and dialogue so
that all in Liberia feel that they have been heard and
included in the work to reconcile the past and forge a
common Liberian national identity.

We also applaud the revised Strategic Road Map for
National Healing, Peacebuilding and Reconciliation and
the 12 agreed thematic areas of national reconciliation.
We hope for immediate progress in the reconciliation
objectives of the peacebuilding plan and realization
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission's
recommendations, along with the legislator's long-
overdue passage ofthe land rights and local Government
bills. We encourage the continued development of
Liberia's Independent National Commission on Human
Rights and its collaboration with civil society to further
embed respect for human rights as a cornerstone
of Liberian society. Moreover, we commend the
agreement between the Government and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) in the establishment of the OHCHR
country office on 2 April.

The closure of the Mission sees the United Nations
and Liberia beginning a different period in a different
form. To prepare for this eventuality, in UNMIL's final
mandate we asked the Mission and the Secretariat
to develop a peacebuilding plan for Liberia, which
they did in close consultation with the Government
and civil society. We again thank all of those who
put in the long hours and great effort to produce the
plan in a remarkable 90 days, and we also thank all
Member States, some represented here, that have
made significant contributions towards the success
of that plan. We encourage all of Liberia's partners to
stand beside the Government as it seeks to unleash the
potential of the country and its people.

In conclusion, UNMIL demonstrated what is
possible when peacekeeping missions enjoy the full
backing of the host country, support political solutions,
have achievable mandates and put forth clear exit
strategies. At this historic moment for Liberia, as
the baton is passed from peacekeeping to further
peacebuilding, we again commend UNMIL's significant
achievements and applaud the contributions of its
personnel and the sacrifices made by its peacekeepers.
With the Mission's closure, we send our encouragement
to the members of the United Nations country team and
its Resident Coordinator as they adjust to a new and
different phase of effort. But most of all, we salute the
Liberian people and their resilience.

