Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The delegation of Egypt wishes to make the following
comments before the vote on this draft resolution.

First of all, the subject before us today is, in the
opinion of my delegation, a legal one. Even if it has
important political dimensions, it relates to the need to
safeguard respect for international law under the Chicago
Convention of 1944 and its additional Protocols, in
particular the 1984 Protocol adding the text of article 3
bis. This article enshrines the rule of customary law,
whereby countries undertake to refrain from the use of
weapons against civil aircraft in flight. The text of this
article - and I personally participated in drafting it - is
global in scope and does not allow for any exception,
whatever the grounds may be. Article 3 bis affirms the
right of every country to protect its sovereignty by
obliging any aircraft overflying its territory without due

 

cause to land at an airport according to procedures adopted
by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
However, this must be done without endangering the lives
of passengers on board the aircraft.

We live today in a world that must be governed by
law, and any violation of international law is a violation of
the rights of every country. We in the Security Council
must act in solidarity so as to address any violations clearly
and specifically. Secondly, the Security Council's approval
of the conclusions of the report - even through we note
contradictions in certain parts of the report, and even
though the Security Council approves the report adopted by
the Council of ICAO by consensus - is aimed mainly at
ensuring the respect of, and full support for, international
law in this area. It aims also at ensuring the observance of
internationally adopted procedures and measures regarding
the interception of any aircraft penetrating the airspace of
a country, whether that country has ratified the Convention
or not.

Egypt has ratified article 3 his and would invite
countries that have not yet ratified that text to do so as
quickly as possible. We believe that all countries should
respect the rules set out in that Protocol. The delegation of
Egypt considers it extremely important to affirm, as
mentioned in the draft resolution and without any
exceptions, the need for all Member States to take
appropriate measures to prohibit the use of any civil aircraft
registered in that State or operated in full knowledge of the
facts by an operator who has his principal place of business
or permanent residence in that State for any purpose
inconsistent with the aims of the Chicago Convention and
related Protocols, particularly if the goals are political.

For this reason, the delegation of Egypt will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

