Mr. Skoog (Sweden): At the outset, I would like
to say that I am really heartened by all the expressions
of condolences and sympathies that are coming in as
we speak on my telephone from all our friends in the
Chamber this morning. I thank everyone for that.

I also thank you, Madam President, for convening
this very important meeting. As we stated two days
ago in this Chamber (see S/PV.7893), the alleged use
of chemical weapons in the attack in Khan Shaykhun
was abhorrent and unacceptable. If these allegations
are proven to be correct, it will, unfortunately, be
no surprise. The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) in Syria has concluded that chemical
weapons have been used by the Syrian regime on at
least three occasions. This latest attack only adds to
the many other confirmed cases ofinternational crimes
committed in the Syrian conflict by all parties, most
notably the Syrian regime.

The use of chemical weapons is clearly illegal,
constitutes a threat to international peace and security
and can amount to war crimes or crimes against
humanity. There must be no impunity for such
atrocities. Sweden has been extremely clear on the
following points: the attack in Khan Shaykun must be
condemned in the strongest terms; there needs to be a
rapid, full and impartial investigation to confirm the
use of chemical weapons; and those responsible for this
horrendous attack must be held to account.

That is why we have worked tirelessly over the
past few days to ensure that the Council adopts a
strong draft resolution on a robust and immediate
investigation into this outrage. While those efforts did
not bear fruit yesterday, we still hope there is enough
common ground for the Council to move forward on a
strong draft resolution. Efforts should continue, and we
will remain constructively and actively engaged.

With regard to the air strike by the United States of
America last night, in response to the 4 April attack, it
is important that action is based on international law.
Last night's missile attack also raises questions as to its
compatibility with international law. As the Secretary-
General said, restraint is important to avoid any risk of
escalation now.

Sweden has championed accountability for war
crimes and crimes against humanity in Syria.

We voted in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2017/172) on accountability for the use of chemical
weapons on 28 February. We endorsed European
Union-targeted measures against those implicated
in the use of chemical weapons. We support the JIM,
including through financial support and technical
expertise. We have also actively supported the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, chaired by Mr. Pinheiro.
We co-sponsored General Assembly resolution 71/248,
which established the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which,
we hope, will begin its work very soon, and provided
support through an initial contribution of approximately
$400,000 to the Mechanism.

Instead of exchanging accusations and insults
around this table, we now need to come together to
urgently reinvigorate the United Nations-led political
process. Ultimately, the only way of ending the suffering
in Syria is by achieving a sustainable political solution.
That will require a transitional political process based
on resolution 2254 (2015). We reiterate our full support
for the intra-Syrian talks under the auspices of the
United Nations in Geneva and the efforts of Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura, from whom we look forward
to hearing next week. The parties must engage seriously.

Over the past few days, we have expressed our
outrage over the latest atrocity in Khan Shaykhun.
Yet every day the Syrian people continue to suffer the
brutality of war in all its forms. It is high time to end the
war in Syria and allow the Syrian people to determine
their own future.

