Mr. Vukasinovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency ofthe Security Council for the
month of November and to wish you and your delegation
every success. We welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have
taken note of his report (S/2016/911, annex) on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the
period from 16 April to 21 October 2016.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2315 (2016), which extends the mandate of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, EUF OR ALTHEA, for an additional
12 months. It is important to emphasize that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as a host country, has had respectable
and fruitful cooperation with EUFOR ALTHEA,
particularly in capacity-building and training of its
armed forces, which has contributed to strengthening
national ownership.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
peaceful and calm for a long period of time. That has
been regularly reflected in the reports of the EUFOR
ALTHEA mission, as well as in the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The EUFOR ALTHEA mission
is mandated to support the implementation of military
aspects of the General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to ensure compliance
with annexes l-A and 2 of the Agreement. Over the
past few years the EUFOR ALTHEA mission has been
reconfigured so as to correspond to the situation on
the ground, while the primary focus of the mission
has shifted from deterrence and activities providing
a safe and secure environment to capacity-building
and training.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way
from a security consumer to a troop-contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping missions and,
accordingly, a security provider to international peace
and security. Today, military and police personnel from
Bosnia and Herzegovina participate in United Nations
peacekeeping missions worldwide.

On 2 October, democratic and credible local
elections were held in a peaceful atmosphere in the
country. Citizens throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina
exercised their democratic rights and elected members
of municipal councils and city assemblies, as well as
mayors. Voter turnout was relatively high. Around
54 per cent of eligible citizens exercised their right to
cast a vote.

With regard to the economic situation, it is
important to underscore that Bosnia and Herzegovina's
economy, like other economies in the region, has been
affected by the global economic slowdown. However,
macroeconomic data also show steady growth in Bosnia
and Herzegovina's economy in the first half of 2016.
Compared with the first half of 2015, the economy grew
by more than 2 per cent. At the same time, exports
increased by 3 per cent.

Duringthereportingperiod,BosniaandHerzegovina
made notable progress in the implementation of the
Reform Agenda and continued its robust efforts aimed
at achieving socioeconomic reforms, in particular,
those necessary for integration into the European
Union (EU). Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities at
all levels have coordinated their efforts to ensure that
the legal and fiscal framework is conducive to foreign
investment, which is crucial for economic growth and
new job creation.

With the backing of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the European Commission and Bosnia
and Herzegovina signed the Protocol on the adoption of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement. Following
the accession of the Republic of Croatia to the European
Union, the adoption of the Agreement became an

outstanding issue for Bosnia and Herzegovina in terms
of its path towards European integration. Furthermore,
Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted a European integration
coordination mechanism. More precisely, the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted the
Decision on the System of Coordination ofthe European
Integration Process in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
sets up an institutional and operational system of
coordination, as well as modalities for coordination
among Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions at various
levels in relation to the process of European integration.

We would like to express our appreciation to the
EU General Affairs Council decision of 20 September,
which asked the European Commission to submit its
opinion on the application of Bosnia and Herzegovina
for EU membership. This decision represents a major
milestone for European integration. Also during the
reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
European Commission signed the agreement associating
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Competitiveness of
Enterprises and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
(COSME) programme. This agreement will enable
Bosnia and Herzegovina to participate in the COSME
programme and support national efforts aimed at
improving the economy and the overall business
environment.

Advancing friendly and constructive cooperation
among countries of the region in areas of mutual
interest is one of Bosnia and Herzegovina's main
priorities. The prospect of European integration
remains one of the most important factors for regional
stability in the Western Balkans, whose States continue,
within the framework of the Berlin process, to deepen
collaboration in the field of transportation and energy
as the most significant areas for economic growth.

Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to prosecute
war crimes in its domestic courts. We reiterate that
fighting impunity at the local level is vital for Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a complex and multinational State.
In that regard, implementing the national strategy for
prosecuting war crimes, regardless of the national
or religious origin of the perpetrators or victims, is
essential for reconciliation and long-term stability.

Terrorism, radicalization and violent extremism
together constitute one of the main security challenges
at the global, regional and national levels. Bosnia
and Herzegovina continues to fulfil its international
obligations with regard to countering terrorism and
violent extremism. In accordance with provisions
of its amended penal code, Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to prosecute individuals involved in fighting
on behalf of terrorist and paramilitary organizations as
well as those facilitating terrorist-fighter recruitment.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's judicial and security
institutions have been implementing its strategy for
preventing and combating terrorism. It is important
to emphasize that the strategy, together with
security measures, includes preventive activities for
deradicalization undertaken by national stakeholders,
such as religious communities, educational institutions,
civil-society organizations and the media. During the
reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina also made
progress in combating organized crime, corruption and
money-laundering.

Refugee and migrant flows in the Balkans remain
to be a challenge to the States of the region and their
institutions. We consider that only extensive and
coordinated actions to address underlying causes
of migration in the countries of origin at the global
level can bring a satisfactory solution to the migrant
crisis. Although Bosnia and Herzegovina has not been
under direct pressure brought about by a significant
migrant movement throughout its territory, I would
like to stress that its institutions have undertaken a
set of comprehensive measures to respond in case of
massive influx of refugees, including measures in
the humanitarian and security spheres. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has adopted a strategy in the field of
migration and asylum as well as a plan of action for the
period 2016-2020. These instruments specify Bosnia
and Herzegovina's policy in the field of migration and
asylum in accordance with the highest European and
international standards.

Finally, we would like to express the readiness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities to continue their
work to secure a better and prosperous future for its
citizens. At same time, we would also like to express
our gratitude to international partners for supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina on that path.'

