Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
resolution that we have just adopted constitutes a clear
message that the actions carried out by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea are not acceptable to the
international community and that they jeopardize
international peace and security. The fuller and more
cohesive the participation of the members of the
Security Council, the stronger this message is. This
ought to be the norm in the Council's actions at all
times.

However, we must be clear. Addressing issues of
international security - non-proliferation, nuclear
disarmament and the use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes - cannot be the monopoly of a group of
States. Quite the contrary, it concerns the whole of the
international community. As set out in the Charter of
this Organization, the Security Council acts on behalf
of the Member States. Therefore, every member of the
Security Council, not just a few of them, has the
responsibility to actively participate in seeking solutions
to those issues that jeopardize the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Aware of the sense of urgency and the gravity of
the situation, my delegation decided to vote in favour
of this resolution. The actions by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea constitute a clear violation
of Security Council resolutions 1695 (2006) and 1718
(2006) and contradict the spirit of the presidential
statement adopted on 13 April 2009 (S/PRST/2009/7).
They also contravene international law and the
purposes of disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation
and have exacerbated tension, thus jeopardizing
regional and international stability.

From the beginning the Mexican Government
strongly condemned the nuclear test carried out by the
Democratic People's Republic, as well as later
launches of short-range missiles. Mexico shares the
concern of the international community that those
decisions undermine the aspiration to achieve a
nuclear-weapon-free world, which includes the
objective of denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
We hope that the Government of the Democratic
People's Republic listens to the call for a pacific
5
dialogue that is set forth in the resolution and returns
immediately to the Six-Party Talks.

Mexico reiterates that nuclear tests must cease
permanently. We deem it positive that the resolution we
have adopted calls on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to join the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). The test carried out by the
Democratic People's Republic has demonstrated the
urgent need of the entry into force of the CTBT. For
this reason, Mexico had wanted this resolution to
include a clear and unequivocal commitment by all
members of the Security Council to this end.

It is also necessary to remember that these actions
of the Democratic People's Republic do not happen in
a vacuum; they take place in a context of a constant
threat to the international community that is linked to
the existence of nuclear weapons and the risk of their
proliferation. The possibility of the proliferation of
nuclear weapons will remain as long as they are not
completely eliminated. What does not exist cannot
proliferate.

We must recognize the recent positive signals
with regard to nuclear disarmament. Some nuclear
weapon States have already announced initiatives that
could favour this objective, and we hope that they
materialize in the near future. We also hope that the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) will
produce concrete measures to achieve a nuclear-
weapon-free world.

Mexico will continue to seek nuclear
disarmament and the adoption of effective and
progressive measures that ensure the credibility and
effectiveness of the international nuclear non-
proliferation regime.

In this context, we once again call upon the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to retract the
announcement of its withdrawal from the NPT, which
is the cornerstone of disarmament, nuclear
non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.

