Ihave the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African States members of the Security Council, namely, the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). At the outset, I would like to express my sincere thanks to Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel, for his insightful briefing and for his dedication to promoting dialogue and for his sustained commitment to stabilizing the situation in the region. I also commend Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim, whose relevant remarks testify to her commitment to raising awareness on the adverse effects of climate change, particularly in a region already facing several challenges. The year 2020 is a one in which several elections were held under normal conditions, despite the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Some of those elections, such as in Mali, led to the emergence of women as a political force, many of whom were elected to the National Assembly. The A3+1 welcomes this trend, which strengthens the basis for democracy and the rule of law, and which in turn lays the foundations for a more consensual and peaceful management of power. We commend the key role played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and his effective efforts aimed at advocating preventive diplomacy through his good offices, without which many crisis situations could have degenerated. In this regard, the strengthening of democratic institutions through the promotion of dialogue among political actors and advocacy in promoting peace and peaceful coexistence among segments of society and communities are actions to the credit of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS). We encourage UNOWAS to continue with these efforts, especially as the subregion prepares for the general elections that are scheduled to take place in five countries, some of them in tense environments. Through good cooperation with the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), whose Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance is essential, UNOWAS must help ensure that all these planned elections take place in a calm and stable environment, especially in view of the difficult security context and the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition to its traditional mandate, UNOWAS will need to devote even more efforts to helping countries deal with what has now become the top priority, namely, the fight against armed terrorist groups, whose actions spare neither the armed forces nor the civilian populations of the countries where they seek to operate. These terrorist groups, which fuel intercommunal tensions, are forcing thousands of people, mostly women and children, to flee their homes. In the Sahel, a region where climate change, armed conflict and fragile health systems compound the challenges, the COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating an already disastrous situation that has made populations particularly vulnerable to disease and hunger and further risks, reversing the hard-earned progress made on many fronts, including economic growth, poverty reduction and the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. According to United Nations agencies, 3.5 million people are expected to face acute to severe food insecurity, and 3.1 million are internally displaced persons, returnees and people at risk of statelessness. We commend the initiatives taken by ECOWAS to mitigate the impact of the pandemic. Faced with such a situation, the A3+1 believes that only a comprehensive approach that addresses the root causes of terrorism and intercommunal violence through poverty alleviation and investment in human development is the most appropriate strategy to reverse this most worrisome trend. We also believe that a strong emphasis on more community-level interventions, such as intercommunal dialogues to address intercommunal violence, are vital. We therefore welcome the convening and the outcomes of the workshop on good practices to prevent and resolve farmer-herder conflicts, co-organized by UNOWAS and ECOWAS, which we believe was a positive initiative for addressing intercommunal violence. 'sfeiIn this regard, the A3+l commend the action taken by some countries to strengthen the participation of women and young people in the implementation of national strategies for peace, security, development and the fight against COVID-19. These positive developments will contribute significantly to the broader national ownership of, and meaningful participation by, all populations in peacebuilding activities in their respective countries. The A3+1 remain deeply concerned at the persistent challenges of drug trafficking, organized crime and maritime piracy, through which terrorist groups find the means to finance their criminal activities. In that regard, we commend the excellent work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in strengthening the interception capacities of States in the region, which has led to significant drug seizures in Guinea-Bissau, Cete d'Ivoire, Senegal and Mali, as well as to the arrest and conviction of those involved in such crimes. In addition to the above-mentioned pressing challenges, the A3+1 believe that UNOWAS should, through its coordination role, assist the countries of the subregion in addressing the cumulative effects of insecurity, the impact of climate change and the economic and social consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. It should support the measures taken by the ECOWAS Heads of State and Government who have already put in place a response plan for the pandemic, taking into account the fight against the spread of the disease and the post-pandemic economic recovery. We welcome the collaboration efforts among ECOWAS, the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the African Union towards realizing the deployment of 3,000 troops of the African Standby Force to the Sahel to further combat terrorism. It is time to redouble efforts to combat insecurity and stabilize the subregion at the military level, through the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the G5S-Sahel forces, the Multinational Joint Task Force and the forces of partner States. We hope that this will be accompanied by substantial funding that could enable the implementation of development actions for the benefit of the peoples of the subregion. The multiple strategies for the Sahel and other development plans should cease to be mere slogans and become real levers for the mobilization of financial resources, which West Africa and its member States so badly need. We hope that the international community will fulfil its commitments to support the region in extricating itself from the current situation, including by disbursing pledges made to the region, as substantial funding is needed to enable the implementation of development actions for the benefit of the peoples of this vast area.
