Mr. A] Bayati (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to express my delegation's high
consideration for your presidency during this historic
meeting for my country, Iraq, and for all the countries
that seek to live in peace and aim to achieve progress
and prosperity.

We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC), its predecessor, the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to disarm the weapons
of mass destruction of the Saddam regime. We thank
Mr. Dimitrius Perricos for his report, although he
concentrated mostly on the past. We, with our friends
in the world, are concentrating on the present and the
future. We also thank Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen for his
positive report.
When the Security Council adopts the draft
resolution to terminate the mandates of UNMOVIC
and the IAEA's Iraq Nuclear Verification Office, an
appalling chapter in Iraq's modern history, which has
had a destructive impact on its people, will be closed.
As is well known, the mandates of UNMOVIC, its
predecessor, UNSCOM, and the IAEA were to destroy,
remove and render harmless Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction - weapons that the previous regime was
keen to acquire and to use against its own people and

to threaten Iraq's neighbours, the stability of the region
and the whole world.

Disarming the previous regime of its weapons of
mass destruction, which was the responsibility of the
international community, was not an easy or painless
task. The Iraqi people paid a very heavy price during
that period of time due to the regime's possession of
those weapons and its refusal to cooperate with the
relevant international bodies responsible for their
elimination - a price which led to the loss of
thousands of innocent lives, in addition to a waste of
national resources and the total destruction of the
infrastructure.

When this dreadful chapter ends, the Government
and people of Iraq will look forward to a better life,
with strong determination to live in peace among
themselves, their neighbours and with the entire world.

The draft resolution before the Council will put
several obligations on Iraq. We consider them to be
national obligations rather than international
commitments. We have committed ourselves, in
article 9, paragraph (e) of our Constitution, to the
following:

"The Iraqi Government shall respect and
implement Iraq's international commitments
regarding the non-proliferation, non-
development, non-production, and non-use of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
Associated equipment, material, technologies and
communications systems for use in the
development, manufacture, production and use of
such weapons shall be banned."

In addition, the Government of Iraq fully cooperated
with the Iraq Survey Group.

As mentioned in the letter dated 8 April 2007
from His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, to the President of the Security
Council, attached as annex II to the draft resolution,
the Iraqi Government reiterates its commitment to the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), the
safeguards agreement of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the Biological Weapons Convention
and the 1925 Geneva Protocol for the Prohibition of
the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other
Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare.

In addition, the Iraqi technical authorities have
drafted a law on Iraq's accession to the Chemical
Weapons Convention. That law is currently before the
parliament with a view to its adoption as soon as
possible. Preparations are also under way for the
accession to the Model Additional Protocol of the
IAEA safeguards regime and to other international
treaties and arrangements concerning disarmament and
non-proliferation.

We consider the Council's adoption of the draft
resolution to terminate the mandate of UNMOVIC and
the IAEA's Iraq Nuclear Verification Office as a
reaffirmation that all prohibitions related to trade with
Iraq and the provision of financial or economic
resources to Iraq established by the relevant Security
Council resolutions - in particular resolutions 661
(1990) and 687 (1991) - shall no longer apply. We
emphasize that Iraq is keen, now and in the future, to
fulfil all its obligations and commitments concerning
disarmament and non-proliferation. We look forward to
transferring the assets from UNMOVIC's escrow
account to the Development Fund for Iraq, as well as
UNMOVIC's material and properties to the
Government of Iraq, during the three-month period
determined by the draft resolution.

We commit ourselves to fulfilling our obligations,
in accordance with the draft resolution to be adopted.
The first of these is to inform the Security Council
within one year on progress made in adhering to all
applicable disarmament and non-proliferation treaties
and other arrangements, as mentioned in the draft
resolution. The National Monitoring Directorate will
be committed to controlling the transfer of dual-use
material within a mechanism based on international
standards.

The Iraqi people and Government are looking
forward to all Security Council members voting in
favour of the draft resolution. We extend our gratitude
to those Council members who supported Iraq in its
efforts to close this chapter.

While we greatly appreciate the Council's
adoption of this draft resolution, which will lead
towards enabling Iraq to contribute, along with the
international community, to the maintenance of peace,
security and stability in our region and the world - we
also look forward to its consideration of an appropriate
mechanism to address another heavy burden for Iraq -
namely, compensation - in a manner that will ease
and end the financial burden that has prevented Iraq
from fully using its resources and allocating them to

development and progress. This compensation is a
result of the invasion by the previous regime of our
neighbouring country, Kuwait. The Iraqi people, who
suffered from the regime's brutal practices, should not
be held responsible.

