Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation would like to reply briefly to
the unfounded claims contained in the statement made
by the representative of Israel.

It is well known that Israel was the party that
brought terrorism to the Middle East, and I find no
reason to recall - especially given that we are here in
the Security Council Chamber - the millions of Syrian
and Palestinian refugees, the Qana massacre, the Sabra
and Shatila massacre and the massacre of the Cave of
the Patriarchs, among others, let alone the continued
Israeli occupation of Arab territories. Once again, we
ask, if this is not terrorism, what is it?

Syria aids, assists and gives shelter to about a half
million Palestinian refugees. The representative of
Israel takes pleasure in calling them terrorists, while
they have been victims of Israeli terror since 1948. We
in Syria have only information and social offices that
represent the Palestinian people and those who have
been displaced.

The members of the international community
have made clear their confidence in Syria: by more
than the required majority, they elected Syria to
membership of the Security Council. Syria did not
succeed in that election by meeting Israel's criteria for
success: occupation, killing, terrorism and destruction.
At any rate, we do not believe that Israel is in the best
position to claim to speak for the international
community.

Looking at this from another perspective, all
delegations that spoke in the Council today warmly
congratulated us on our accession to membership of the
Council. That reflects confidence that we cherish and
provides our response to the claims of the
representative of Israel. We affirm to all present that
we will most assuredly strive to be worthy of that
confidence.

In short, let me reiterate on behalf of the Syrian
Arab Republic that Syria, as it always has been, is
prepared to work with every country in the world, from
East to West, from North to South, to fight terrorism
and to eradicate the scourge it represents. We are
prepared to do this immediately and unconditionally.
We have made that intention clear to all who have
visited Damascus. We are engaged in close cooperation
with all countries that have requested and sought such
cooperation.

I reaffirm in conclusion that our struggle and
resistance against Israeli occupation of Arab territories
are a just and legitimate struggle by the terms of the
Charter and international legitimacy.

