Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We have
held repeated meetings in the Security Council and the
General Assembly regarding the Syrian crisis during
the past few months to no avail, but rather generating
draft resolutions and statements and engaging in
endless arguments while the Syrian people continue
to suffer at the hands of such an inhumane and bloody
conflict. That conflict persists, although we all see that
it is possible to reach a solution, provided there are good
intentions. Time is being wasted and lives are being lost
in vain, despite a conclusive decision has been within
the reach of parties both directly and indirectly involved
in that merciless war, and despite the terms of reference
of the Council being clear regarding putting an end to
the bloodshed, especially through the implementation
of resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016).

There were moments when we believed that the
contending parties would realize that the conflict was
futile and that it was time to face the facts. But, time
and again, we are confronted by the fact that the highly
political and military positions continued to exceed the
desire to achieve a settlement ofthe conflict and to ignore
the worst humanitarian situation in modern history,
overlooking the fact that Syrian territories had become
a breeding ground for terrorists and mercenaries, and
the fact that it was being torn apart by non-State actors,
on the one hand, and foreign intervention, on the
other. The existence of political rivalries continues to
delay embarking upon serious negotiations among the
Syrian parties. Divergent views on the history and an
evaluation of the reasons behing the Syrian crisis and
the factors fuelling it must not remain an obstacle for
the international community. We now have before us a
clear conflict, which is tantamount to a fully fledged
war, and it will not cease without a political solution.

In that regard, allow me to reiterate the elements
that we tried, during the past period, to reflect in
Egypt's initiatives, whether through our communication
with the parties to the crisis, including the Syrian
opposition, or through our endeavours in the Security
Council, which we hoped would guide all the parties
with influence.

First, during the past six years, the Syrian people,
including children, mothers, the elderly and men, have
borne witness to something no human being should
ever have to, namely, displacement, murder and the
destruction of their future. Hence, taking into account
the humanitarian condition of all Syrians, regardless of
their affiliations, must remain the first priority for all
parties withuot exception, irrespective of the goals. The
achievement of democracy and liberty, on the one hand,
and fighting terrorism, on the other, are not pretexts to
tear apart a society, kill children or take vengeance on
certain sects through executions.

Secondly, the proliferation of terrorism in Syria is
not an illusion or an exaggeration, neither is it a subject
that can taken lightly in terms of its importance and its
impact on the events on the ground. Scores ofthousands
of terrorists, mercenaries and extremist ideas are
proliferating with the support of outside forces. There
are groups and parties that have consciously chosen
to support extremism and terrorism politically and
operationally on the ground, including through direct
cooperation and political support to the Al-Nusra Front
and Fatah Al-Sham. It is high time that the Security
Council and its counter-terrorism bodies decisively
confront that phenomenon, especially through the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), and the International Syria
Support Group.

Thirdly, the proxy war and foreign intervention
in Syria must cease. Syrians must regain their right
to shape their future and achieve their aspiration for
a united, stable and democratic country that observes
human rights and equality among various attitudes
and affiliations.

Fourthly, Syrian parties are still capable of
regaining control. I call upon all of them to assume
their responsibility vis-a-vis their people, who are being
killed and displaced daily, free of foreign intervention
or one party aspiring to gain control over the other.
There will be no winners or losers in Syria. Everybody
will lose.

Regardless of the level of the military solution on
the ground for one party or another, such a solution
will not be long-term and will not provide stability for
the Syrian people. The challenges facing it are greater
and more important than the battle results. Those
challenges include millions of internally displaced
people and refugees, hundreds of thousands of victims,
entire cities destroyed, an economic collapse and the
entrenchment of the long-term goals of foreign parties
that do not intersect with the interests of the Syrian
people. What is more grave than all of that is the fact
that the sectarian and ethnic conflict over the past few
years threatens any aspiration for coexistence.

I will therefore continue to repeat that the situation
in Syria will not be resolved through a military solution.
Facing such challenges requires a comprehensive and
balanced political process. I once again call upon
the Secretary-General, through his Special Envoy, to
start as quickly as possible to prepare for negotiations
between the Government and the broadest spectrum of
the opposition, without selectivity or accommodations
that jeopardize the independence of the Syrian solution,
and in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and on
the basis of the Geneva communique (see S/2012/522, annex) in order to develop a transition on which
the Syrian parties can agree. I also call upon the
Secretary-General to resist any pressure that could
hamper the conduct of negotiations as soon as possible.
Furthermore, I call upon him to actually name any
party that is indeed impeding such negotiations. It is
high time for all parties to assume responsibility before
the Syrian people and before history.

