I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall for his presentation and the latest report (S/2020/1154). They both clearly demonstrate that the work of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in Central Africa remains very relevant. I would also like to take this opportunity to raise three points. Belgium remains concerned about the situation in Cameroon. While we welcome some progress towards dialogue and decentralization in the North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon, the boycott of the local elections held on 6 December is a cause for concern. We call on all stakeholders to show restraint in the follow-up to the regional elections. The implementation of the recommendations resulting from the dialogue and the continuation of this dialogue with all parties remain essential to the construction of sustainable peace and development. Furthermore, Belgium calls on all parties to support the call by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the African Union for a comprehensive ceasefire. In that regard, we remain particularly concerned about the negative impact of the conflict on women and children, forced displacement and human rights violations. In view of the number of cases of recruitment and use, killings and attacks on physical integrity, abductions, attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access in Cameroon, we welcome the Secretary-General's addition of Cameroon to the list of countries in which the situation is of concern in his forthcoming report on children and armed conflict. International humanitarian law and international human rights must be fully respected. In that regard, we are particularly concerned about the continued escalation of attacks and kidnappings of humanitarian workers and clergy. The protection of United Nations personnel, as well as all other relevant humanitarian actors, must be guaranteed. The added value of UNOCA lies especially in its early-warning system and its coverage of regional issues, including climate change and terrorism. In this context, we would like to expressly welcome the integration by UNOCA of the climate security perspective into its conflict analysis. The adoption of a subregional regulation on pastoralism and transhumance will therefore be of the utmost importance in preventing and reducing farmer-herder conflicts. We also welcome the numerous reports on terrorism by UNOCA - both in the context of Boko Haram and in other contexts in Central Africa. It is therefore crucial that the lessons learned and good practices of UNOCA can also be useful in other contexts on the African continent where terrorism is simmering, such as in Mozambique. Lastly, we want to focus briefly on the situation in Burundi. The elections have turned a page. We are now ready to start writing a new chapter. In its presidential statement last week (S/PRST/2020/12), the Council took note of the improved security situation in Burundi and the six principal priorities presented by President Ndayishimiye in his inauguration speech on 18 June 2020. Progress has been made, but challenges remain. They include, but are not limited to, the return of refugees, a problem already identified by the most recent UNOCA report. However, they also include continued work on the President's sixth priority in terms of human rights, sustainable peace and reconciliation. Belgium remains ready to work on this important issue with the people and the Government of Burundi.
