Mr. Spoerri: The International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) is honoured to brief the Security
Council once again and wishes to thank China, as
President, for the invitation.

We commend the Secretary-General for his latest
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2012/376), which highlights several issues of great
concern to the ICRC. I will limit my remarks to three
of them. The first fundamental concern is threats
affecting the security and delivery of health care, the
second is the availability and use of arms and the third
is the failure to comply with international humanitarian
law. The need to improve respect for international
humanitarian law and to ensure accountability for
violations lies at the heart of all of those issues, which
continuously confront the ICRC in its daily operational
work around the world. The terrible human suffering
caused by those issues can and must be reduced.

Violence against health-care workers, facilities and
beneficiaries is one of the most serious yet neglected
humanitarian concerns today, as the Secretary-General
mentioned in his opening speech. It impedes access
to and the delivery of health care in many countries.
I will mention just a few examples. In Pakistan, the
kidnapping and murder of an ICRC health manager
earlier this year has deprived thousands of wounded
patients of adequate treatment. In Somalia, hospitals
have been shelled. In Libya and Syria, ambulances
have been shot at. Just yesterday, in Syria, a first-aid
volunteer of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent was shot
and killed. That is the fourth time since last September
that a member of the Red Crescent was killed while on
duty. In Afghanistan, wounded people may languish for
hours in vehicles held up at checkpoints. In sum, blatant
disrespect for the neutral status of health facilities,
transport and personnel is all too common.

In response to that reality on the ground, the ICRC
has documented and analyzed hundreds of violent
incidents affecting health care in 16 countries where it
operates, over a two-and-a-half year period. The results
of the study, published at the end of last year, show that,
while the number of recorded incidents is striking, they
represent only the tip of the iceberg. A single violent
incident against health-care infrastructure or workers
can have immeasurable longer-term repercussions on
entire communities with war-related or chronic health
problems.

The ICRC and some 50 National Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies subsequently raised this issue
at the thirty-first International Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva in November
and December of last year. That Conference saw the
adoption of a far-reaching resolution entitled "Health
Care in Danger", demanding an effective response from
States, national societies and the health-care community
at large. The resolution called upon the ICRC to initiate
consultations with all major stakeholders in order to
identify and agree upon concrete measures for making
the delivery of health care safer in armed conflicts
and other emergencies worldwide. Such consultations
are under way, aimed not at creating new international
instruments or legal frameworks but rather at
producing practical recommendations and measures to
be implemented at the national level.
While a concerted international effort is required
to tackle such major humanitarian concerns, primary
responsibility clearly lies with States. The ICRC
therefore makes a special plea to the members of this
Council to actively support this important humanitarian
endeavour.

Many threats to the security and delivery of health
care stem in fact from the widespread availability and
use of weapons, which is the second issue I would like
to highlight today. Each year, hundreds of thousands
of civilians pay a devastating price for the rampant
availability and misuse of conventional weapons.
Civilians remain at risk of being injured, killed or
displaced by violence involving weapons, even long
after a conflict has ended. That is partly a consequence
of the poorly regulated international trade in
conventional arms. The ICRC, in most of the contexts in
which it works, is confronted with the manifold effects
of inadequate control over transfers of conventional
weapons. That is why the ICRC strongly supports the
adoption of a global arms trade treaty.

One key objective of such an instrument must be
to reduce the human cost of that availability by setting
clear treaty norms for the transfer of conventional arms.
An effective arms trade treaty would require States to
assess whether the weapons they are transferring may
be used to commit serious violations of international
humanitarian law and other relevant international
instruments, and to prohibit those transfers when such
clear risks exist. A strong treaty would save lives,
facilitate medical and other humanitarian aid and
strengthen compliance with international law.

The failure to comply with international
humanitarian law is the third issue that I wish to stress.
As set out in the Secretary-General's report, weak
compliance with international humanitarian law and the
lack of accountability for violations seriously impact
the protection of civilians. Fortunately, some positive
developments have been observed. At the national level,
there have been many measures to improve compliance
and accountability, such as adopting legislation,
training public officials, including security forces,
and strengthening local judicial capacities. In parallel,
key decisions of the international criminal tribunals
have constituted major steps in the effort to ensure
accountability.

Still, major challenges remain. Last year's
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent endorsed ICRC proposals for further work to
strengthen legal protection for people affected by armed
conflict. Ajoint Swiss-ICRC initiative is already under
way to explore with States ways to make compliance
mechanisms more effective.

The Security Council has an essential role to play
in reminding the parties to conflicts to fully respect
the rules of international humanitarian law governing
humanitarian access. It is Vital, however, that all
concerned understand and respect the roles played by
different actors on the ground, including organizations
without any judicial functions, such as the ICRC and
national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. In that
vein, it was reassuring that the Secretary-General's
report explicitly recognized the diversity and specific
mandates of protection actors and stressed their security
and need to have access.

As we deliberate here today, civilians in many parts
of the world are bearing the brunt of hostilities. The
ICRC urges the States in this Council to take practical
measures to counter a wide range of threats to health
care, to adopt a strong arms trade treaty and to commit
to strengthening legal protection for the victims of
armed conflict.

Resolute action in those three areas would go a long
way towards ensuring better protection of civilians
everywhere.

