Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for being
steadfast and maintaining the hope that we could arrive
at the point we have reached today.

Angola supports today's unanimous adoption of
resolution 2268 (2016), on a cessation of hostilities in
Syria. It is a positive and long-awaited step forward in
the quest to achieve a peaceful settlement of the Syrian
crisis, and we will continue to support it, especially the
confidence-building measures aimed at establishing
the conditions necessary for the Syrian-led political
transition and dialogue that we in the Council have
never ceased calling for.

The establishment of an international task force to
ensure unimpeded humanitarian access and a ceasefire
in Syria is a timely initiative, given the worsening
refugee crisis, the brutality and the loss of the lives
of more than a quarter of a million people that we
have experienced. Allowing humanitarian agencies
to conduct their work, which can be effective only
with a cessation of hostilities, is crucial to stemming
the growing flow of refugees and the horror of the
hostilities that we have witnessed. We sincerely hope
that the cessation will hold under the monitoring
mechanism and we look forward to a resumption of
the intra-Syrian talks under the auspices of the Special
Envoy, now announced for 7 March.

In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the
Special Envoy and wish him every success in the
next round of negotiations. We hope that this time the
cessation of hostilities will hold and that our focus will
shift to building bridges between the various factions
in Syria, based on the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), and to uniting our efforts to neutralize
and further work to eliminate the threat of hostilities
from terrorist groups. We may then be able to move
forward in order to build momentum for the political
track, while encouraging the holding of the ceasefire
and a move towards peace and stability in Syria and
the region.

