Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and his entire team for their comprehensive and
detailed briefing.

We in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcome
the positive outcome of the joint efforts of the
Government of the Sudan, the African Union and the
United Nations. Their invaluable contribution to the
peace process has led to a considerable reduction in the
number of clashes between the Sudanese Government
and Darfur rebel groups and better protection for the
civilian population in Darfur. Such conditions have
enabled the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur to prepare to exit the area after
more than 10 years of intense conflict. We thank all
stakeholders that have contributed to the situation, in
particular the Governments of Qatar, Germany and
the United States as the main sponsors of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. We invite all parties
to the conflict to cease hostilities and adhere to the
Doha Document.

Generally, it all points to a security situation that
appears to be more stable. We hope that such stability
can be sustained with the main aim of restoring peace
and fostering direct, earnest and inclusive dialogue. In
the light of such progress, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea commends the efforts of the Sudanese
Government and urges it to continue to work to restore
normalcy and protect civilians, in particular the
most vulnerable.

We would like to underscore the progress made
with respect to the confiscation of weapons. Weapons
alone do not kill, but let us not fool ourselves - they
help considerably. It is therefore important to establish
a security sector in accordance with the guidelines set
by the African Union Framework on Security Sector
Reform. The trafficking and proliferation of small
arms and light weapons are key factors contributing
to insecurity and instability in the Central African
subregion, threatening the present and future of our
young people and our ability to build civil, functional
and modern societies. It is an issue that affects us directly
and we intend to address it during our membership of
the Council.

Despite the progress that has been made, it is clear
that the process is incomplete and that much remains to
be done. That is why we will continue to support and
commend the approach adopted by the African Union
and the United Nations to coordinate efforts, which
we hope will soon result in a positive outcome for the
Sudanese people. We would like to underscore that
while we commend efforts to develop an exit strategy,
we recommend that it be consensus-based, gradual,
flexible and realistic, in line with developments
on the ground, bearing in mind that the conflict is
inter-ethnic in nature and spurred by competition for
scarce resources in the area and clashes over lands on
which those resources are found. We believe that this
is another issue that must be resolved in order to end
the conflict. That is why we welcome State efforts in
eastern Darfur to establish a mechanism that would
determine and formalize land ownership rights through
the courts. We would like to see progress in that area.

Lastly, we would like to underscore our concerns
about the serious humanitarian situation currently
affecting more than 1 million people. Many of the
displaced now endure famine exacerbated by the
adverse impact of climate change and are in dire need of
food assistance. We therefore call on the international
community and the Security Council to work together
to adopt measures to resolve the horrific situation.
We believe that including the situation in Darfur
on the agenda of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission, as requested by the Government of the
Sudan, would be a good way to do so. We intend to
support that request during the next annual meeting
of the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union and in the Security Council in July. We will
work with our colleagues to address those issues in
the upcoming mandate-renewal resolution. As our
Ethiopian colleagues stated, we hope the mandate will
be extended.

