Mr. Kriihenbiihl: Allow me to begin by expressing
my sincere appreciation to the Security Council for the
invitation and the honour to deliver a briefing from
Gaza City today.

In this, the second of my visits to Gaza during the
current crisis, I have spent the last two days assessing
the situation on the ground, the extent of the human
suffering, and the state of our operations, which
continue in many parts of the Gaza Strip amidst terrible
conditions resulting from the conflict that erupted on
8 July.

I would like, first and foremost, to express my
deepest admiration to staff of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) who are providing a humanitarian
lifeline to the people of Gaza. It is under the truly
outstanding leadership of our Director of Operations,
Mr. Bob Turner, that UNRWA staff in Gaza - who
number over 12,000 - are assisting its people at a time
of their greatest need, and doing so at considerable
risk in the prevailing context. Eight of my colleagues
have now lost their lives since hostilities began.
In acknowledging the sacrifice, I extend heartfelt
condolences to their families. Let me not forget also
to thank the rest of the United Nations family that is
doing so much address the humanitarian and political
dimensions of the situation.

Since my arrival yesterday, I have borne witness
to the tragic situation that has unfolded and been so
graphically seen on television screens across the
globe. I have seen extensive damage done to whole
neighbourhoods and essential infrastructure. I have
in particular seen this morning the catastrophic
human cost of this war at the paediatric ward in the
main hospital in Gaza, with broken bodies that are
the real - and unacceptable - consequence of an
armed conflict waged with excessive - and at times
disproportionate - force in densely populated urban
settings. Among the many children lying in the rooms
and corridors was five-month-old Yussuf who has very
barely and not yet definitively survived the shelling of
the UNRWA school building yesterday in Jabalya.

Like many Council members, I have children of my
own, and what I saw today - the terrible wounds - were
devastating to me. I refer to young Yussuf because I
have always refused the concept of anonymity in death
and injury. Too often, reports from war zones refer to
lists of numbers. The Palestinian children I saw today
are not statistics. Behind every death and injury there is
a story and a destiny to be respected.

Yesterday, an elementary girls' school in Jabalya
serving as a designated emergency shelter for displaced
people received artillery strikes, which we have
assessed to have been fired by the Israeli military.
The precise location and coordinates of the school
were conveyed on 17 occasions to the Israeli military,
including a notification that the school was sheltering
displaced persons. The displaced were instructed by the
Israeli military to evacuate their homes and seek shelter
in premises such as ours. I reiterate my condemnation
of the attack in the strongest terms, reiterate also that
it was a serious Violation of international law, and call
for accountability, including through the immediate
launching of a transparent investigation by Israel and
for it to share its findings. We are engaged in continuous
dialogue with Israel on the matter.

Speaking to many inhabitants of Gaza yesterday
and today I have heard the same messages time and
time again: "If we are not safe in an UNRWA school,
we are not safe anywhere in Gaza", they say, and they
add, "the world has failed us, has failed to protect".
"The protection of civilians is an expression we do not
want to hear anymore", many have commented.

I also call on all parties to respect the sanctity
of United Nations premises and exercise the highest
precaution in the conduct of military operations that
affect civilians in the region. That the attack on the
shelter in Jabalya came only six days after a strike
on the designated UNRWA emergency shelter in Beit
Hanoun and caused multiple injuries and fatalities to
internally displaced persons (IDPs) taking refuge there
makes the call all the more urgent.

There is another challenge in our field of operations
to which I want to draw attention. On three occasions
we have found in empty UNRWA facilities rockets
belonging to armed groups in Gaza. We immediately
alerted all relevant parties to their existence and
we strongly condemned placement of weapons in
our schools. UNRWA is now working with United
Nations partners to improve procedures to address
such violations in a manner that does not compromise
the safety of staff or civilians, including UNRWA
beneficiaries. It should also be said that such discoveries
do not in any way justify attacks on UNRWA facilities
and in particular those sheltering IDPs. UNRWA takes
robust measures to closely monitor all its facilities to
which it has access in an effort to prevent misuse by
combatants and other parties.

Allow me to turn to the most difficult challenge
facing UNRWA in Gaza today. We are currently
hosting over 220,000 internally displaced people, a
number that has grown every day of the conflict and at
an accelerated pace in the last week. That is four times
higher that the peak number of displaced people during
the conflict in 2008 and 2009. I am not referring here
to the tens of thousands of displaced in Gaza that have
found temporary shelter with host families, only to
those who are registered in UNRWA schools.

We are doing everything possible to provide
the displaced with items to meet their minimum
needs - food, mattresses and blankets - but we
are now into the fourth week of mass displacement
in facilities unequipped to shelter large numbers for
such a duration. Conditions are increasingly dire in
the shelters. There is no water for hygiene, very few
showers, and latrines are totally inadequate. Outbreak
of disease is beginning, with skin infections and
scabies, inter alia. There are thousands of pregnant
women in our schools, deliveries are precarious, and
we are sheltering newborn infants in these appalling
conditions. Our ability to mitigate the situation is of
course heavily restricted by ongoing hostilities.

We are gravely concerned about the situation.
We are also gravely concerned about any possible
additional displacement that will drive up the numbers
in our shelters. With as many as 2,500 displaced
persons residing in schools and an average of 80 people
to a classroom, we have exceeded the tolerable limit we
can accommodate. It is therefore with alarm that I have
received accounts of new instructions from the Israeli
military to Palestinians to evacuate the Zeitoun area of
Gaza City and areas in the vicinity of Khan Younis.

In view of the foregoing facts and of the shelling
affecting UNRWA schools on six occasions, I believe
that the population is at a precipice and I appeal to the
international community to take the steps necessary
to address this extreme situation. Should further large
scale displacements indeed occur, the occupying Power,
under international humanitarian law, will have to
assume direct responsibility for assisting these people.

The new reality being created before our eyes in
the occupied Palestinian territory and Israel is not
sustainable under any circumstances. The humanitarian
and political costs grow by the day with each death and
injury, with the continuing destruction of infrastructure
vital to the life of the Palestinian people in Gaza, and
with the continuing violations of international law. As I
have stated on previous visits to Gaza, the rocket firing
on Israeli cities and endangering Israeli civilians is
unacceptable and must cease.

We all aspire to seeing a Middle East in which its
peoples share common interests, a stake in each others'
well-being, and a commitment - as the Secretary-
General recently said - to peace, justice and security
for all in the region. That cannot happen under the
conditions of military occupation and those caused by
the pitiless conflict now unfolding. It is past the time
for an immediate and unconditional ceasefire to be
agreed by the parties as called for by the Council in its
recent statement (S/PRST/2014/13).
Allow me also to add my voice to those calling
for the redress of the underlying conditions that fuel
the conflict and the violence that repeats itself in full
view of the world. In other words, a ceasefire, while
immediately required to save lives, is not enough. It is
not conceivable to simply return to the situation existing
before the conflict. Notwithstanding Israel's legitimate
security concerns, the illegal blockade of Gaza must
be lifted. This small territory is home to 1.8 million
people, who face the prospect of its becoming unlivable
in a matter of only a few years unless urgent steps are
taken by the international community to enable the
development of Gaza and ensure security for all in the
region.

UNRWA, faithful to its mandate, will remain
steadfast in its commitment and operations, whether
during this terrible emergency or in the recovery phase
once the fighting has ceased. But much more is required
to ensure lasting peace and stability in the region.

