Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We welcome High
Representative Baroness Ashton to the Security Council
and thank her for her briefing on the European Union's
cooperation with the United Nations. We join Australia
in congratulating the European Union on receiving the
Nobel Peace Prize.

Pakistan and the European Union enjoy excellent
relations. The European Union is an important trading
and development partner of Pakistan. Our country
attaches the highest importance to cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Over the years, the European Union has become a
major cooperation partner of the United Nations and
has made important contributions to the maintenance
of international peace and security. African issues
constitute the bulk of the Security Council's agenda.
Although the African Union and African subregional
organizations are currently working actively to resolve
conflicts in Africa, they face funding and capacity
problems. The European Union has provided significant
support to peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities
in Africa. It has provided substantial funding for
United Nations-mandated African Union peace support
operations and plays an active role in post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts on the continent.

The Sahel region faces serious security,
humanitarian and socioeconomic challenges that have
negative consequences for the long-term stability
of the region. They include chronic food insecurity,
underdevelopment, the impact of climate change and
the rise in organized crime, including terrorism and
the trafficking of drugs and weapons. The outflow
of refugees from Mali, for instance, has placed an
additional burden on neighbouring countries, which
have already suffered from the consequences of
drought. The enormous challenges in the region can
be addressed effectively through a coherent strategy.
The region lacks capacity and resources. It needs the
support of the international community.

In that context, Pakistan supported the elaboration
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
region. The European Union is already making a
significant contribution to the Sahel region through its
Strategy for Security and Development in the Sahel.
In addition to the funds pledged under the Strategy,
the European Union has also made a commitment to
address the humanitarian situation in the region. We
hope that the European Union will continue to support
the region and to provide resources for the United
Nations integrated strategy, which we expect to be
finalized soon.

The situation in Mali poses a serious threat to
the peace and security of the region and beyond. The
crisis in Mali stems from internal causes, as well as the
overall situation in the wider Sahel region. Following
the French intervention, the situation has significantly
improved, but the country requires sustained support on
the part of the international community to consolidate
peace and restore full constitutional order.

We welcome the European Union's decision to
provide training to the Malian defence forces through
the deployment of the European Union's training
mission, as well as its commitment to contribute to
the funding of the African-led international support
mission for Mali, through the European Union African
Peace Facility. We hope that, as a clearer picture
emerges regarding the country's needs, the European
Union will offer further assistance to Mali.

The European Union has also made an important
contribution to consolidating peace in the Balkans.
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo is
providing support to Kosovo in the area of the rule of
law. The European Union-mediated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina has helped to bring the two
sides together to resolve their outstanding disputes.
The recent elevation of the dialogue to the level of
Prime Ministers is an important contribution, made by
Baroness Ashton herself.

The Syrian crisis has assumed catastrophic
proportions. According to the Secretary-General, more
than 70,000 people have died there. An estimated
4 million Syrians, including 800,000 refugees
and 2 million internally displaced persons, need
humanitarian assistance. The pursuit of the military
option has fuelled this devastating internecine strife for
the past two years. The Syrians, as one nation, have to
reconcile their differences through dialogue.

With the recent statements of the opposition and the
Government for dialogue without preconditions, there
is a glimmer of hope for engagement. This opportunity
must be seized by the Syrians, the United Nations and
the European Union. Full support for the efforts of the
Secretary-General and Joint Special Representative
Lakhdar Brahimi will help in making the Geneva
communique operational and giving a fresh impetus to
diplomacy.

We welcome the results of the donors conference
held in Kuwait on 30 January, where the international
community was able to pledge $1.5 billion. We hope
that those pledges will be fulfilled and materialized
expeditiously to alleviate at least some part of the
suffering of the Syrian people. We appreciate the
humanitarian assistance that the European Union is
providing to the affected people of Syria.

The Security Council has invested considerable
time and effort to address the Iranian nuclear issue. It
is time to reflect on and to review the objectives and
strategy pursued so far. A peaceful resolution of this
issue is possible on the basis of confidence-building
measures while pursuing the goals of non-proliferation
and respecting Iran's right to peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.

We encourage the E3+3 and Iran to stay the course
of meaningful engagement, build on the talks they have
held so far and deepen the diplomatic process for a
negotiated resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue. We
hope that the talks to be held on 26 February will make
some headway.

We welcome Baroness Ashton's statement that the
Middle East peace process should be launched again.
The European Union and the Secretary-General, as
members of the Quartet, can play an important role in
reviving the completely stalled process. The two-State
solution is in freefall. The European Union can help in
reversing that trend by putting its collective political
moral weight behind the efforts to persuade key States
and players to come back to the negotiating table.

In conclusion, we welcome the Security Council's
continued engagement and exchange of views with
the European Union. We encourage the ongoing
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations. Such cooperation
plays an effective role in conflict prevention and in the
resolution of conflict and post-conflict situations.

