Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela endorses the statement delivered by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Our country condemns the continued denial of the
inalienable rights of Palestinian people due to the Israeli
military occupation of the State of Palestine, including
East Jerusalem, and the illegal measures taken by the
occupying Power, which result in civilian casualties,
humanitarian and socioeconomic deprivation, and
the destruction of Palestinian institutions, properties,
infrastructure, and land and water resources,
fragmenting its territory.

Venezuela rejects in particular the construction
of settlements and of the separation barrier; the use
of lethal force against Palestinian civilians, including
unarmed demonstrators; the detention and ill-treatment
of political prisoners; the imposition of a blockade on
the Gaza Strip; and the establishment of hundreds of
checkpoints in the West Bank. Likewise, we object to
the withholding of Palestinian revenues and the various
other measures aimed at isolating East Jerusalem and
modifying its historical character.

The State of Israel has since 1947 systematically
disregarded the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations that advocate a two-State solution. Israel
ignores the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and of international humanitarian
law.

Our country supports any action taken by the State
of Palestine aimed at seizing the opportunities offered
to it by the United Nations and reiterates its full support
for the desire of Palestine to be a full State Member of
the Organization.

Venezuela eagerly awaits the resumption of the
political dialogue between the State of Palestine and
Israel and reiterates its call on the occupying Power to
end the policies that stand in the way of that goal.

In that regard, we aspire to a bilateral solution, with
a contiguous and economically viable Palestinian State
based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in accordance with the resolutions of the
United Nations.

The Government of Venezuela believes that the
Syrian Arab Republic must be respected and that the
only way to resolve the conflict in that country is through
political dialogue between the Syrian authorities and
the opposition, which is the Syrian people themselves
see as the only alternative.

Venezuela deplores the fact that arms are being
supplied from abroad to groups involved in terrorist
activities that refuse to participate in a political
dialogue.

My country rejects any foreign intervention in
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity and
political independence of the Syrian Arab Republic.

