Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): At the outset, let me
congratulate New Zealand for its successful leadership
of the Security Council this month. We express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his recent report
(S/2016/ 768) on the situation in my country. We welcome
Ambassador Tadamichi Yamamoto as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and thank him
for his first briefing to the Council. We look forward to
working closely with him and wish him every success
in his very important task.
Since the Council's latest deliberations on
Afghanistan (see S/PV.7722), on June 21, the country has
seen increased armed clashes and suicide attacks, with
high civilian casualties, which has tested our resilience
and brought the peace process to an impasse. During
the same period, thanks to the continuing support of
the international community, we have maintained
steady progress to enhance the capacity, capability,
professionalism and sustainability of the Afghan
National Defense and Security Forces (ANDSF).

In the midst of vibrant democratic debates as a key
feature of recent political developments, the reform
agenda of the National Unity Government, in line
with Agenda 2030, is bearing fruit. Afghanistan has
achieved progress in regional trade and infrastructure
connectivity, anti-corruption measures, governance,
the rule of law and human rights, legal reform, restoring
fiscal sustainability and the integrity of public finance,
commercial banking, development planning, social
inclusion and private-sector development.

During this summer, the world witnessed terror
spread wildly across the globe, with major attacks
in nearly 20 countries in three continents. From
Libya to Afghanistan, Somalia, Iraq, Yemen, Turkey,
Syria, Bangladesh, France, Libya, Mali, Germany,
India, Angola, the Congo, Pakistan, Nigeria and the
Philippines, terrorist attacks took many innocent lives
and inflicted huge damage. It is clear that, as terrorist
groups face international pressure at the core, they
attempt to strengthen their symbiotic networks and
resort to more desperate attacks far and wide.

Afghanistan has also seen an increase in large scale
terrorist attacks. In June, Da'esh affiliates terrorized
villagers in Nangarhar. A few days later, the Taliban
targeted new police recruits outside Kabul. In July,
Da'esh affiliates struck again, this time against a
peaceful civilian demonstration in Kabul. In August,
the Taliban targeted tourist buses in

Herat, followed by an attack on university students
in Kabul. In September, they targeted civilians, security
officials and an aid group in Kabul. Altogether, around
180 people, predominantly civilians, lost their lives
and 435 were wounded in these attacks, with extensive
damage to infrastructure. Among the victims were
scores of our educated and talented youth who were
committed to the rehabilitation and development of
their country.

President Ashraf Ghani on August 25 called
Pakistan's Chief of Army Staff and asked for serious
and practical measures against the organizers of the
attack on the American University of Afghanistan in
Kabul. These savage attacks in populated urban centres
showcased the cowardly behaviour of the terrorist
groups and their supporters, aimed at compensating for
their so-called spring offensive losses.

We have evidence that most of these attacks were
orchestrated outside Afghanistan. Last week alone we
seized two trailer trucks entering Afghanistan from
Pakistan with 35,700 kilograms of ammonium nitrate,
an amount nearly 20 times larger than what was used
in the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995. Let us take a
second to imagine the magnitude ofthe devastation had
the attack, or attacks, been carried out against us or
our allies.

Judging from previous experience, as we approach
the General Assembly session, the second anniversary
of the National Unity Government of Afghanistan and
the forthcoming Brussels Conference on Afghanistan,
the Taliban and other terrorist groups may escalate
their attacks to gain international visibility.

The growing violent extremism and terror
worldwide is proof that the current pace of counter-
terrorism efforts is at best lax compared to the
magnitude of the threat.

Current efforts remain scattered, slow and at times
static, and they have proved incapable of matching
the sophistication and ever-changing tactics of global
terror for its eventual defeat, as far as the experience
of Afghanistan is concerned. As a strategic imperative,
we must move beyond rhetoric and address the enablers
of terrorism, including the role of State elements in
orchestrating and facilitating the growth of terror. We
need to review the state of United Nations counter-
terrorism efforts to identify and address gaps in their
implementation and assess what needs to be done by the
relevant United Nations agencies to achieve results and
effectively fulfil their mandates.

The Taliban's brutal attacks have continued in
different parts of the country, with particular focus
on the provinces of Helmand, Kunduz and Paktia.
Their aim is to create a durable political geography
inside Afghanistan for the Quetta Shura and
Haggani leadership.
The response from the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces has been remarkable. Successive
Taliban and Da'esh attacks were repulsed in different
parts of the country, which proves that these extremist
factions do not have the capacity to hold territory
anywhere in Afghanistan. However, we are putting in
place measures to pre-empt rather than react to their
attacks. I am pleased to report that in line with my
Government's five-year national campaign plan, which
focuses on reconciliation, security and stability, the
mobility and effectiveness of our security forces have
further improved Afghanistan's resilience in the face of
the the ongoing security challenges.

Moving forward, the continued support of our
international partners remains critically important.
We welcome the outcome of the NATO Warsaw
Summit last July, which extended the Resolute
Support Mission beyond 2016, reaffirmed continuing
national contributions to the financial sustainment of
the ANDSF until the end of 2020 and enhanced our
enduring partnership with NATO. We have committed
to further strengthening our security institutions and
ensuring service delivery within the rule of law. We
will continue to increase our financial contribution to
the ANDSF. The empowerment of women will continue
in all aspects of Afghan society, including service in
the ANDSF and political processes, as well as the full
implementation of Afghanistan's national action plan
on resolution 1325 (2000). We have already taken
the necessary measures to protect children from the
effects of armed conflict and have witnessed good,
measurable results.

Despite our constant outreach and efforts in the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace
and Reconciliation Process, Pakistan has yet to utilize
the opportunity to play genuine peacemaker. The fact
is deserving of attention that based on the Group's road
map, they must take the necessary measures against
irreconcilable Taliban elements to win the international
community's due recognition as a serious and genuine
partner in the fight against terrorism.

We thank the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
for its renewed focus on promoting peace in Afghanistan.
We welcome the upcoming Ulema Conference in Mecca
and Medina, which will bring together global Islamic
scholars to denounce the violence in Afghanistan.

On 21 September we will celebrate the second

anniversary ofthe signing ofthe agreement establishing
the National Unity Government of Afghanistan. We are
committed to the full implementation of the agreement.
Discussions are ongoing among the leadership of the
National Unity Government to address the overdue
commitments stipulated in the agreement.

Let me assure the Council that our entire political
elite, irrespective of ethnic and linguistic background
or political standing, is committed to preserving the
national interest of Afghanistan, with its full support
behind our national security forces. Developments,
perceived by some as "tensions" in the National
Unity Government, and "rising pressures" by political
opposition groups, are part of a routine exercise of
democratic debate and a hallmark of our vibrant society,
where citizens express their views in accordance with
their democratic rights. The 2016 World Press Freedom
Index ranks Afghanistan higher than all its neighbours
and fourth among 13 countries of South and Central
Asia in terms of ensuring a culture of free speech. We
will work to improve political stability through healthy
dialogue over outstanding issues.

I am pleased to present the highlights of our
achievements from the past three months. Afghanistan's
development needs are being driven by our extensive
reform measures to curb corruption, improve service
delivery and promote transparency. Our collaboration
with regional partners has resulted in projects that
will transform the economic landscape of our part
of the world. We have already seen the inauguration
of the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
natural gas pipeline project, the CASA 1000 electricity
project and the Chabahar Port agreement, all of which
present opportunities for regional cooperation on an
unprecedented scale.

In August, we completed a major housing project of
2,015 residential units in Kabul. Additional projects are
under way to provide over 11,000 residential units, with
support from China and Qatar.

Last week, for the first time in the history of
Sino-Afghan relations, a special cargo train between
the two countries was officially welcomed in Hairatan,
Afghanistan. Additionally, as part of the Khaf-Herat
railway project, an Iranian train entered Afghan soil,
thereby offering new opportunities for increased
economic activity. Such developments reflect a spirit
of constructive cooperation for mutual benefit in our
region. We urge other neighbours to adopt a similar
approach and to avoid measures that undermine
relations, such as the the closing of entry ports, trade
blockades, shelling and illegal construction activities
along our south-eastern territory.
We urge the Government of Pakistan to choose the
path of cooperation to reinforce constructive relations
and build trust, a fundamental precondition for peace
and stability for both our countries. In that connection,
we note with satisfaction the announcement on the
completion of Pakistan-funded health projects in
Afghanistan by year's end. As a principal component
of our foreign policy, we are convinced that regional
cooperation and multilateralism are catalysts for
peace and prosperity. In that respect, we look forward
to the upcoming Afghanistan-India-United States
trilateral meeting, to be held on the margins of the
General Assembly at its seventy-first. Let me inform
the Council that President Ghani is currently in New
Delhi on an official visit, and India has just announced
another $1 billion in aid towards the development of
Afghanistan. We thank India for that pledge.

The Anti-Corruption Criminal Justice Centre
and the High Council on Governance, Justice and
Anti-Corruption are already operational and reviewing
Government corruption cases. Our judicial sector is
being revitalized by a set of bold measures. More than
600 judges have been replaced, with 60judicial officials
being prosecuted for corruption and malpractice. We
have also announced new appointments and conducted
performance reviews to instil a culture of transparency
in our State institutions.

In tandem with our economic achievements, our
social sector is reaching new heights, with women
increasingly assuming leadership positions at different
levels of Government. There are more women in senior
Government positions now than at any other time in
Afghan history. Among them there are four ministers,
nine deputy ministers, one governor, one deputy head
of the High Peace Council and a number of senior
diplomats at a leadership level. The Ministry of the
Interior has opened six new child-protection units in
police recruitment centres, bringing the country total
to 13. We are committed to the protection of children
and have prohibited security forces from using schools
for military purposes. We are working on the national
policy on civilian casualty mitigation, which will be
adopted across all Government institutions to better
protect our citizens.

However, mainly due to continual attacks by the
Taliban and other terrorist groups, the number of
internally displaced people has risen, especially in
rural areas. Food insecurity and lack of adequate health
care remain a challenge among that group, and the
Government is focusing its resources to mitigate the
crisis. Under the voluntary repatriation programme, the
number of returnees has increased significantly. The
number of Afghan migrants to Europe has also fallen,
as compared to 2015. We are grateful to the United
Nations and our international partners for the continued
humanitarian assistance.

On counter-narcotics, despite some increase in the
production and cultivation of opium, we are focused
on continuing eradication efforts despite the security
challenges. We are pleased with the outcome ofthe ninth
session of the Regional Intelligence Working Group on
Precursors, which, among other issues, identified next
steps on the issue of precursor trafficking.

The forthcoming Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan will be an opportunity to showcase to
the global community our long-fought and hard-won
achievements. The focus will be on the joint international
and Afghan efforts to increase the effectiveness of
sustained international support, multiple Afghan reform
measures, including public finance management and
anti-corruption, as well as regional efforts to achieve
peace and economic prosperity. The preparations for
the Conference are ongoing and we have presented
the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework to our partners for their final input.

In conclusion, the global security scenario is
undergoing significant changes, and Afghanistan's
role in the fight against terrorism remains pivotal. We
have long suffered at the hands of extremists and paid
a very steep price through the blood and sacrifices
of our people in standing up against it. Innumerable
Afghans have been robbed of the promise of a peaceful
future due to years of instability. However, in the past
15 years, the Government of Afghanistan, along with
many of our international friends, including the United
Nations, has worked hard to restore faith in the values
we cherish - freedom, democracy, good governance,
the rule of law and human rights for all. We look forward
to seeing members of the international community at
the Brussels Conference to reiterate pledges of support
to Afghanistan and to refocus on the long road ahead
in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism. A
win for Afghanistan in that realm would be a win for the
world, and we would be safer and prosperous together.

