Mr. Trautwein (Germany): Germany voted in
favour of resolution 1500 (2003). We believe that this
decision by the Council today marks an important step.
Germany has always advocated a vital role for the
United Nations in Iraq, and we welcomed the recent
suggestions of the Secretary-General in that regard as
being of the utmost importance for the necessary
implementation of resolution 1483 (2003).

The decision of the Council to establish the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
with the responsibilities set out in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2003/715), definitely reaffirms
that indispensable, vital role and is therefore a
significant step in the right direction. Moreover, that
decision creates a direct responsibility of UNAMI to
the Council and allows the Secretary-General to furnish
the United Nations efforts with the necessary financial
means.

We also agree with the Secretary-General that the
establishment of the Governing Council has to be
welcomed as an important first step in the development
towards an internationally recognized representative
government in order to create momentum in the
political process.

Resolution 1500 (2003) deserves merit for having
implemented those requests of the Secretary-General as
such without unnecessarily politicizing the matter. In
that respect, the adoption of this resolution will
contribute to finding a common way forward which
will lead to the full sovereignty of Iraq. Irrespective of
the fact that the resolution is certainly not the one
about which the media has speculated in the last few
days - a revision of resolution 1483 (2003) - it
marks, from our point of view, the beginning of a
process that should lead to a more even balance of
responsibilities among the United Nations, the
international community and the Coalition Provisional
Authority in the common effort to rebuild Iraq
economically and with respect for democratic values
and the rule of law.

Without in any way diminishing the substance of
this important resolution, I would like to conclude by
saying that we would have appreciated, if not expected,
a more transparent and comprehensive consultation
process among all members of the Council, with a
view, inter alia, to giving more members of the Council
an opportunity to consider sponsorship.

