Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Madam President, for
convening today's meeting. The Plurinational State
of Bolivia is grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
Mr. Martin Kobler, for his briefing. We would also
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Sweden,
Ambassador Olof Skoog, for his briefing, in his capacity
as Chair ofthe Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
and reiterate that he has the support of our delegation
in his work.

We welcome the efforts to support the Libyan
political process by both international and regional
actors, including the African Union, the League ofArab
States and Egypt, Tunisia and Algeria individually, and
particularly their willingness to strengthen dialogue,
while respecting Libya's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. Nonetheless, we are deeply
concerned about the escalation of violence in Libya.
According to UNSMIL's report, it has resulted in the
deaths of more than 100 people and hundreds more
injured between December 2016 and March. We should
remind all the parties involved that the only solution to
the conflict lies in the political transition that is already
under way and must continue. We therefore urge them
to put aside any belligerence or notion that weapons are
the way to resolve this or any other conflict.

We are also concerned about the plight of internally
displaced persons. According to the 18 April report
of the International Organization for Migration, their
numbers have now reached more than 290,000, owing to
the constant clashes between the various armed groups.
And we are very concerned about the worsening plight
of refugees. According to a statement on 22 March by
Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights Kate
Gilmore at the thirty-fourth regular session of the
Human Right Council,

"[M]igrants in Libya continue to be held
arbitrarily for indefinite periods with no due
process guarantees, legal recourse or review. They
commonly face inhuman conditions and horrific
abuse. Often it is armed brigades who exert direct
or indirect control over these centres, including
official detention centres, meaning there is no
effective protection against abuse".

In that regard, we urge the parties and armed actors to
cease all violent attacks on innocent civilians who play
no part in the conflict and to honour their obligations
under international law.

We acknowledge and encourage the resolute efforts
of the Government and the people of Libya to combat
terrorism, while emphasizing that as areas are liberated,
the humanitarian assistance that the people need can
be correspondingly facilitated and guaranteed. We
reiterate our firm condemnation of terrorism and all
forms of political, social and economic violence as
unjustifiable and criminal, regardless of their motivation
and wherever, whenever and by whomever they are
committed. We also encourage Libyan institutions and
United Nations agencies and services such as the United
Nations Mine Action Service to continue to make every
effort to neutralize the improvised explosive devices
that can still be found in areas that have been liberated
from Da'esh and remain a threat to the life and physical
well-being of civilians.

Finally, we welcome the fact that the Libyan
Presidency Council has approved its budget framework
for 2017. In that regard, we call on all parties concerned
to be ready and willing to reach common ground and
take the positive steps that can enable the Libyan
Political Agreement to be implemented effectively,
as an inclusive process designed and conducted to
benefit the Libyan people. We also acknowledge the
progress made on the Libyan Political Agreement and
the assistance provided by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya during the reporting period. We stress
that all efforts by the Security Council must be aimed
at achieving a peaceful solution that is in the overall
interest of the Libyan people and respects their rights.
To that end, we would like to highlight three points.
First, the Libyan State and its institutions must be
strengthened. Secondly, Libya's natural resources must
controlled and managed by Libyans and all profits from
them should be used to benefit Libyans. Lastly, I would
like to underscore the primacy of politics as the only
way to resolve this and other conflicts.

