Mr. Ayari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2000/738). My thanks go also
to Mr. Hedi Annabi for his introductory remarks.

I join other delegations in offering our
condolences to the people of New Zealand and to the
family of the peacekeeper who was killed while
carrying out his noble task. It is sad to see the
international community paying a price in human lives
lost in the cause of peace. Criminal acts and attacks on
personnel of the United Nations and of humanitarian
agencies must be condemned and their perpetrators
brought to justice.

We express our satisfaction at the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in the situation in
East Timor, which shows that the period of intense
crisis is over, and that the focus has shifted to
reconstruction and renewal. In our view, this means
that progress has been made in the overall situation, but
it also makes clear how much remains to be done to
consolidate what has been achieved on the path
towards peace and reconstruction.

We are particularly encouraged by progress in the
process of normalizing relations between Indonesia and
East Timor. The agreements concluded in that
respect - including notably the agreement on border
crossing arrangements to make it easier for people to
move about and to engage in exchanges, and the
establishment of a Joint Border Committee - are
important signs with positive implications, especially
for the way in which the refugee issue will be
addressed.

At the same time, we are concerned by the
difficult refugee situation; according to the report of
the Secretary-General, between 85,000 and 120,000
refugees remain in camps. We call upon the parties to
help the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) carry out its
vital mission.

Two days ago, the Council discussed the issue of
children and armed conflict. Everything said in that
debate holds true for the children of East Timor. The
fate of those children is of great concern; we must help
them, as a matter of primary importance.

We share the view stated by the Secretary-
General in his report, that the achievement of the
important mission entrusted to the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
will depend to a degree on the relationship between
UNTAET and the Timorese. In that connection, we hail
the consultations undertaken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General with the
Timorese and the excellent coordination between the
Transitional Administration on the one hand and the
Government of Indonesia and the agencies in the field
on the other.

Finally, we consider that economic factors and
the promotion of the economy must be among our
highest priorities; the international community, donor
countries and financial institutions should therefore
help East Timor to consolidate its achievements and to
address the humanitarian and economic needs of the
post-conflict period.

