Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to begin by thanking
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his clear and detailed
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. We hope that both he and the
team he represents will continue to work this year with
the same zeal and spirit of dedication and collaboration
on this delicate issue. We welcome the delegations of
Israel and Palestine, as well as the other delegations
that have decided to make statements in this important
meeting because of how important they consider the
issue. We especially welcome Mrs. Retno Lestari
Priansari Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, and appreciate her presence here during
our debate.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has been closely
following the developments in the Middle East, which
has been the scene of numerous conflicts for several
decades. Though they may be different from one
another, while frequently related, and although they may
vary in the degree of devastation they inflict, what they
all share is the fact that they have claimed numerous
human lives, destroyed a great deal of infrastructure
and damaged all sorts of services, thereby wasting their
populations' efforts to improve their lives and ensure a
decent future for their children. That destruction has
caused the displacement of considerable portions of the
populations of Syria, Yemen, Lebanon, Palestine and
other neighbouring areas affected by these struggles.
The persistence and ongoing exacerbation of this
situation has not only left the region in a constant state of
instability, it also continually jeopardizes international
peace and security. It is therefore urgent and essential
that the Security Council and the international
community continue to put pressure on the parties who
sustain these conflicts.

On the question of Palestine, we deplore the tension
that has continued between the parties during the past
year, with violent and deadly incidents that we have
mainly witnessed since the Great March of Return
began, on 30 March 2018, through December. In that
regard, and now that we are beginning a new year,
we want to call on the parties to refrain from taking
unilateral actions that incite violence and could harm
any future negotiation process. In the past there have
been worse moments in the history of this conflict,
with much bloodshed and destruction, but they have not
brought the guarantee of security that the Israelis desire
or facilitated the establishment of a Palestinian State
recognized by Israel. We therefore once again reiterate
our fundamental position, which is that the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict can only be resolved through
negotiations based on the idea of two independent
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security within mutually recognized borders.
Violence is not and will never be the best way to resolve
this dispute that pits Israelis against Palestinians.

However, my delegation wants to emphasize the
importance of ensuring that Palestine's leaders address
the security concerns of the Jewish State with sincerity
and pragmatism. As always, we insist on the return of
the Palestinian National Authority to the Gaza Strip.
In recent years, most of the violent exchanges between
Israel and Palestine have been related to Gaza. The
Palestinian National Authority, supported by the
international community, should be able to work more
effectively to improve socioeconomic conditions and
ensure a secure environment that guarantees peace and
tranquillity both for the 2 million Palestinians living in
the Gaza Strip and for the people of neighbouring Israel.
It is therefore essential to support and encourage the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process under Egypt's
auspices. We have been closely following the situation
on the border of the Gaza Strip, and we hope that the
drop in the number of violent episodes in recent weeks
will continue and can result in a mutual understanding
on the transportation of goods and on maintaining the
current atmosphere of tranquillity.

We also urge the Government of Israel, to the
extent that it wants to find a solution to the conflict, to
case its policies in the occupied Palestinian territories
with regard to issues such as the demolition of
Palestinian homes and property, as well as the ongoing
construction of settlements that will continue to pose
a huge obstacle to achieving a reasonable agreement
in future. We also urge the Israeli security forces, in
cases where they are exercising their inalienable right
to self-defence, to take into account their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and avoid actions that make it more
difficult to resume dialogue.

The Republic oquuatorial Guinea will agree to any
approach that takes into account the various relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and other current
legal instruments that provide for a peaceful solution to
this conflict. In that regard, we once again affirm our
support for a solution based on two independent States
of Israel and Palestine, within the 1967 borders, and in
the hope that with the support of confidence-building
measures, the two States can live side by side in
harmony and with the other countries of the region.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the fact that the
United States Administration intends to issue a plan
for a resumption of the negotiation process. We hope
and wish that it will be issued as soon as possible and
will represent a genuinely positive starting point for a
resumption of negotiations. In that regard, we invite the
United States to ensure that its plan is impartial and fair
to all the parties involved.

It is very likely that the elections planned for April in
Israel will end up postponing the possibility ofpromoting
the peace process during the electoral campaign. In that
regard, we ask the Israeli Government to abstain from
taking unilateral action as part of the campaign, which
would have long-term consequences.

