Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation would like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting on the situation in Kosovo. My delegation
would also like wholeheartedly to thank Mr. Steiner,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for his complete and detailed briefing on
recent developments there. We thank him in particular
for his accurate summary of the situation in the
province as presented in the six-page handout that has
been distributed to us. We agree with his analysis of
the situation and his emphasis on the need for social
integration in Kosovo with a view to enabling the
people there to move towards a future in which they
can all actively and positively contribute to building
the province.
My delegation would once again like to thank the
Norwegian delegation, and Mr. Kolby in particular, for
the efforts made last year, including during the Security
Council mission to Kosovo.

My delegation would like also to welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/ll3) submitted
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
My delegation commends the efforts made by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to change the political dynamics in
that country, to provide incentives to eliminate parallel
structures and to encourage all communities to
participate in common institutions.

The report of the Secretary-General notes the
emergence of Kosovo's two Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government: the Assembly and the Government.
Ongoing efforts to establish a multi-ethnic civil service
continue to be of importance, despite the emergence of
obstacles pertaining to the limited number of minority
candidates, security concerns and tension among
various ethnic minorities. Like previous speakers, we
are concerned about information regarding continuing
attacks against religious sites. We call for a halt to all
such acts, which are unacceptable regardless of the
religious values, teachings or criteria involved.

My delegation would like to emphasize the
importance of the principle outlined by Mr. Steiner,
namely, "standards before status". That principle is at
present of great importance in order to guarantee
participation by all communities in the political life of
Kosovo and to overcome ongoing ethnic differences
prior to discussing Kosovo's future status. That
message, which was in fact confirmed by the Security
Council's mission to Kosovo last December, was one
that we have stressed repeatedly to all the parties
concerned.

My delegation welcomes the extension of
UNMIK's authority throughout Kosovo. Last
November, the Mission extended its presence to the
northern part or Mitrovica, thanks to the agreement
reached between the Mission and the then Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

My delegation would like to stress the need to
work within a regional context in order to reach a
solution to the question of Kosovo. Nevertheless, we
encourage dialogue between Belgrade and UNMIK. We
call for the strengthening of that dialogue, which in the
past produced positive results that cannot be ignored.

We would also like to stress that there is still an
urgent need for UNMIK's work to continue. There is
also a need to enhance the Mission's role, so that it
may lead Kosovo and its people to peace.

The positive political developments in Kosovo -
including the debate on decentralization, the
strengthening of the rule of law, the building of a well-
functioning and sustainable police force and fighting
organized and cross-border crimes - can all lead to
greater stability in Kosovo and will ultimately pave the
way for a favourable economic environment that will
encourage investment and economic and financial
growth. That will in turn positively affect the return of
displaced persons and refugees to their homes and
property, thereby making it possible for them to
contribute to building the future of Kosovo.

In conclusion, my delegation hails the efforts of
Mr. Steiner and UNMIK to bring about peace and
stability in the province. Building the Kosovo of the
future will be impossible unless the memories, pain and
suffering of the past are set aside and we focus on a
future that includes the integration of all Kosovars
regardless of their ethnic and religious background. It
is through that integration that the people of Kosovo
will guarantee peace and progress for future
generations.

