Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa thanks the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Herve Ladsous, for introducing the quarterly report
of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan (S/2012/462).
We also thank the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov,
for his briefing. We welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan in this debate
and thank him for sharing the views of his delegation.

In assessing the situation in Afghanistan over the
past three months, it is clear that while some progress
has been made, particularly towards strengthening
Afghan leadership and ownership, there have been
setbacks that undermine the progress achieved. We wish
to reiterate that political dialogue and reconciliation are
critical for ensuring sustainable peace in Afghanistan.
Clearly, there can be no military solution to the conflict
there. We therefore welcome the Afghan Government's
persistent initiatives to engage with the armed
opposition and the continued calls by President Karzai
for the armed opposition to lay down their arms. In that
regard, we welcome the appointment of Salahuddin
Rabbani as Chair of the High Peace Council and his
stated objective of improving the inclusiveness of the
Council.

We were optimistic at attempts to foster peace and
reconciliation by the engagement of all parties. It is
pivotal for the long-term stability of Afghanistan that
all political role-players overcome their differences
and commit to national reconciliation and a political
solution.

We welcome the legal and legislative framework
that is currently being put in place to ensure fair,
transparent and inclusive presidential elections in
2014. While those processes are commendable, those
efforts should not detract attention away from crucial
contemporary challenges.

My delegation is concerned about the incidents of
violence directed against women and the challenges
that women continue to face in the economic, social and
cultural spheres.

In spite of the decrease in security incidents
and civilian casualties during the reporting period,
there has been a rise of targeted killings of civilians,
including children, and an ongoing campaign of
violence directed at schools and educators. Those
acts should be condemned. Civilian casualties
resulting from International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) air-strikes, as well as anti-Government use of
improvised explosive devices, remain a concern. We
wish to underline that all the armed elements operating
in Afghanistan have the responsibility for ensuring
that unarmed civilians are protected. A failure by both
State and non-State actors to uphold that responsibility
should not go unpunished. The Secretary-General, in his
ninth report on the protection of civilians (S/2012/376),
underlined the importance of accountability. In that
regard, we are reminded that in its presidential statement
on justice and the rule of law (S/PRST/2012/l), adopted
on 19 January, the Security Council reiterated its call
to all parties to armed conflict to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
to take all required steps to protect civilians.

We are concerned by recent developments that again
witnessed increased tensions between members of the
local communities and the ISAF. We call on the ISAF to
undertake efforts to mitigate the loss of civilian life and
ensure respect for the cultural and religious heritage of
the population.

Ensuring the long-term protection of civilians
requires building national institutions in the area of
the rule of law, justice and security sector reform. In
that regard, we welcome the fact that the surge target
strength of the Afghan National Police and the Afghan
National Army is ahead of their 2012 targets. We note
the timeline for the international military drawdown
and the commitment for a post-ISAF mission to conduct
training and development of the Afghan security
services, announced at the NATO Chicago Summit.

Security in Afghanistan at a national level should
continue to be reinforced by efforts at a regional level
to consolidate peace, stability and development. We
therefore welcome the political dialogue and cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours during the
reporting period. There has been significant bilateral
contact between Afghanistan and the countries of the
region, which has resulted in strengthened economic,
political, security and socio-cultural links. Those
initiatives were bolstered by the recently held Heart of
Asia ministerial conference in Kabul. The upcoming
Delhi conference, which will focus on investment, is
also a welcome initiative.

There can be no doubt that there is an inextricable
link between development and security in Afghanistan.
The socio-economic and humanitarian challenges
confronted by Afghanistan are significant. It is therefore
important that, despite the financial situation facing
the international community, we should continue our
support to the Government and people of Afghanistan,
in line with the commitments of the Bonn Conference
in the area of direct financial support, and towards the
country's long-term economic growth. The upcoming
Tokyo conference will therefore be important in
consolidating global support for Afghanistan's
development and long-term economic sustainability, and
also in ensuring that the gains registered over the past
10 years are not reversed. We note that Afghanistan will
present a comprehensive action plan on self-reliance on
their national priority programmes at that meeting. That
is commendable and it affirms the Afghan ownership of
its own development.

In conclusion, we wish to stress that national
ownership and leadership is crucial to achieving
political, security and socio-economic progress in
Afghanistan. For its part, the international community
should continue its supportive role in the country's
move from conflict to stability and prosperity.

South Africa stresses that given the magnitude of
these challenges, acomprehensive strategy incorporating
security, humanitarian efforts, good governance and
socio-economic development is required. In this regard,
we wish to underscore the central role of UNAMA
in supporting the Government of Afghanistan and
coordinating international assistance to the country.
The continued role played by bilateral and multilateral
partners remains indispensable.

