Mr. Fabius (France) (spoke in French): I will focus
my statement on the fight against terrorism in Iraq and
Syria.

Confronted with the Syrian crisis and the limitless
barbarism of Daesh, the Security Council has,
unfortunately, mostly been the "Impotence Council".
What the victims of this tragedy and international
public opinion are demanding of us can be expressed in
two words: act fast. That is also France's position, and I
would add, if possible, act in unison.

France is an independent Power. Around the world,
we seek peace and security. In Iraq and Syria, that
requirement has determined and will determine our
choices. In Iraq, in August 2014, when Daesh seized
Mosul, an international coalition was formed. From day
one, France committed itself to it. Our military action,
relayed on the ground by the Iraqi security forces and
the peshmerga, was accompanied by a political process
of national reconciliation. It took no less than a year
after the start of our involvement before Daesh began
to pull back. It remains a strong threat, and all of us
here now know that defeating terrorism will require a
long-term effort.

In Syria, the situation is even more complex.
Indeed, there the terrorist group Daesh has flourished
in reality with the complicity of Mr. Bashar Al-Assad's
regime. Its grip on Syrian territory has expanded in
recent months, with the city of Raqqa as its centre.
The flow of foreign fighters has increased, raising the
terrorist risk far beyond the Levant region. The regime's
scorched earth policy has alienated a large majority of
the population. A military response from the coalition
was organized. We think that it should be strengthened.
But by itselfit cannot be a sufficient response, since the
solution - and I think we all are in agreement on this
point at least a must be a political solution.
Today, some are proposing that we join our forces
to form in Syria a grand coalition against Daesh. Russia
has just presented the principles for a draft Security
Council resolution. What is France's position? It is
based on a few principles that I will now set forth.

First, we must strike Daesh wherever we can. As
far as France is concerned, that is what we are doing.
In Iraq, we have been operating for more than a year
in the framework of the coalition and at the request
of the Iraqi Government. In Syria, the coalition's air
forces have been engaged for several months, and last
Sunday, by decision of the President of the Republic,
French fighter planes took action against a training
camp where attacks were being prepared specifically
against our country.

I say to all partners who wish to join our efforts:
they are welcome, subject to three conditions.

The first is that there can be no ambiguity about
whom we are fighting. The ones that we must fight are
the terrorists affiliated with Daesh and other radical
groups that want to impose their barbaric laws. But
that obviously does not include the civilian population
and the moderate opposition forces, which for years
have courageously defended their vision - which is
also ours - of a united Syria that is democratic and
respectful of all communities, in contrast to the other
form of terror, namely, the bloody repression on the
part of the regime. That is the first condition - the
enemy is Daesh and not the civilian population or the
moderate opposition.

The second condition is that an end be brought,
at the same time, to other forms of violence against
civilians, which is what is actually fuelling extremism
and the dramatic flow of refugees. It is said that 80 per
cent of the 250,000 dead from the Syrian crisis and that
80 per cent of the millions of refugees driven out of
the country in the last three years were the result of
the indiscriminate shelling on the part of the regime,
which must be stopped. The Security Council must,
therefore, once and for all, prohibit the use in Syria of
barrel bombs and chlorine bombs.

The third condition is that it be recognized that the
problem must be addressed at the root: the fight against
Daesh is connected to a political transition that could
give new hope to the Syrian people. The fate of that
people cannot be limited to alternative horrors - a
criminal regime, on the one hand, or barbaric terrorism,
on the other hand. What we need to seek is set forth
in black and white in the Geneva communique of June
2012: a Government with full executive powers that
brings together elements of the regime - yes, elements
of the regime - and elements of the opposition that
reject terrorism.

The time has come to implement such an exit
transition and reassure the Syrian people that their
future will not be in the hands of an executioner. We are
familiar with the essential objectives, parameters and
players for such a transition. We now need to implement
the process. In our view, it involves a broad negotiation,
under the auspices ofthe United Nations Special Envoy
for Syria and under the supervision of a contact group
whose core, in our View, could be extended beyond the
Permanent Five to include key regional partners.

I would add that in order to make those commitments
credible, we must consider the mechanisms that can
effectively, beyond words, protect the civil population.
In Syria, there are entire areas that are now under the
fire of indiscriminate bombing that is not justified
by the struggle against terrorism. Thousands of
Syrians have had to flee their cities and villages. That
must stop. Several of our partners have put forward
concrete proposals for creating - the nomenclature
varies - security zones, overflight prohibition
zones - in which the safety of the civilian population
would be ensured. We need to study those proposals
carefully and quickly, in order, if possible, to implement
them wherever they would be helpful to peace.

In the fight against Daesh, there is no magic
formula that could exempt us from the long effort
needed to combat terrorism. But there are - and they
should be avoided - false solutions that would only
prolong the crisis. A coalition whose very foundation
would, in fact, prohibit any rallying of Syrians against
terrorists would fuel the Daesh propaganda and in the
end strengthen its power of attraction. It would be a
moral and political error for which the Syrian people,
the entire Middle East, Europe and the world would
have to pay for decades.

France is therefore ready to act with its traditional
partners - and with Russia and others - on the basis
of the three principles I have just set forth, as long
as the actions taken respect the three conditions: an
effective military engagement against Daesh and other
terrorist groups, and not against the Syrian resistants
or the civilian population; stopping the barrel bombing
and chlorine bombing of the civilian population; and
a broad negotiation aimed at a political transition that
does not lead to keeping the executioner of Syria in
power, but which makes it possible, finally, to truly
bring the Syrian people together. Those are the three
preconditions for the effectiveness of our actions in
Syria.

