Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): This
morning the President of the French Republic paid
tribute to President Arafat. He extended his
condolences, on behalf of the French people and
Government, to the family and associates of Yasser
Arafat, and I reiterate them here. We send a message of
friendship and solidarity to the Palestinian people and
to its leaders. France will continue tirelessly to work
for peace and security in the Middle East, with respect
for the rights of Palestinians and with respect for the
rights of Israelis.

I would like to thank Lord Ashdown for his
statement, which served to supplement his excellent
report (S/2004/807, enclosure). I would also like to
warmly thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for his statement.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
that will be made later by the representative of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore limit myself to three comments.

First, I would like to reaffirm France's support
for the actions undertaken by Lord Ashdown in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We share the priority goals of his
mission. Moreover, we fully share his ultimate goal,
which some speakers have already mentioned: to make
Bosnia and Herzegovina a peaceful and viable State
embarked on the path of European integration. Lord
Ashdown's determination has made it possible to
achieve fresh, considerable progress in all areas. We
are most gratified by that progress and we thank him
for it.

Secondly, I would like to recall that we attach
great importance to cooperation by all the authorities
of the country with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. In that regard, we would note that
concrete results are needed. We support the measures
taken by the High Representative to overcome
obstacles in the framework of the Dayton Agreement.

Thirdly, this afternoon we will have the
opportunity to hear a statement by the Secretary
General of NATO. The Atlantic alliance has played a
critical role, under the eye of the Security Council, in
stabilizing Bosnia and Herzegovina and in
implementing the military component of the Dayton
Agreement. We should pay a tribute to that outstanding
success, to which France has contributed.

As members are aware, the Stabilization Force
will soon be replaced by an operation of the European
Union (EU), Operation Althea. The mission will
include 7,000 troops, and it will be the largest external
operation ever carried out by the European Union. We
shall soon be asking the Council to authorize the
deployment of Operation Althea. The operation forms
an integral part of the European Union strategy for the
Balkans. The increased involvement of the European
Union is a major factor for stabilization and progress in
that region, whose European destiny is beyond
question.

To those comments, I would like to add two
questions for the High Representative. First, we have
duly noted that the constitutional debate is an internal
question, which falls solely within the competence of
Bosnia and Herzegovina itself. We know that that
approach is also shared by Lord Ashdown. It might be
useful, however, to know his feelings about whether
the international community should or should not
encourage such a debate, which would of course have
consequences for our actions. If it should, how should
it?

Secondly, in the economic sphere, I would ask the
High Representative how he is planning for the
implementation of programmes that address, on the one
hand, the strengthening of the rule of law and, on the
other, the creation of jobs. Should those two
programmes be implemented simultaneously or
consecutively? How can the international community
assist him in these activities?

I may be slightly indiscreet in asking such
questions, but I am emboldened to do so by the High
Representative's own stress on those topics in his
introductory statement as two major issues that we
must continue to ponder.

