Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
greatly thank Presidents Robinson and Kahn and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their briefings
today. I congratulate Judge Kahn on her new
appointment and thank Judge Byron for his valuable
service.

The Council has opened this debate on a day
when Ratko Mladie is in The Hague. His capture, arrest
and transfer to the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is a milestone on the
path to justice and reconciliation. We commend the
Government of Serbia for apprehending Mr. Mladic',
and we welcome President Tadie's statement about his
country's commitment to apprehending the final ICTY
fugitive, Goran Hadzie. Mladie's capture means that he
will now have to answer to victims for his alleged
crimes, including the genocide at Srebrenica, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in 1995. It puts perpetrators of mass
atrocities on notice that they will be held accountable
for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
We expect all United Nations Member States to take
the steps necessary to bring to justice those indicted by
the Tribunals.

We welcome the steady progress made by the
ICTY and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) in increasing efficiency. We urge both
Tribunals to strive to complete their work at the earliest
possible date. We are mindful of the importance of
doing so without sacrificing the high standards of a fair
trial. We urge the Presidents, and the Judges who act as
managers of the courtrooms, to take every measure to
ensure that trials and appeals are both expeditious and
fair. These Tribunals and their predecessors have had
genuine historic impact.

The establishment last December of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals demonstrated that war crimes fugitives
cannot escape justice. The Residual Mechanism will
allow for the completion of those functions that will
necessarily outlast the Tribunals themselves. Transfers
of cases to national jurisdictions have been made
possible because States have further developed their
judicial and investigative capacities. Programmes such
as the joint European and ICTY training project for
national prosecutors and young professionals are
welcome efforts to help build such long-term capacity.

Again, we applaud the Tribunals' work thus far,
and we urge them to make the most efficient use of
available resources. We also encourage the Tribunals to
continue to work with the United Nations Secretariat
and other relevant United Nations bodies to develop
practical and effective methods, including retention
measures, to address the staffing shortages and attrition
problems highlighted in the Prosecutors' and
Presidents' reports.

The United States calls on States of the former
Yugoslavia to cooperate fully with the ICTY. That is
both a legal obligation and a key to Euro-Atlantic
integration. We welcome the Government of Croatia's
continued strong record of cooperation with the ICTY
and its commitment to continue to search for any
additional information requested by the Prosecutor.
Croatia provided crucial witnesses and documents in
the important case against Ante Gotovina and others
that proved critical to the Tribunal's deliberations. We
appreciate Croatia's reaffirmation of its commitment to
support the ICTY through the conclusion of its
processes.

Let me now turn to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. The United States welcomes the
judgment in May in the case of the former chief of staff
of the Rwandan army, the former head of the military
police and the two former commanders of the
reconnaissance battalion. This was the second case
concluded by the ICTR that involved the responsibility
of former senior military officers. It represents an
important step for the Rwandan people towards justice
and accountability.

The United States also welcomes the recent
apprehension of the fugitive Bernard Munyagishari in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge all
States to cooperate fully with the ICTR in their efforts
to locate and apprehend fugitives. We commend those
countries that are cooperating with the ICTR to bring
the remaining nine fugitives to justice. We encourage
continued progress so that these fugitives can be
swiftly arrested.

On behalf of the United States, let me thank the
Office of Legal Affairs for its dedication and service to
the Tribunals. Let me also again thank the Presidents,
Prosecutors, Registrars and their staffs for all that they
do to promote justice under international law for the
victims of war crimes and mass atrocities.

We will never be able to bring back those who
were murdered in Rwanda or in the former Yugoslavia.
But Ratko Mladie will now have to answer to his
victims and the world in a court of law. From
Nuremburg until today, my Government has long
viewed justice for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide as both a moral imperative and an
essential element of stability and peace. We reaffirm
those convictions again today.

