Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): In
the interests of time, I shall abridge my remarks; the
full text of my statement has been distributed.

The resolution that we have adopted today sets
out a road map for the Council's work in the future,
and three aspects of the annex are particularly
important. First, it contains a commitment to getting
peacekeeping mandates right - for instance, more
regular briefings from the Military Adviser, an
improved system of consultations with troop
contributors and a greater United Nations involvement
in the negotiation of peace accords, which are all
essential.

Secondly, this resolution will lead to more
effective peacekeeping operations once they are on the
ground. A rapidly deployed and effectively configured
mission can make an enormous difference in securing a
fragile peace.

Thirdly, the document makes clear that our role in
the maintenance of international peace and security
cannot be narrowly defined. The United Nations must
have recourse to a more effective set of tools in
preventing conflict, and it must be able to put in place
coordinated strategies to build peace once conflict is
over.

This resolution is a first step. It sets out a series
of practical measures in clear and precise terms.
Ambassador Ward is to be congratulated on leading the
Working Group to this excellent result. But this is just
the beginning. We in the Security Council have a
responsibility to ensure that the road map which this
resolution represents is followed in our everyday work.
The Security Council is only one of the partners that
will need to take clear and decisive action if the
Brahimi Report is to be properly implemented. Other
organs of the United Nations, including the General
Assembly itself, are already engaged and need to move
quickly to the implementation stage.

Member States, including the United Kingdom,
must look at their own internal procedures to ensure
that troops and civilian police can be deployed rapidly
and that they are well trained and equipped. The
Secretary-General has already produced a plan of
action for implementation in his areas of responsibility.
We are confident that he will take firm measures to
ensure that procedures in the Secretariat are
streamlined, that coordination is institutionalized and
that the quality of support and advice that can be
offered to the Council and to peacekeeping operations
in the field is enhanced.

The Permanent Representative of Bangladesh
referred earlier to his delegation's proposal to require
the permanent members of the Security Council to
contribute to every peacekeeping operation. His
statement carried the implication that all permanent
members fail to meet their responsibilities in respect of
peacekeeping. I reject that implication. Over the past
decade, the United Kingdom has been a leading
contributor to peacekeeping operations, providing
troops and police, as well as resources, in significant
quantities, and initiating training activities among
Member States, especially in Africa. We also devote
huge resources, and sometimes British lives, to
operations enforcing or supporting international peace
and security in much more difficult circumstances than
those of traditional peacekeeping operations. Our
support for United Nations objectives in Sierra Leone
is continuing evidence of that. We agree that those with
the greatest capacity must contribute in proportion, and
the United Kingdom does so.

The British Prime Minister told the Millennium
Summit that the Brahimi Report was right and that it
should be implemented within a l2-month time scale.
We again congratulate the Panel on achieving a step
change in our thinking. We should be clear that
peacekeeping is a vital tool in the maintenance of
international peace and security and an essential
component in our wider and priority task of delivering
sustainable development. In the interests of all, we
must collectively ensure that we take the historic
opportunity offered by the Brahimi Report to get
peacekeeping working.

