The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, Canada, Chile,
Guatemala, Haiti, Peru and Uruguay, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Merores
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
acknowledge the presence of His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon at today's meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2010/29, which contains a draft resolution
submitted as a "presidential text" by the members of
the Security Council, and also submitted by Argentina,
Canada, Chile, Guatemala, Peru and Uruguay.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2010/27, which contains the
text of a letter dated 18 January 2010 from the
2

Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it was so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in Chinese): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1908 (2010).

The members of the Security Council have just
unanimously adopted resolution 1908 (2010), by which
they have decided to increase the troop levels of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). That fully demonstrates the great
importance that the Council attaches to the post-
disaster situation in Haiti and its strong support for the
work of MINUSTAH at this challenging moment. It
also demonstrates the common desire of the United
Nations and the international community as a whole to
support the rescue and post-disaster reconstruction
efforts in Haiti. We believe that the adoption of this
resolution will facilitate more effectively the
implementation by MINUSTAH of the important tasks
of maintaining peace and stability in Haiti, supporting
disaster relief efforts and helping to restore capacity-
building and post-disaster reconstruction.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
10-21214

