Ms. Del Ponte (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank the members of the Security Council for
their assessments and the views they have expressed
today.

I should also like to thank the representatives of
the Balkan countries, in particular the representative of
Serbia and Montenegro. This is indeed the first time
that we can testify on both sides to cooperation that has
begun between the Tribunal and that country. In fact, it
answers the question raised about success in the
Tribunal's activities in the region. I believe that the
major success is not only the acknowledgement of
what the Tribunal is doing in The Hague, but also the
reciprocal cooperation of States with the Tribunal. It is
true that an effective reconciliation could be made
when the States not only accept the truth emerging
from our trials, but also allow their own national
systems to proceed with their own war crimes trials.

As to witness protection, it must be said that it is
of constant concern to the Office of the Prosecutor. The
situation varies depending on the region. The major
problems are with issues relating to Kosovo. We found
one individual, who was actively involved in
threatening witnesses, guilty of contempt of court a
few weeks ago. We even had a case wherein a bomb
was planted in a witness's car and he lost both legs.
Thus, in the case of Kosovo, of course we rely
primarily on the United Nations Mission in Kosovo
and the Kosovo Force to protect witnesses. We
particularly requested protection for a release that we
opposed - but which was granted nonetheless -
because we felt that the situation was highly
threatening to our witnesses. There are witnesses who
refuse to appear in court because they have received
threats. That is a problem we face, but one which we
generally hope to solve on a one-by-one basis.

Regarding transfers of cases under rule 11 bis,
only one decision has been made, but has not yet been
implemented because it is under appeal. We are
awaiting the appeals court decision, so it has not yet
taken effect.

As to how we might save time by joining cases,

we are required in every single trial to prove the basic
crime. If the basic crime is proven once, as I have said,
and does not need to be repeated for every indictee, it
saves us time because the proof of the basic crime and
the repeated testimony of witnesses are the most time-
consuming tasks. We therefore believe that, with
regard to Srebrenica, for instance, instead of
undertaking three trials at each of which we have to
prove the same massacre that has already been
confirmed under appeal as genocide, there could be
only one instance requiring proof of the genocide in
Srebrenica.

