We thank Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo for the information provided. We welcome Minister Shokry and the Ambassadors of the Sudan and Ethiopia to today's meeting. The Russian Federation has always supported the negotiation process between Addis Ababa, Cairo and Khartoum on the major hydropower project on the Blue Nile, the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, and on all related issues of water resource management. We have stressed that the modalities of the use of the Nile's water resources should be determined by all the countries in the Nile basin on an equal footing, taking into account tasks relating to their social and economic development. The modalities should also be based on international law and be in the interest of maintaining regional stability. The search for a mutually acceptable solution to the problem should be carried out in keeping with the spirit and letter of the 2015 Khartoum Declaration, while taking into account the progress achieved in the trilateral format on a range of issues related to the regime for filling the hydropower station's dam and the timelines for its entry into operation, as well as the principles of water management and further operation of the dam, ecological run-off volume, drought mitigation measures and the project's safety. We take note of the positive nature of the trilateral technical consultations held on 15-17 June. We welcome the meeting of the Extraordinary African Union Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held on 26 June via video-teleconference, with the participation of leaders from Ethiopia, Egypt and the Sudan and chaired by President Ramaphosa of South Africa. The summit produced a promising format of cooperation, the tripartite committee on technical and legal issues, which was tasked to sort out all outstanding problems regarding the dam's operation. We also take note of the contribution that African States made to address the differences between Ethiopia, Egypt and the Sudan with a view to accompanying the tripartite negotiations. Thus, our African colleagues demonstrated their commitment to realizing the principle of African solutions to African problems. We express the hope that Addis Ababa, Cairo and Khartoum will be in a position to achieve, on that basis, a mutually acceptable agreement on dam-related issues in the interest of maintaining stability in the region. We see no alternative to bridging the differences on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam other than through negotiations based on international law, with due respect paid to the interests of all sides. To conclude, I would like to underscore that the Russian Federation is genuinely interested in seeing the issue sorted out in an expeditious and just manner. Doing so would contribute to progress, development and prosperity in the African continent, in line with the spirit of the first Russia-Africa economic forum and summit, held last year in Sochi, and with the goals set out there.
