Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) ofresolution 1970 (2011) of26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by that
resolution. The report covers the period from 10 March
to 9 June 2014, during which time the members of the
Committee met twice in informal consultations.

In my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7130),
I reported on the final reports of the Panel of Experts
and that the Committee had agreed to take follow-up
actions on 9 of the 15 recommendations of the Panel.
I would now like to recall that, during the informal
consultations of 2 June, the Committee further agreed
to establish a procedure to address incomplete arms
embargo exemption notifications, which was also the
subject of an additional recommendation of the Panel,
bringing the number of recommendations to which the
Committee agreed to follow up on to 10.

That follow-up action has thus far consisted of the
following. Three recommendations relating to arms
procurement by Libya were addressed by a bilateral
meeting I held with the Permanent Representative
of Libya to the United Nations on 12 March and by
informal consultations of the Committee on 2 June,
with the participation of the Permanent Representative
of Libya, on which I will elaborate later on.
One recommendation aimed at requesting the
Permanent Representative of Libya to update the names
of authorized officials in the Libyan focal point for arms
procurement required no follow-up, as the Permanent
Representative of Libya provided that information on
20 March before the Committee wrote to him.

Therefore, follow-up action on six recommendations
is currently pending before the Committee. On 18 and
27 March, as well as on 12, 16 and 20 May, respectively,
a Member State informed the Committee about the
dates and locations of the delivery of parts of previously
notified transfers to Libya.

On 18 March, the Committee received a letter from
the Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), relating
to an initiative to implement the travel ban measure
more effectively through cooperation with the World
Customs Organization.

On 3 April, the Committee received a letter from
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
proposing six members to serve on the Panel of Experts
on Libya.

On 11 April, the Committee received a second letter
from the Chair of the aforementioned Committee and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), concerning procedures for requesting relevant
Member States to submit biometric data on individuals
on the Committee's list.

On 16 April, the Committee received a report from
a Member State about the loss in Libya of part of a
shipment of arms and related materiel, an exemption for
which had previously been approved by the Committee.

By letter dated 6 May, the Committee invited
the Permanent Representative of Libya to attend
a meeting of the Committee to discuss the Panel's
recommendations relating to arms procurement by
Libya, as well as two pending incomplete notifications
under paragraph 13 (a) of resolution 2009 (2011).

On 9 May, the Committee received a report from the
Secretariat on the inter-panel coordination workshop
that took place from 17 to 19 December 2013.
On 20 May, the Committee received a letter from
the Permanent Representative of Libya to the United
Nations, informing the Committee of the creation of
two focal points for arms procurement for the Ministry
of the Interior and the Ministry of Justice, in addition
to the Military Procurement Department, which,
according to the letter, continued to serve as focal point
for the Ministry of Defence.

In informal consultations on 29 May, the
Committee received an update from the reappointed
Panel of Experts. The Panel updated the Committee on
its activities since the presentation of its final report
(see S/2014/106, annex). The Panel presented its travel
plans for the present mandate, expressed concern about
the tense security situation in Libya and informed
the Committee about a fraudulent company currently
reaching out to Member States, claiming to be
authorized to recover frozen funds on behalf of Libya
and transmitting a forged Libyan Government decree
no. 378 to that end. Also in informal consultations on
29 May, the Committee discussed the new composition
of the Panel of Experts.

On 30 May, the Committee received an inspection
report from a Member State, in line with paragraph 13
of resolution 1970 (2011) and paragraph 15 of resolution
1973 (2011).

The Committee's informal consultations on
2 June involved the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Libya to discuss issues relating to
the arms embargo. While some Committee members
appreciated Libya's strong efforts to implement the
arms embargo in challenging circumstances and pointed
to the need for practical and implementable solutions,
others raised concern about the implications ofa lack of
a single, unified procurement mechanism in the current
security situation and called for a single focal point
superseding individual ministries. The Permanent
Representative of Libya recognized the difficulties in
having multiple focal points, but also noted that this
was the best option for the current situation, as Libya
lacked the capacity at this point to implement a single
superseding structure.

The Panel ofExperts saw a high risk ofthe diversion
and misuse of weapons in the current situation and
reported that ongoing transfers of weapons to Libya
were likely to have a detrimental effect on the security
situation in the country, with some uncertainty about
exact end-users of notified materiel and about the
control of territory, including air and sea ports. The
Committee will continue its engagement with Libya
on the setting-up of arms procurement procedures and
responsibilities, with a view to providing any assistance
that it can.

Lastly, I should like to provide some updated
statistics on the issues dealt with by the Committee
since the last periodic report to the Council. In relation
to the arms embargo, the Committee approved three
exemption requests and received two notifications, on
which no negative decision was taken. Also in relation
to the arms embargo, the Committee responded in one
case that did not require notification, citing paragraph
10 of resolution 2095 (2013), and replied in three cases
that the notifications were incomplete. The Committee
further received two addenda to an implementation
report previously submitted by a Member State.

