Mr. Mantovani (Italy): At the outset, I would
like to express our great appreciation for the strenuous
efforts made by Mr. Gambari in moving forward the
good offices mandate of the United Nations. His
briefing confirms the value of the challenging
diplomatic process that he is conducting through his
visits and talks. Last month, we referred to a window
of opportunity that was opening for Myanmar. We are
convinced that that window is indeed still open, due
first and foremost to Mr. Gambari's wisdom and
patience. It is encouraging to observe that the
membership at large remains united in support of
Mr. Gambari's mission. Once again, it will be crucial
for the Security Council to seek his advice when
considering how to deal with the situation in Myanmar.

In that regard, we are convinced that the
Council's sustained attention has been, and remains,
instrumental to the achievement of our common goals.
At this stage, it is essential to take stock of the
implementation of the requests made by the Council in
its presidential statement of 11 October (S/PRST/ 2007/37).

Having listened to today's briefing, we believe
that that implementation has not achieved all its
objectives - and therefore is not completely
satisfactory. I refer in particular to the limited access
granted to Mr. Gambari during his latest visit and to
the measures taken against the United Nations Resident
Coordinator, which are not consistent with the stated
commitment of the Myanmar authorities to cooperate
fully with the United Nations.

It is certainly not our intention to underestimate
the positive steps taken in recent days by the Myanmar
authorities. As mentioned by Mr. Gambari, a path to
constructive dialogue has been opened. Myanmar
authorities remain committed to receive further visits
and are considering the establishment of an in-country
United Nations presence. Aung San Suu Kyi has been
allowed, for the first time in years, to meet with a
Government representative and with members of the
National League for Democracy's Central Executive
Committee, as well as to release a public statement
through Mr. Gambari, which is the clearest proof of her
readiness to embrace a constructive dialogue on the
democratic future of the country. However, those
positive developments are still coupled with elements
of concern that require further progress. The rejection
of the trilateral dialogue mechanism proposed by
Mr. Gambari shows that the Myanmar authorities are
still reluctant to engage without preconditions in a
credible, comprehensive and inclusive national
reconciliation process.

Thousands of political detainees are still
imprisoned. Arbitrary detentions and enforced
disappearances continue to be reported. We hope that
the current visit by United Nations Special Rapporteur
Pinheiro, which is in itself a positive development, will
not be subject to any restrictions and will create the
conditions for substantive and immediate progress in
that regard. Positive answers are required to the whole
set of concerns expressed by the Human Rights
Council and the Security Council.

The international community as a whole is
increasingly recognizing that national reconciliation is
the only viable recipe for peace and development in
Myanmar. We praise the efforts by the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and other neighbours of
Myanmar to positively influence that process by
conveying clear messages to the Myanmar authorities.
Further engagement by regional players is still
required, as an integral and essential element of any
sustainable solution to the current problems.

Last week, the Italian authorities expressed these
views to them at all levels, including through specific
visits to the region. In fact, in Italy, the call of the
people of Myanmar for peace, democracy and freedom
continues to be at the top of the concerns of the
Government, the Parliament, civil society and public
opinion at large. There is no loss of focus or decrease
in attention.

Italy welcomes with deep satisfaction the
appointment of Mr. Piero Fassino as European Union
(EU) special envoy for Myanmar. The primary
objective of the special envoy's mandate is to support
the United Nations and Mr. Gambari in the

implementation of the good offices missions. All his
efforts will be in that direction. We are convinced that
this appointment will be essential to allow the EU to
speak with one voice and to reaffirm the importance
that all EU countries attach to development,
democratic transition and respect for human rights in
Myanmar. The EU looks forward with particular
interest to the outcome of Mr. Gambari's efforts, as
they are the major yardstick to review the restrictive
measures adopted last month to target those
responsible for the violent crackdown and the political
stalemate in Myanmar.

Let me conclude by expressing the view that, at
this crucial stage, we should not open a divisive debate
on whether the glass is half empty or half full. Rather,
we should identify the most effective way to support
Mr. Gambari in his efforts to fill the glass completely,
as the people of Myanmar are asking for nothing less
than that.

