Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I be
the first to thank Minister Bakoyannis for her full
briefing today and for taking the trouble to come to us
and for setting out the priorities of the Greek
Chairperson-in-Office throughout 2009. She is
welcome with the Council here today.

As one of a number of countries around the table
which was a founding member of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and before
that the Conference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe, we hold the work of the OSCE in very high
regard and importance, both in terms of the security
work that the OSCE does and the human dimension,
including through the work of the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights, that the Minister has set
out for the Council.

We have also seen the OSCE play a very valuable
operational role across the Balkans. It continues to play
a very important role in Kosovo, less so these days in
Bosnia but still an important role in the Balkan region,
and we are encouraged by the growing cooperation of
the OSCE in Afghanistan, where support for elections
and other issues in which the OSCE is involved is very
welcome.

The Minister mentioned Georgia as a priority for
the OSCE at the moment. The United Kingdom
welcomes the agreement that the Chairperson-in-Office
secured to extend the presence of the 20 additional
military monitors until June. Obviously, our goal is to
find a basis for renewing the mission's mandate that
will allow access throughout the areas of concern,
including inside South Ossetia. We welcome the
Chairperson-in-Office's efforts to find a compromise
based on OSCE principles and we encourage all the
participating States to cooperate in that process.

We also believe that there is an important role for
the OSCE in what has been called the unresolved
conflicts i in Nagorny-Karabakh and Moldova-
Transdniestria - and the idea of the Chairperson-in-
Office to appoint a special representative for them is
helpful. If we could entice the Chairperson-in-Office to
say a few more words at the end of this discussion
about the prospects in those two regions, I think that
would be helpful. I apologize ifI am not here to listen
to the answers, but my delegation will certainly be
interested in them.

The Chairperson-in-Offlce mentioned Russian
ideas to enhance European security. We are studying
those carefully. My minister made clear at the OSCE
Ministerial Meeting in December that we are open to
further discussions. The security relationship between
Russia and Europe is very important to us all. We look
to further information and analysis from our Russian
friends as to why a new treaty is needed to enhance
security. We do not exclude that, but we are studying
the idea and are willing to consider participating in a
high-level meeting once there has been fuller
discussion and preparation on that issue.

May I close just by saying that we are fortunate
in Europe to have strong multilateral institutions. The
OSCE is a crucial member of that grouping, together
with NATO, the European Union and other trans-
European institutions, and they help provide real
security on our continent. It is vital that we consider all
the elements of our security as enshrined in the
Helsinki Final Act and in subsequent OSCE
commitments. They include human rights, good
governance and the rule of law as the fundamental
elements of European security.

