We extend our gratitude to Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her insightful briefing this morning. First, we wish to join other Council members in condemning the attack that took place just north of Baghdad over the weekend. We offer our condolences to the Government and the people of Iraq for the lives lost. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines expresses its support for the Government of Iraq as it prepares for early elections next year, and recognizes the supportive role played by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in that regard. We also welcome the Government's commitment to the empowerment of women and the advancement of their political, economic and social participation, as highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1099). The challenges of 2020 have left no one unscathed, but as leaders we have a responsibility to assist those more vulnerable than us, wherever we can, and assuage their suffering. In the context of Iraq, the plight of its citizens must remain a priority. That means that the perpetrators of attacks on civilians must be held accountable, including those responsible for attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, which have resulted in numerous deaths and injuries. The targeted killings of members of civil society, including political and human rights activists, is unacceptable and must not be allowed to continue with impunity. It cannot be overstated that accountability is a critical tenet of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic demands from us a coordinated response. It is not a threat that we can successfully tackle independently. In that regard, we recognize the role of the World Health Organization in assisting the Iraqi Government, including their donation of ambulances to ensure that persons in remote locations receive support. We express concern over the impact that the virus has had on the people of Iraq, as well as on the economy and delivery of basic services. To that end, we recognize the United Nations country team's efforts, which led to the completion of the socioeconomic response plan for Iraq to bridge the gap between humanitarian, development and peacebuilding efforts. However, it is disheartening to read in the report of the Secretary-General that the humanitarian response plan and the COVID-19 fund remain insufficiently financed. We appeal to the international community to step up its efforts to assist the people of Iraq during these extraordinary times. We conclude by welcoming the continued cooperation that has taken place between Iraq and Kuwait on the search for missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, particularly in the light of COVID-19-related challenges. We recognize the roles played by UNAMI and the International Committee of the Red Cross in supporting that process and encourage further endeavours towards resolving the issue.
