Mr. Naanda (Namibia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate,
which affords the broader United Nations membership
an opportunity to contribute to the important
deliberations on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. I also wish to thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-
General for his briefing.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The Palestinian people continue to suffer from
injustice and oppression and are denied freedom
and peace in the land of their birth, which remains
under occupation by Israel. Namibia is increasingly
concerned about reports that the situation in the
Palestine territories continues to deteriorate, and
that Israel continues to undermine the possibility
of a two-State solution through its actions in East
Jerusalem, which include pushing Arabs out of the city,
maintaining the separation wall and the imposition of
a restrictive building-permit regime. Israeli policies
in Jerusalem not only affect its Palestinian population
but pose a severe threat to the possibility of resolving
the Arab-Israeli conflict by political means. Namibia
wishes to remind the Security Council that it is the
collective responsibility of the entire global community
to consider practical steps to address Israel's actions,
particularly in East Jerusalem, since those actions
constitute a sophisticated type of ethnic cleansing and
another form of apartheid.

We condemn any attacks against civilians in Gaza
and call on all parties to adhere to the terms of the
Gaza ceasefire agreement. We also call on Israel to
unconditionally lift the unjust blockade imposed on the
Gaza Strip, since it deprives Palestinians of the most
rudimentary requirements of a decent livelihood. We
further call on Israel to withdraw from all occupied
Palestinian territories, cease its settlement activities
and allow the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to perform its
humanitarian activities unhindered. We also call on
Israel to comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We are deeply concerned about the statement by the
Israeli Prime Minister in which he calls for suspension
of the peace talks because of the reconciliation
agreement reached between the Palestine Liberation
Organization and Hamas. The international community
and the bodies of the United Nations should continue to
play their crucial third-party role in dissuading Israel
from taking unauthorized measures and in facilitating
and fostering a climate of dialogue aimed at reaching
a peaceful solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
including resolving the future status of Jerusalem. The
humanitarian situation of Palestinians in the city must
also be addressed. A very urgent key factor for peace in
the region is that Jerusalem should be put back on the
political map.

I wish to join others in reaffirming Namibia's
unwavering support for the Palestinian people in their
just and legitimate struggle for self-determination
and independence, and I call on the Security Council
to fulfil its mandate and take appropriate action to
end Israel's continuing occupation of Palestine. The
international community has an obligation to ensure that
the people of Palestine realize their inalienable right to
self-determination and the creation of an independent,
sovereign State of Palestine, on the basis of the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We must
ensure that Palestine is unconditionally admitted as
a full Member of the United Nations and its agencies
and takes its rightful place in the global community
of nations. We are pleased to note that the State of
Palestine has acceded to 15 international conventions
and that its signature is expected to enter into force on
2 May. In that regard, Namibia would like to call on the
Security Council to resume its consideration ofthe State
of Palestine's application for full membership in the
United Nations and to make a positive recommendation
on that to the General Assembly.

We remain convinced that our deliberations here
today are fruitful and will contribute to the search for
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution that can
bring the Israeli occupation to an end and enable the
Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable rights
in an independent State of Palestine, with Jerusalem
as its capital. Real and lasting progress towards peace
and freedom for Palestine can be achieved only through
the implementation of all the relevant United Nations
resolutions on the peaceful settlement of the question
on Palestine.

In conclusion, 2014 has been proclaimed the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 68/12, adopted on 26 November 2013. That is
a commendable milestone on the path to the momentum
and political will needed to make an Israeli-Palestinian
peace a reality. It therefore remains the responsibility
of the United Nations and the international community
to make sure that the question of Palestine is resolved
in all its aspects.

