Mr. Al-Ahmed (Saudi Arabia)(interpretation from Arabic): It gives me pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the Council presidency for this month,
and I wish you full success in the performance of your
duties. I would also like to express our appreciation to
your predecessor for the great role he played as the
President of the Security Council last month.

If the Palestinian problem represents the crux of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, then the issue of Holy Jerusalem is
at the heart of that problem and is the pivotal element for
dealing with the peace process depends on it. The future
of the peace process depends on it.

We are gravely concerned to see how the Israeli
authorities continue to take actions and measures with the
intention of altering Holy Jerusalem's demographic and
structural character and attempting to change its Arab
character and to Judaize the city and its legal, historical,
religious and cultural reality.

 

This is a violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 and the Hague Convention of 1907.
These acts and measures also adversely influence the
negotiations on the future of Jerusalem, which are supposed
to take place when the final status of the city is addressed.

The Holy City of Jerusalem is of the utmost
importance to the Arab and Muslim worlds, as well as to
the world community and the three monotheistic religions
in general. That is why the illegal Israeli policies and
practices in Jerusalem are highly dangerous.

The Israeli Government's approval of the plan to
expand the boundaries of the municipality of Jerusalem and
its jurisdiction is designed to strengthen Israel's grip on the
city and the neighbouring areas and to isolate the city from
the rest of the West Bank in a series of illegal policies and
acts, notwithstanding the fact that the international
community and the Security Council have issued clear
resolutions declaring such policies illegal, null and void. In
addition, the international community has demanded that
Israel desist from such policies and practices. Despite all
these clear signals, the Israeli authorities continue their
dangerous practices and policies in the occupied Palestinian
territories, disregarding every convention and recognizing
no right, as if no deterrent could make them revert to
observing legal norms.

Some of the most continually destabilizing factors in
the occupied territories are manifest in the Israeli
Government's pursuit of its provocative policies and
practices in violation of international law and legal
resolutions. One can only imagine how dangerous this
would be within Holy Jerusalem. The city is the first kiblah
and the third-holiest place for Muslims, and the center of
Muslims' attention. They will not be satisfied until all their
rights are restored to them in this Holy City. The
announcement by the Israeli Government that it intends to
tighten its illegal control of the city of Jerusalem, despite
all Arab, Islamic and international warnings, constitutes a
new challenge to the international community and will
negatively affect the peace process and the future of peace
and stability in the region.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia affirms that no lasting
peace will be achieved in the Middle East without a just
solution to the issue of the Holy City of Jerusalem in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), which demand Israel's withdrawal from the
Arab territories occupied in 1967, and resolution 252
(1968), which deals with Jerusalem. Accordingly, the future
of the Middle East and peace in that region are in the hands

 

of the international community. Unless the international
community moves to save this peace by demanding that
Israel cease its settlement practices and policies in the city
of Jerusalem, the peace process in the Middle East and
the integrity of the agreements already signed between
parties to the conflict will be seriously threatened, since
this behaviour affects the most important issue in the
Arab-Israeli conflict.

As we express our grave concern over this decision,
we affirm that the Israeli plan to expand the boundaries
of the municipality of the Holy City of Jerusalem will
shatter the peace process and may be the straw that
breaks the back of peace, because the West Bank is not
outside the city of Jerusalem. Thus, the expansion of
Jerusalem eastward, westward, northward or southward -
or even skyward and underground - is still unacceptable,
contravenes international treaties and resolutions, and will
not be accepted by the Arab and Muslim worlds.

The Government of the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques considers that the decision of the current Israeli
Government to expand the boundaries of the municipality
of Jerusalem is illegal and constitutes a dangerous
violation of international conventions and agreements.
This decision reaffirms the continuation of the Israeli
Government's plans to Judaize the city of Jerusalem and
efface its Arab and Islamic character. Saudi Arabia also
believes that such policies and practices contribute to
increasing tension and undermine the credibility of and
confidence in the Israeli Government in the context of the
peace process.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, under the leadership
of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, denounces
and rejects Israel's ongoing irresponsible behaviour in one
of the most delicate and sensitive aspects of the peace
process. We also emphasize the extreme gravity of this
decision and ask the Security Council to make every
effort necessary to ensure that Israel, as the occupying
Power, will desist from these policies and practices, and
in particular will completely halt all settlement activity in
Arab Jerusalem. Failure to achieve this will plunge the
region back into a spiral of conflict, tension and
instability.

We reiterate our belief that the Security Council, as
the organ responsible for maintaining international peace
and security, is obligated to take the necessary concrete
measures to stop the Israeli violations in the Holy City of
Jerusalem. Israeli violations of international law and the
resolutions of the Security Council must cease forthwith.

 

We are hopeful that the Security Council will assume
its responsibilities with regard to the Holy City of
Jerusalem so as to prove to the entire world that it is on the
side of right.

