Mr. Duale (Somalia): I wish at the outset to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this timely
debate on piracy in Somalia and in the Gulf of Guinea.
I would also like to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson for this
morning's briefing, and to thank you, Mr. President,
for the enlightening concept paper you provided
(S/2012/814, annex), which more or less sums up what
has been discussed today, namely, that piracy is not
only a maritime issue but has causes originating on
land that must also be dealt with.

Before going further, I wish to convey, on behalf
of my country, our heartfelt and sincere sympathy to
those seafarers who are still being held in captivity by
pirates, as well as to their families. We hope that they
will soon be released. As was said this morning, it is
very important that they be supported while still in
captivity as well as afterwards.

With regard to the concerns and actions of those
affected in the region, I believe that Tanzania's
statement gave an idea of what has been and could be
done.

I am very glad that almost all of the Security
Council members, and most of those who spoke today,
expressed the need for immediate action in order
to attempt to achieve a comprehensive solution and
effective intervention in the fight against piracy. We
commend those efforts and the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2012/24), which we support. That said, I am
duty-bound to mention the fact that while we thank all
the organizations and countries that are dealing with
pirates at sea now, and that have expended much effort in
doing so, we must take some action onshore concerning
the requests made by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the African Union for the marine
component of the African Union Mission in Somalia,
which I think should be given serious consideration,
until such time, of course, that the Somali marine police
are able to take over such action.

I would like to thank you once again, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting, which will be
followed in December by a meeting of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and of the
Trust Fund. We very much hope that this will highlight
the possibilities for more positive action.

