Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Poland for holding today's important
debate on upholding international law within the context
of the maintenance of international peace and security.
We are very honoured today to welcome the President
of the Republic of Poland. I would also like to thank the
speakers for their very informative briefings.

People's aspirations have not changed since the
Charter of the United Nations was adopted in 1945.
From Syria to Burma, from Yemen to the Central
African Republic, from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to South Sudan, in Palestine as in Israel,
human beings want to live in peace in a world where
their dignity is respected and their rights and freedoms
are protected. That goal cannot be achieved without
the rule of law. International law is at the heart of the
DNA of the United Nations. It is the cornerstone of
the multilateral order erected at the end of the Second
World War by a generation that, after experiencing the
terrible consequences of two global conflicts, viewed
the law as an essential instrument for resolving crises
and restoring peace. That is why international law is
at the heart of the principles of the Charter and the
constituent treaties of regional organizations such as
the European Union. Let me touch on some of the major
issues that illustrate the importance of international law
for the maintenance of peace and international security.

First, the Security Council acts as a guarantor of
international legality when exercising its responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
That is what the Council does when it calls on parties
to work to peacefully resolve disputes based on the
methods outlined in Chapter VI of the Charter, and
when it supports the increasing power of regional
partners under Chapter VIII of the Charter. We support
the commitment of the Secretary-General in that
regard, and I welcome his presence and the statement
made by his Chef de Cabinet.

The Security Council also acts as the executive
arm of international law when it calls on Member
States to respect their obligations. In that respect,
international law represents a complex architecture
balanced between the various legal regimes that are
critical to the maintenance of peace and security. It
is the responsibility of Member States to ensure that
the balance between those rules is maintained when
new legal instruments are introduced, so as not to
undermine the framework put in place to maintain
international peace and security. An example of that is
the framework designed to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear weapons.

Finally, Council decisions help to enforce
international law, in particular when it involves the
adoption of sanctions or when it authorizes the use
of force under Chapter VII. Such decisions may be
aimed at ensuring that violations of international law
do not go unpunished, particularly when it comes to
preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
a State or preventing attempts to use force to challenge
its borders. In any event, it is important to recall that
States should not recognize any annexation, such as the
illegal annexation of Crimea, resulting from a territorial
acquisition obtained by the threat or use of force. I also
want to reiterate here that the principle of sovereignty
cannot be invoked to excuse a State from complying
with its international obligations under Security
Council resolutions, international humanitarian and
human rights law or treaty obligations. The Charter
was not created to absolve criminals.

That brings me to my second point, concerning the
Council's contribution to the fight against impunity,
which must be strengthened further. The Security
Council supports the fight against impunity when it
mandates peacekeeping operations to assist national
authorities to arrest and bring to justice those suspected
of being guilty of the most serious crimes, including
by cooperating with the States of the region and the
International Criminal Court (ICC), as is the case with
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It contributes
to the fight against impunity when it supports the
establishment of national and hybrid tribunals, for
example in the Central African Republic, where the
Special Criminal Court is supported by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. The Council
also works to fight impunity when it creates tribunals.
I would like to commend, through President Meron,
the impressive work undertaken by the International
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda in the
service of international peace and criminal justice.

France stresses the major role in this area of
the International Criminal Court, whose potential
contribution to peace and justice has unfortunately still
not been fully realized, 20 years after its establishment.
That is particularly the case with regard to the situations
in Darfur and in Libya. It is regrettable that in the
absence of sufficient cooperation with the International
Criminal Court, trials could not be initiated in those
two situations to investigate the responsibility of those
suspected of large-scale crimes. The Council has the
responsibility for dealing with failures to cooperate
where they concern its own referrals to the ICC.
Thirdly and finally, if the Council is to fully carry
out its mission, it cannot allow itself to be paralysed or
subject to repeated blockages by some of its members.
That responsibility lies with each member of the Council.
In that respect, and considering the Syrian regime's
serious and systematic violations of all its obligations,
France will continue its efforts at the highest level and
with all its partners to find a path to a political solution
for Syria, and it is in that spirit that President Macron
will visit Russia at the end of this month.

In 2013, in order to prevent blockages in cases where
mass atrocities have been committed, as in Syria or
Burma, France called for a unilateral suspension of the
veto in the form of a voluntary political commitment by
the five permanent members of the Security Council.
We have advanced that initiative with Mexico, and now
100 States Members of the United Nations support it.
That measure can be implemented immediately and to
the benefit of the entire international community. The
permanent members must be exemplary not only when
it comes to implementing Council resolutions but also
in respecting the accords that they themselves have
agreed to or helped to formulate.

In view of the divergent interpretations that may
exist in the Council, the International Court of Justice,
the presence here of whose President Emeritus I
would like to acknowledge, has a major role to play in
providing the necessary clarifications for a harmonious
interpretation of international law. In that regard, in
certain situations the Council may use its prerogative
to refer one or more points of law to the Court, it being
understood that the exercise of this jurisdiction must
not be used to settle bilateral disputes.

Considering that global threats have never been
so numerous, it makes no sense to accept unilateral
withdrawals and temptations. On the contrary, it is
only through a voluntarist, renewed and demanding
multilateralism that we can tackle the world's
challenges. International law must be at the heart of the
strong multilateralism that we are calling for. That is
why respect for international law and its development
are top priorities for French diplomacy. It is in that spirit,
in the wake of the Paris Climate Change Agreement,
that France has proposed to consolidate international
environmental law by proposing a global pact for the
environment, launched by the General Assembly a few
days ago through its adoption of resolution 72/277.
France intends to continue those efforts with all of its
partners in the coming months.

