Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting. We also extend our sincere
thanks to Mr. Chambas and Mr. Chergui for their
valuable briefings. We appreciate the role played by the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), under the leadership of Mr. Chambas, who
is working to achieve progress in many areas, including
the reduction of political tensions, governance and
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.

Ijoin my fellow speakers in extending my sincere
condolences to the Government of the Niger and the
families of the victims of the terrorist attack that took
place last Tuesday in that country, killing 71 of its
soldiers. We wish a speedy recovery to those injured.
The attack demonstrates the magnitude of the security
challenges facing the region as a whole.

West Africa and the Sahel are dealing with many
challenges, including the spread of terrorist activities
and weapons, climate change and the illegal drug
trade, all of which contribute to destabilization in the
region. Discussions on those challenges must address
the root causes, and progress must be made in the
areas of development, creating economic opportunities
for people and strengthening governance. There are a
number of regional, international and United Nations
initiatives aimed at achieving development, and it is
important to coordinate all of those efforts to ensure
their success, as that will contribute to building
confidence between the Governments and the peoples
of the region and to fighting the phenomenon of violent
extremism, building on the military gains achieved
by the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
and the Multinational Joint Task Force. For its part,
Kuwait has contributed to supporting development
in West Africa by providing financing for various
development projects - almost $640 million over the
past five years - through the Kuwait Fund for Arab
Economic Development.

There are also challenges that contribute directly
to increasing violence within societies in West Africa,
such as conflicts between farmers and herders, climate
change and the lack of State authorities in remote
areas - a phenomenon that has spread to a number of
West African countries. Therefore, our focus should
be on issues related to social welfare and development
efforts. There is also an urgent need for social
reconciliation between the various communities and
for initiatives aimed at ensuring peaceful coexistence
between communities for the sake of stability in the
region. We have seen such measures taken in Mali, with
the signing of reconciliation agreements between the
Government and representatives of a number of Mali's
central communities.

The United Nations has many offices and missions
in West Africa. The most prominent among them is
UNOWAS, which plays a pivotal role in the region as a
whole and needs our support to strengthen its mandate
and mobilize the resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities as effectively as possible. It
also provides support for the countries of the region
in their quest to counter the challenges they face and
builds their capacities to combat terrorism, organized
crime and illegal trafficking.

United Nations peacekeeping missions play an
important role in the protection of civilians and support
for Governments in the preparation of plans to prevent
intercommunity violence and achieve stability. We also
welcome the efforts made by the countries of the region
within the framework of the Economic Community
of West African States, which issued a pledge in
September to commit to its decision to strengthen the
role of dialogue in the reduction of tensions among
societies and to ensure the involvement of women,
young people and religious leaders in that process,
given that, together with civil society organizations,
they play a fundamental role in achieving tolerance,
moderation and coexistence.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the fact
that the role of the United Nations is not limited to those
countries suffering from conflict, but is also crucial
to preventing conflict, the deterioration of situations
and relapse into conflict. UNOWAS is dedicated to
that area and we have seen how effective its role has
been in Burkina Faso in response to the deteriorating
situation there, and in the Gambia after the presidential
elections in 2017. We invite UNOWAS to continue
working along those lines and reiterate our full support
for its endeavours.

