Mrs. Booto (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): May I first of all extend to you,
Madam, the sincere congratulations of the Congolese
delegation on your presidency of the Security Council
for July.

I also thank the Under-Secretary-General and the
Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights for
introducing the very important reports before us on the
item on today's agenda, the human rights situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also wish to
pay a well-deserved tribute to the High Commissioner
for Human Rights for his tireless commitment to the
cause of human rights in my country and throughout
the world.

As members of the Council know, the war of
aggression against the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has for the past four years entailed a series of
flagrant violations of human rights and 3 million
deaths, and absorbs 80 per cent of our resources. In
analysing the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and in particular the human rights situation,
it would be reasonable objectively to contrast the
efforts that have been made to improve the situation in
the area under governmental authority with the overall
climate of terror, characterized by major violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law, in the
occupied territories.

No pretext cited by the aggressors can justify the
barbarities committed against civilians in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which include
summary executions; torture; cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment; massacres; the deliberate
spreading of HIV/AIDS through the use of rape as a
weapon of war; the burial-alive of women; the use of
child soldiers; the shameful exploitation of human
resources; and the plundering of the country's natural
resources and other wealth.

The authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are eager to restore the rule of law, democracy
and respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Despite current difficulties, we are sparing
no effort to ensure respect for all human rights,
including by taking steps to preserve law and order and
to ensure the protection of peoples in times of war and
peace, in accordance with our international
commitments.

This has been possible above all through a
strengthening of our partnership with the United
Nations through the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Kinshasa, and
through ongoing constructive dialogue with the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Steps have been taken, especially with respect to
the protection of the members of the most vulnerable
sector of society, namely children. Indeed, as rebel
movements continue to recruit children as young as
eight or ten years old, the President of the Republic has
signed a decree prohibiting the recruitment of children
into its armed forces. The General Staff of the
Congolese Armed Forces has established a programme
to demobilize child soldiers, with assistance from
international agencies, particularly the United Nations
Children's Fund. Our Government has also begun
reforming juvenile justice. Five hundred child soldiers
have been demobilized and reintegrated into civil
society, while 20,000 street children now have access
to education and basic health care.

Despite all the efforts made and the initial
indications of peace returning to Ituri, the situation is
still extremely bad in that region. The reports
introduced today confirm once again that the most
serious violations are committed in that part of our
country that is not under governmental control.
Following the Kisangani massacres, others occurred in
Bogoro, Mandro, Drodro and Mambasa, where
hundreds of civilians died in the most horrible way. We
trust that the Interim Emergency Multinational Force
will soon restore a measure of stability.

Moreover, MONUC investigators have
established that atrocities were committed against
civilians yet again in Ituri by rebel forces that killed
their victims systematically and even indulged in
anthropophagy against the native pygmies. These
native pygmies, a peaceful rural people who were
recently independent and carefree, have been
psychologically traumatized by such repulsive and
incomprehensible acts. It is imperative that those who
perpetrate such human rights violations understand that
the international community will no longer tolerate
these crimes and will punish the guilty. My delegation
welcomes the statement made by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the punishment of
the guilty during his visit to my country in January.

This past week has been very crucial in respect of
the establishment of transitional democratic
governmental structures in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The last obstacle to the establishment of the
Government was removed with the signing of the
agreement assigning responsibilities in the armed forces.
The All-Inclusive Agreement was put into practice
through the issuance of Decree 03-06 nominating the
members of the transitional Government.

Much remains to be done to restore lasting peace
and security. The challenges are huge, but we dare
believe that the creation of the transitional institutions
obviates all pretexts for pursuing the war, which is in
itself a violation of human rights. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo counts on the support of the
international community through constructive
cooperation in defence of human rights.

As has been stressed here in the Council, it is
imperative that all parties claiming a role in the future
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo demonstrate
their commitment to human rights, international
humanitarian law, security and the well-being of our
peoples in order to free the men, women and children
of our country from the web of violence and barbarism
in which they have been enmeshed by the murderous
madness of the invaders.

