Mrs. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We support the statement made by the representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Palestine continues to suffer from illegal
occupation and the Israeli settlement activities, which
violate international law, including human rights and
international humanitarian law and the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Israeli
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory are
unacceptable, as is the continuation and expansion of
the construction of such settlement units, in violation of
resolution 2334 (2016). It will not be possible to achieve
the two-State solution or a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement to the Palestinian question so long as
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations continue
to be violated.

We defend the right ofthe Palestinian people to self-
determination and to a free, independent and sovereign
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the
pre-1967 borders and with the return of the Palestinian
diaspora to that State. We reiterate Cuba's support for
the accession of Palestine to full fledged membership
in the United Nations, and call on the Security Council
to take a position on this issue.

The Council must adopt without further delay
concrete measures to put an end to the occupation by
Israel of Palestinian territory and other Arab territories;
end the blockade of the Gaza Strip; halt the construction
and expansion of settlements and of the separation wall
in occupied Palestinian territory; stop the confiscation
and destruction of Palestinian lands and properties; and
put an end to forced displacement and to the transfer of
settlers to occupied Palestinian territory.

Cuba reiterates that all measures or actions that
Israel has taken or will take with the aim of modifying
the legal, physical or demographic status as well as the
institutional structure of Syrian-occupied Golan, as
well as measures taken by Israel to exercise jurisdiction
and administration over this territory, are null and void
from a legal point of view.

We also reaffirm that all these measures and actions,
including the illegal construction and expansion of
Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967,
represent violations of international law; international
agreements; the Charter and resolutions of the United
Nations, including resolution 497 (1981); and the Fourth
Geneva Convention, as well as a challenge to the
international community.

Cuba demands that Israel withdraw fully from
the occupied Syrian Golan back to the borders of
4 June 1967.

