Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today's meeting.
We wish also to congratulate you and your delegation
for the outstanding manner in which you have been
presiding over the work of the Council this month.

African issues have consistently taken up a large
share of the agenda of the Security Council. This
month the Council held in-depth discussions on
Somalia, Burundi, Ethiopia and Eritrea, Cote d'Ivoire,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and other African items.

It is particularly gratifying that last week the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 1590
(2005) on the deployment of United Nations
peacekeepers in southern Sudan. This demonstrates
once again the Security Council's level of attention and
input vis-a-vis the conflicts in Africa.

In recent years the African situation has
witnessed some gratifying positive developments, and
some long, drawn-out conflicts have gradually
subsided. However, as the Secretary-General said in his
consolidated report to the General Assembly, most
regions in Africa are still suffering from the
devastating effects of armed conflict, poverty and
disease. Of the 24.6 million internally displaced
persons in the world, half live in Africa.

In carrying out its responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council should give African issues careful
and particular attention.

First, the Security Council should strongly urge
the international community to intensify its focus on
African issues, and also urge members to demonstrate
greater political will and provide additional resources.

Secondly, the Security Council should continue to
place African items at the top of its agenda. It should
give greater play to the role of the African Union and
other African regional and subregional organizations,
carefully heed their views and proposals, enhance their
coordination and cooperation on the ground, and assist
them in capacity-building.

Thirdly, the Security Council should take an
integrated approach to identifying effective ways of
resolving African issues; enhance its coordination with
peacekeeping operations and other United Nations
agencies; and promote synergy to avoid any waste of
resources.

Fourthly, the Security Council should devote
even greater attention to post-conflict reconstruction
efforts on the part of the countries concerned. The
Secretary-General's report recommends the
establishment of a Peacebuilding Commission; this is
an innovative idea that merits further consideration by
the Security Council.

In brief, we believe that the Security Council
should continuously take stock of its experience in
considering African issues in order to enhance its
work, so that its decisions can better meet the actual
needs of African countries and make solid
contributions to resolving African conflicts.

