Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Cote d'Ivoire for taking the initiative to
convene this meeting and Executive Director Yury
Fedotov for his briefing.

West and Central Africa have become key targets
of an onslaught of international drug trafficking. The
criminal activities that transit through countries of
West and Central Africa seriously undermine their
economic development and social stability and fuel
crime, Violence and terrorism. To address the region's
drug trafficking problem, the international community
should propose work in the following three areas.

First, we must work to help countries in the region
build capacity so that they are better equipped to
take the lead in tackling this scourge. The countries
of West and Central Africa are being held back by an
array of challenges in terms of resources, expertise
and know-how, capacity and others when it comes to
combating transnational organized crime, including
drug trafficking. They need robust support from the
international community. While fully respecting
their ownership, the international community should
help them formulate anti-drug trafficking strategies,
develop greater enforcement capacity and effectively
tackle this scourge and other forms of transnational
organized crime. International anti-drug trafficking
cooperation should be scaled up on the basis of broad
participation and shared responsibility, with a focus on
clamping down on the drug consumption market so as
to curb drug production and trafficking at the source.

Secondly, the international community should work
to strengthen coordination and cooperation between
regional and subregional organizations and United
Nations bodies to form synergies. China applauds
the strengthened cooperation between regional and
subregional organizations such as the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Economic Community of Central African States,
on the one hand and, on the other, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa in areas such as
combating drug trafficking with greater intensity, joint
border control and joint law enforcement, whereby
each institution can leverage its unique advantages
and expertise. The United Nations should continue
working in its coordination role to better marshal and
allocate resources and to provide a staunch buttress for
the efforts of regional countries and organizations.

Thirdly, we must work to tackle and try to
overcome the root causes of drug trafficking. Poverty
and underdevelopment serve as hotbeds for drug
trafficking and other forms of transnational organized
crime in West and Central Africa. We encourage the
United Nations agencies based in West and Central
Africa to work closely together, and we hope that
international partners will honour their aid and
investment commitments without delay, focusing
on helping the countries of the region with capacity-
building and infrastructure development so that they
are in a better position to seek and achieve self-reliant
and sustainable development in West and Central
Africa at the earliest possible date.

At the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation,
held in Beijing in September, China announced its
commitment to cooperating with African countries
on matters of peace and security. Such cooperation
includes 50 assistance programmes aimed at combating
drug trafficking, strengthening border security and
enforcement, and combating piracy and transnational
organized crime, inter alia, with a View to endowing
African countries with greater capacity to maintain
peace and security.

China, along with the international community,
will continue to support Africa in tackling the challenge
of drug trafficking and help African countries achieve
peace, stability and development as soon as possible.

