Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary General for his presence today and for his
powerful statement. I also thank the United States for
submitting resolution 2321 (2016), which we have just
adopted unanimously and which France co-sponsored.

After the January nuclear test, the launch of a
long-range missile using ballistic technology, and the
various ballistic-missile tests conducted this year,
North Korea's fifth nuclear test in September served
only to strengthen our deep concern over that country's
destabilizing provocations. The test demonstrates
Pyongyang's stubbornness and represents an
irresponsible decision to forge ahead. Let there be no
mistake - the determined, methodical and systematic
effort of North Korea to develop nuclear and ballistic
capabilities is today one of the main threats to regional
and international peace and security and an attack on the
international non-proliferation regime, making it one of
the most important challenges the Security Council has
to face and therefore one of its highest priorities.

In that context, France welcomes the unanimous
adoption ofresolution 2321 (2016). The resolution marks
a necessary and decisive step in strengthening sanctions
against North Korea and allows us to send a clear and
unambiguous message on the unity and determination
of the international community to sanction any
unacceptable challenge to the non-proliferation regime.
Its goal is therefore to lead to a radical policy change
in Pyongyang.
The unanimity that the Security Council has shown
today is a fine example of its capacity to come together
when the essential is at stake. I hope that this unity will
be renewed every time issues related to the proliferation
or use of weapons of mass destruction should arise.
Resolution 2270 (2016), adopted in March, represented
a very significant evolution in the sanctions regime. In
that same vein, resolution 2321 (2016) allows us now
to move one step further in several respects. First, it
identifies, clarifies and provides a stricter framework
for some of the provisions contained in resolution 2270
(2016). That is the case particularly with regard to the
export of coal, the inclusion of new designations and
the banning of the transfer of new goods.

The resolution also diversifies the means of action
that we have available to us by identifying new tools that
allow us to prevent the development of North Korea's
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes, including,
for example, new banking and financial measures, new
limits on transport modes that the regime is using, and
enhanced constraints on the diplomatic means being
used by North Korea.

Resolution 2321 (2016) also enables us to enhance
our capacity to prevent Pyongyang from funding
its nuclear programmes. The extension of sectoral
measures, which are synonymous with additional
constraints on the regime, illustrates that fact. Through
the new resolution, we also condemn the logic being
followed by the regime, which involves diverting
existing resources to fuel its illegitimate programmes
to the detriment of the North Korean people.

Finally, the resolution strengthens the strong
message of dissuasion sent to Pyongyang by clearly
recalling not only our determination to take additional
measures in the event of further provocations, but also
that the rights and privileges of membership of a State
subject to sanctions do not emerge out of nowhere. The
resolution does not close the door to dialogue, because
the imposition of sanctions is not our final objective.
And yet, as long as those provocations continue, we will
have no choice but to enhance them. The determination
of France in that regard is adamant. It is now up to North
Korea to concretely show, by abandoning its nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes, that it is ready to
fully respect its international obligations.

