Mr. Mahmood (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
congratulating the delegation of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November, and I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting.

Civilians continue to suffer the brunt of violence
during armed conflicts. It is against that backdrop that
Member States of the United Nations pledged in the
Millennium Declaration "to expand and strengthen the
protection of civilians in complex emergencies"
(resolution 55/2, para. 26).

The protection of civilians is a basic principle of
humanitarian law. The 1949 Geneva Conventions and
their 1977 Additional Protocols contain specific rules
for the protection of civilians. In situations that are not
covered by those treaties, in particular internal
disturbances, civilians are protected by the
fundamental principles of humanitarian law and human
rights law.

Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
important tools available to the United Nations for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The Security
Council's thematic resolution 1894 (2009), as well as
its resolutions relating to children and armed conflict
and to women and peace and security, the mandating of
peacekeeping missions to protect civilians, the
adoption of the aide-memoire on the protection of
civilians contained in document S/PRST/2009/1 and
the creation of the informal expert group on the

protection of civilians, have been important steps
forward. However, at the same time, the gap between
the words in the protection mandates and their actual
implementation still seems to persist. In that regard,
my delegation would like to re-emphasize the
importance of the principle of the responsibility to
protect, as endorsed in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1), in preventing harm to
civilians in armed conflict.

My delegation urges all parties to conflicts to
ensure protection of the lives and property of civilians.
My delegation condemns all violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law and stresses the
need to combat impunity, safeguard access for
humanitarian assistance and protect the safety of
humanitarian aid workers.

My delegation welcomes the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict as contained in document S/2010/579. The
report highlights three action areas, namely, ensuring a
comprehensive approach (ibid., paras. 102-103),
ensuring a consistent approach (ibid., paras. 104-105)
and ensuring an accountable approach (ibid., paras. 106- 110) in order to enhance the protection of civilians.

The vulnerable situation of civilians in post-
conflict societies needs special attention. For peace to
be sustained, civilian victims must be rehabilitated and
reintegrated into their communities more effectively,
and the perpetrators must bear the resultant cost.

The presence of uniformed female personnel may
play a pivotal role in protecting civilians in armed
conflict. I would like to take this opportunity to refer to
the efforts of the all-women Bangladesh police
contingent working in a peacekeeping mission in Haiti.
We believe that a female police force could also play a
critical role in a State's ability to protect its citizens.

Finally, we would like to mention what my
delegation considers to be two overarching themes for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The first
relates to prevention and the building of a culture of
peace. Prevention is at the heart of protection. The
preventive capacity of the Organization must be
enhanced. At the same time, Member States need to
take steps to inculcate the values of peace, tolerance
and harmony, which contribute to long-term
prevention.
The second theme is that of coordination among
all stakeholders. We believe that the protection of
civilians is the primary justification for a United
Nations presence in the field. My delegation stresses
the importance of effective coordination, particularly
among the various United nations entities, namely, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs.

In conclusion, my delegation expresses its grave
concern over the violations and breaches of
international law, including international humanitarian
law. For example, the total disregard and rejection of
humanitarian and international law and their
underlying values shown by the occupation forces in
the occupied territories of Palestine for years now is a
disgrace to all humanity. My delegation wishes to draw
the international community's attention to the fact that
the occupying State, as a signatory of the relevant
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
stipulate the responsibilities of an occupying Power,
cannot legally or morally absolve itself of its
responsibilities to guarantee the basic human rights of
the people under its occupation. The occupier State
must comply with resolution 1860 (2009). My
delegation strongly urges the international community,
and in particular the Council, to take effective steps to
ensure respect for and compliance with the Geneva
Conventions in such a situation.

