Mr. Thayeb (Indonesia): Mr. President, on behalf
of the delegation of Indonesia, I would like to express
my appreciation to you for convening this meeting on
what is, for us, a very crucial subject. We would also
like to express our gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his lucid report and to Under-Secretary-General
Dhanapala for introducing it. The report has
highlighted the role of the Security Council in
combating the global menace posed by the illicit trade
in small arms, which has been taken into account in its
consideration of conflict-prevention, peacekeeping and
peace-building activities.

The report also contains numerous
recommendations which warrant our careful attention.
My delegation wishes to note in particular the
recommendation to consider modalities to enhance the
interaction between the General Assembly and the
Security Council, especially in the context of the
Programme of Action adopted by the July 2001 United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

We are focusing our attention on the issue of
small arms in the Security Council today because the
only thing that continues to be small about small arms
is probably their physical size. However, these arms
continue to be big in stature, as they are big business
and bring big profits. As a result, they continue to be a
big problem. In every corner of the world, especially in
the developing world, and particularly in areas of
armed conflict, small arms continue to cause
horrendous misery to families and are a significant
cause of humanitarian distress. The deaths, injuries,
forced displacement and the loss of homes, property
and jobs they cause defy rational explanation.

There are also new areas of concern that merit the
close attention of the international community. Many
humanitarian agencies are reconsidering the previously
sacrosanct principles of neutrality and impartiality as
small arms proliferation endangers their activities and
personnel. The humanitarian impact of small arms is
escalating in magnitude and severity, largely as a result
of the eruption of new conflicts facilitated by the
continuing availability and use of small arms. Such
impacts are difficult to quantify because of poor or
non-existent data-collection facilities and insufficient
international attention and concern.

This is a grim picture in every respect. It is a
combination of humanitarian, security and economic
problems that demand the utmost in international
cooperation. It is reassuring that the basis for such a
response already exists. The July 2001 United Nations
Conference on Small Arms referred to earlier adopted a
Programme of Action, which is to be implemented at
the national, regional and global levels.

Today, Indonesia reiterates its support for, and its
commitment to, the Programme as a first step in a
comprehensive scheme to address this problem
definitively. In our view, at this stage, the Organization
should focus on the implementation of measures
contained in the Programme before any new or
additional measures are agreed upon. Furthermore, the
issue of small arms is one in which the potential for
multilateral action must be not only recognized but also
self-evident.

Following that Conference, the Government of
Indonesia convened a workshop in Bogor last
November to map out its national response. The
primary aim was to introduce the Programme of Action
to participating stakeholders, including governmental
and non-governmental institutions, and to promote its
internalization. It was also aimed at identifying the
concrete legal, administrative, institutional and
preventive measures that Indonesia can take in
implementing the Programme.

As a result, there now exists a national consensus
that its implementation should be pursued in a gradual
manner, taking national capacity into consideration. It
would ultimately depend upon strengthening national
capacity-building through international cooperation,
which is essential when national resources are limited.
In addition, the establishment of a national focal point
has recently been suggested to coordinate the
implementation of the Programme of Action. There is
also a need for the establishment of a national database
to assemble information on the production, registration,
circulation, mapping and transfer cycle of small arms
and light weapons. Regional and bilateral cooperation,
especially with neighbouring States, are essential in
this regard.

At the global level, Indonesia is aware of the need
for States and the World Customs Organization to
enhance cooperation with the International Criminal
Police Organization to identify those groups and
individuals engaged in the illicit trade of small arms.
Equally important is the promotion of such cooperation
and coordination among States, regional and
international organizations, as well as civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, in
combating this menace. My delegation is also aware of
the value of education and public-awareness
programmes on the problems posed by illicit trade in
small arms by promoting dialogue among relevant
constituencies for a culture of peace.

These are imperatives that are close to the heart
of Indonesia, and on which we intend to work in unity
with other States and the United Nations so as to
ensure that the problem of small arms, and their
needless humanitarian consequences, are addressed in
the shortest possible time. It must be recalled that this
issue is so important that it forms an integral part of the
Millennium Declaration, which called for concerted
action by the international community.

Before concluding, as referred to earlier by the
representative of Japan, my delegation wishes to
inform members that Indonesia, in cooperation with the
United Nations Department for Disarmament Affairs,
will host a regional seminar to consider the
implementation of the Programme of Action, followed
by a workshop on transparency in armaments, in
February 2003.

