Ms. Hidalgo (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we would like to thank Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), for her briefing. We commend her
good offices during the difficult post-electoral process
and the political transition. We urge her to continue
supporting the Congolese people in the consolidation of
peace, stability and economic development. Similarly,
we thank Ms. Anny Tenga Moda, Executive Director
and co-founder of the non-governmental organization
Afia Mama and initiator of the movement of young
women leaders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for being with us today and for her insights
and recommendations on the subject of women and the
changes needed to provide them greater opportunities.

We once again congratulate the Congolese people
for the display of political maturity in establishing the
legislative bodies, the procedures for appealing the
results of the elections and the peaceful coexistence
with the elected authorities. We hope that the indirect
election of senators, governors and deputy governors,
as well as the delayed elections in the city of Beni in
North Kivu province and the area of Yumbi, will be
conducted in a peaceful and transparent manner.

Due to the continuation of destabilizing activities
by armed groups, inter-communal conflicts and
the military operations of the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo against those groups,
we understand that the security situation remains tense.
Clashes in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, with attacks perpetrated by the Allied
Democratic Forces against the national security forces,
civilians and MONUSCO and the activities of foreign
and local armed groups alike continue to drive insecurity
and displace thousands of people. The presence of
such armed actors and groups poses a serious threat
to civilians and a great challenge to the authorities.
The time has come for the Congolese authorities,
the countries of the region that are affected and the
international community to implement strategies at the
regional level to eradicate armed groups and finally
bring to an end the interminable internal displacement
and suffering of the civilian population.

We urge the authorities to uphold their stated
intention to collaborate with MONUSCO in defining a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
approach. Such reintegration plans must take into
account the needs of young people affected by armed
conflicts through investment in capacity-building
for them to meet labour demand through relevant
educational opportunities designed to promotes a
culture of peace. We believe that the effectiveness of
weapons-collection and DDR programmes depends
upon sustainable opportunities being provided for ex-
combatants and the capacity of State institutions to
foster an inclusive environment where people feel safe
and secure, as envisioned in resolution 2220 (2015).

We must not forget the humanitarian situation
generated by those conflicts. According to the
MONUSCO report (S/2019/218), almost 13 million
people need assistance and protection in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Moreover, according to
UNICEF, more than a quarter of a million children
in the Kasai region, and thousands more having fled
with their families to nearby provinces, suffer severe
or acute malnutrition, requiring urgent assistance. We
urge donors to honour their pledged commitments to
cover the funding shortfall.

Such a generalized humanitarian crisis can lead to
the occurrence of epidemics. The Dominican Republic
is concerned in particular about the Ebola virus.
Already more than 500 people have died from Ebola,
and hundreds more have been affected by the disease.
Insecurity, attacks by armed groups against treatment
centres and lack of access for health authorities and
emergency services to Ebola-affected areas have
hindered the monitoring of infections and other aspects
of the humanitarian response. That puts the health of
those affected at risk and multiplies the probability of
the virus spreading to other cities.

In that regard, the Dominican Republic condemns
and deplores the recent attacks on humanitarian, and
especially medical, personnel. We recall that all parties
to the conflict are under an obligation to respect
international humanitarian law and to ensure full,
secure, immediate and unimpeded access for medical
personnel to the affected areas. We commend the
Government and the United Nations system, including
the World Health Organization, for their efforts to
eradicate the disease under such difficult circumstances.

With regard to the protection of civilians and human
rights, we commend the decision of the new President
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Felix
Tshilombo Tshisekedi, to pardon approximately 700
political prisoners and arrest 15 people linked to the
massacre of more than 800 people in the west of the
country. However, we are alarmed at the ongoing
threat posed to the life and well-being of the civilian
population by the clashes between the Congolese armed
forces and armed groups.

While we commend the work of the MONUSCO
in preventing and swiftly responding to attacks on
civilians in the country, we believe we must continue
strengthening early-warning mechanisms in the most
vulnerable areas. In that context, we must underscore
the particular vulnerability of women and children,
who continue to be disproportionately affected. We
therefore view it as crucial to work with the national
Government to develop a strategy and implement an
action plan to end and prevent sexual violence by the
armed forces and armed groups.

Such violence, like the repeated human-rights
violations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
must not go unpunished. Greater effort must be made
to prosecute human rights violations and abuses,
without privilege or exception. We call on MONUSCO
to continue promoting respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights law, to ensure that
those responsible are prosecuted and victims receive
appropriate reparations.

In conclusion, we welcome the holding of
consultations between MONUSCO and the Government
on the future presence of the Mission and its priorities,
pursuant to the recommendations of the 2017
MONUSCO strategic review and the Mission mandate
for the post-electoral period. Any modification or
adjustment to MONUSCO must be based on a robust
strategic evaluation of the political, security and human
rights situation, focused on consolidating and building
on the progress attained to date, and aimed at the
effective and efficient execution of its mandate.

We commend the MONUSCO for its work and
express our hope that this new chapter in the political
life of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be
characterized by full respect for human rights, thereby
consolidating peace, the rule of law, democracy and
socioeconomic growth in the country.

