Mr. Al-Shara' (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to
express our appreciation for your chosen theme for this
ministerial meeting, "Justice and the rule of law: the
United Nations role". It is difficult to find in this world
a clearer example of this theme than in the Middle East
region - a region of conflicts and post-conflict
situations; a region where the United Nations plays a
noble role in its search for solutions to those conflicts.
No wonder, then, that the Organization has achieved a
new record in the number of resolutions adopted with
regard to the region.

Despite the fact that the Charter of the United
Nations has sought to ensure a degree of justice and
equality in relations among nations, a number of the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council have been
imposed on some States while not truly imposed on
others, to the extent that the meaning of the phrase
"double standard" - which is extremely vague - has
become much clearer among the ordinary citizens of
our region than among those of any other region in the
world.

With regard to justice and the rule of law, one
may well wonder how one can compel the Palestinians
to commit themselves to the rule of law if one chooses
to ignore the rights of refugees to return to their
homeland and to reclaim their identity, under the
pretext that they left their country more than 50 years
ago and that their return threatens the existence of
democratic Israel, while in fact Israel is the party that
threatens their existence every time it grants the right
of return to a Jew whose ancestors might have left
Palestine 2,000 or more years ago. I do not know why
Israel would consider their return a threat to its
existence if it truly upheld a democratic system in
theory and in practice. In addition, one would have to
be extremely naive to believe that the number of Israeli
civilians killed by defenceless Palestinians under the
yoke of occupation outnumbers Palestinian civilians
killed by Israel, when everyone knows that the
Palestinian people have no army and no military
arsenal, unlike Israel.

Now the nagging question is how much longer
can Israel succeed in convincing the world that it is the
victim while it continues to occupy by force the
territories of others, to besiege them, to destroy their
homes, to uproot their trees and crops, and to murder
their sons, instead of sitting at the negotiating table to
restore to the Palestinians the rights that belong to
them. Isn't peace throughout history concluded among
enemies? Who among us will see the establishment of
two States living side by side in peace and security in
2005, if the current situation should continue? We
should recall the fact that the Israeli Prime Minister,
when asked about his views on a ceasefire, said that a
ceasefire should be concluded among the Palestinians
themselves, not between Israel and the Palestinians.

Syria has every right to ask here, how can justice
be attained, if Israel refuses to turn the Middle East
region into a zone free from weapons of mass
destruction and when Israel, at this time, owns the
largest arsenal of such weapons in the entire region,
and when it continues to falsely accuse others of
possessing such weapons.

Indeed, it is extremely paradoxical that an
occupying Power in Palestine or Iraq requests the
assistance of neighbouring States to consecrate its
occupation and to help it address security concerns,
including the security of its soldiers, and accuses those
who do not immediately comply of being rogues,
terrorists and a threat to international peace.

It is also regrettable, that in the twenty-first
century some think-tanks produce false and misleading
information to decision makers, on the basis of which
wars are waged outside the context of the United
Nations and its resolutions, blood is shed and baseless
and unbridled accusations are levelled in deliberate
defiance of the values and principles on which our
countries have unanimously agreed.

The Syrian Arab Republic, through its
membership in the Security Council, has contributed to
deepening the understanding of the role of the Security
Council and the importance of supporting United

Nations peace-building missions as an attempt to assist
in reorganizing the various aspects of justice and the
rule of law.

The Syrian Arab Republic, as a member of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, has
encouraged the attempt to give the United Nations a
primary role in peacekeeping. Syria encourages all
Member States to support, financially, the role of our
Organization, in order to allow it to undertake its
responsibilities in full.

During the remaining period of its membership in
the Security Council, Syria will make every necessary
effort in this regard, and will always remain faithful to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter.

