Mr. Berteling (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. All associated
countries - Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, the
Slovak Republic and Slovenia - have aligned themselves
with this statement, as has Norway.

A little more than two years ago, a major United
Nations peacekeeping operation, the United Nations
Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM. II), was withdrawn
from Somalia. Since then, the conflict between the
factions has continued. Many more Somalis have fallen
victim to the continued violence. Some progress in the
area of reconciliation has been achieved recently.

Today's open debate is testimony to the fact that the
international community has not forgotten about Somalia,
or abandoned that country. The United Nations Political
Office for Somalia continues to make efforts to facilitate
a settlement, and United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations try to alleviate the
humanitarian situation wherever they can. The European
Commission and its Special Envoy, as well as States
members of the European Union, continue their relief
activities and rehabilitation assistance to stable areas,
where the local authorities are prepared to work together
with civil society towards peace and reconstruction. The
Somalia Aid Coordination Body plays a crucial role in the
coordination of all these efforts, and deserves the
continued support of the entire international aid
community.

The European Union wishes to reiterate its full
support for the efforts of regional and other interested

 
States, as well as those of international and regional
organizations, such as the Organization of African Unity,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
League of Arab States, to promote a direct political
dialogue and facilitate a broad-based political settlement in
Somalia. We salute in particular the initiatives of Kenya,
which facilitated the Nairobi agreement, and of Ethiopia,
which led to the establishment in Sodere of the National
Salvation Council of Somalia. We would also like to
commend the efforts by Italy's Special Envoy for Somalia,
Ambassador Cassini, for facilitating the dialogue between
some of the main faction leaders.

Unfortunately, the results of these efforts have so far
not been altogether inclusive, as in every case one or more
important players have refused to participate. This points to
the need for coordinating the various regional peace efforts
and integrating them into one comprehensive political
settlement for Somalia as a whole. We should like to
reiterate, however, that the ultimate responsibility for
achieving national reconciliation and for restoring peace
rests with the Somali people themselves. The European
Union therefore calls upon all Somali factions immediately
to cease all hostilities, and to cooperate with the efforts for
peace and national reconciliation in Somalia. We are
encouraged in this regard by the recent meeting of the
National Salvation Council and by the establishment of the
joint committee on Mogadishu, aimed at reaching a political
settlement in Mogadishu that could give impetus to the
current momentum for dialogue and compromise.

The response from the international community to the
most recent United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency
Appeal for Somalia has been limited. The European Union
encourages all States to continue to contribute generously
to United Nations appeals to ensure continued relief and
rehabilitation efforts in Somalia, including those aimed at
the strengthening of civil society. We expect the Somali
factions, for their part, to refrain from violence, to ensure
the safety and freedom of movement of all aid personnel
and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian relief to the
Somali people. The latter requires the opening of the airport
and harbour of Mogadishu.

Finally, we wish to recall that there is one more way
in which Somalia can be helped to solve its problems: by
full and scrupulous adherence to the Security Council
embargo on all deliveries of weapons and military
equipment to that country.

