The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the Permanent
Representative ofthe Syrian Arab Republic.

We are meeting today to once again deliberate
over developments in the serious situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. Our meeting today is taking place in the
context of the Security Council playing its role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. A
large number of representatives of the Member States
of the United Nations who have spoken before me have
made it clear that the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories has worsened due to the fact that
Israel disregards its responsibilities as a member of this
international Organization and defies the relevant
resolutions ofthe Security Council.

Since 1948 the Security Council has adopted 28
resolutions to deal with the tragedy that has befallen
the Palestinian people as a result of their persecution,
repression and expulsion from their land. Israel has not
implemented any of those resolutions. In this regard,
we wish to refer to the resolutions adopted by the
Council during the last two months, namely,
resolutions 1402 (2002), 1403 (2002) and 1405 (2002),
all of which were adopted unanimously and with the
full support of the members of the Council. Yet, they
are being treated by Israel in the same way it has
treated previous resolutions.

In this context, in the last two weeks the Israeli
occupation forces have resumed their practices of
assassinating and killing innocent Palestinian civilians,
reoccupying towns and villages, demolishing houses
and destroying the infrastructure of Palestinian
institutions, imposing a strangulating military siege and
restricting the movement of Palestinians between their
homes, villages and towns. And, in continuing its
aggression on the Palestinian people, Israel is
employing all the lethal weapons in its military arsenal.

Israel has not found sufficient the wide-scale
destruction it has committed. It also has carried out
crimes against humanity in the Jenin refugee camp and
in the towns of Nablus and Ramallah, as well as in
other Palestinian villages. It has done so while
disregarding the appeals made by peoples from around
the world, including the United Nations. According to
information from reliable sources, over 75 per cent of
Palestinians are living under the poverty line today as a
result of Israel's repressive actions. If Israel continues
such actions and its siege ofthe Palestinian people, that
figure will rise in a few days to nearly 80 per cent or
more. This raises the spectre of a real humanitarian
tragedy, which requires that we stop it immediately.

Despite all these facts, the Government of Israel
continues to make accusations and to assign
responsibility to one Government or another based on
some random statement made to the press by some
Palestinian refugee who had been expelled from his
land. In fact, Palestinian refugees emerged from the
Jenin refugee camp to defend their rights - preferring
death to a life of humiliation and suffering, which is
the only thing the Israeli occupying forces had left
them with. It is truly unfortunate that such Israeli
accusations have fallen on cars that have listened to
them and believed them.

At the end of the day, the continued existence of
Palestinian refugees outside the occupied territories, in
Syria and other countries, is a responsibility that falls
upon Israel, which has expelled them from their land
and replaced them with Jewish immigrants from all
parts of the world. Israel continues to deprive these
refugees of their basic human right to return to their
land. But Israel does not find it sufficient to deprive
Palestinians of that right, it also wants to silence their
voices, and condemns anyone who shelters them and
helps them to survive the very tragic conditions from
which they suffer.

As we have heard today, it has become very clear
to the international community that the main reason for
the catastrophes and tragedies that the Middle East is
experiencing is the continuation of Israel's occupation
of Arab territories in Palestine, Lebanon and Syria and
its toying with the framework and rules of the peace
process since the holding of the Madrid Conference on
peace in the Middle East, in 1991. Since 1991, Israel
has also tried to avoid the requirements for peace by
talking about peace while it practises literally
everything that contradicts peace and the principles and
objectives the international community has agreed to
bring about such peace, in particular Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle ofland for peace.

Those who may still have doubts about the real
intentions of the Israeli Government can refer to the
contents ofthe article by the Israeli Prime Minister that
appeared a few days ago in The New York Times, which
has been referred to in several statements today. In that
article, the Prime Minister practically insulted the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole by distorting resolution 242 (1967) in a way that
can only be condemned. In contradiction of the
principle of land for peace and resolution 242 (1967),
Mr. Sharon said that Israel would neither return to the
indefensible 1967 borders nor re-divide or give up Al-
Quds Al-Sharif. What kind of peace does Mr. Sharon
really want?

The representative of Israel has today showered
us with lies and misleading statements when he
referred to Syria's presidency of the Council. He also
made other allegations, which the Council had
previously heard many times, both within and outside
this Chamber.

While the presidency of the Council will not
stoop to such a low level of diplomacy, we would like
to affirm here that Syria, which a majority of Member
States elected to the Security Council, feels proud that
the world has confidence in it and has given it such
credibility. Syria affirms that it will continue in the
future to work in accordance with the precious
confidence that the world has placed in it.

The declared Israeli campaign against Syria and
its membership of the Security Council since it was
first nominated, a campaign which has continued for
many years, has escalated in the recent past. It falls
within the framework of a deliberate attempt to cover
Israel's crimes of destruction and terrorism against the
Palestinians and against their struggle for freedom and
independence.

Everyone has the right to speak about terrorism
except Israel and the Israeli Government, because
terrorism is an essential component of the very life-
blood ofthe Israeli Government and its officials. As for
us, all we want is an end to the occupation of our Arab
territory. That right is guaranteed by the Charter and
United Nations resolutions.

Syria, which has made peace its strategic option,
has made it clear that the peace it demands is one based
on justice and the implementation of the resolutions of
international legitimacy, and that peace cannot coexist
with occupation. We have all heard that reaffirmed
today.

At the recent Beirut Summit, Arab leaders
formulated an initiative to bring about a just and
comprehensive peace, which has received wide
international support and acceptance. Now, the
international community and the Security Council must
exert pressure on the Israeli leaders to implement
relevant Security Council resolutions and must work
once again to convince them that the Arabs have rights
that they will never relinquish.

Syria looks to the Security Council to take action
once again, to shoulder its Charter responsibilities and
to bring about a just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East that puts an end to occupation and restores
the rights ofthose who lawfully possess them.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 8.20pm.
