Mr. Bessho (Japan): First of all, I would like to
join others in congratulating Italy on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. It has our
full support.

I would also like to express my sympathies to the
victims of the attack in lower Manhattan. It is a stark
reminder that terrorist attacks can happen anywhere
and against anybody.

I would like to express my gratitude to Mr. Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for
his comprehensive briefing.

The role of the Security Council is to work to
achieve peace and security in the world, but we
are continually reminded that humanitarian issues,
including the refugee issue, need to occupy a large
portion of the Council's attention. As Mr. Grandi's
briefing illustrated, we are currently seeing an increase
in the severity of the humanitarian crisis. There is a
greater need for a strengthened response to refugees.
As of October, Japan has contributed approximately
$150 million to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which includes
emergency-grant aid to Myanmar and Bangladesh, as
well as to the Middle East and Africa.

As for the humanitarian crisis in Syria, although
the Security Council has been tackling the situation in
that country for six years, there has been no substantial
improvement. Considering the critical situation of
refugees from Syria, Japan has delivered assistance to
host communities through the United Nations. Japan has
also accepted Syrian students, helping them to continue
their studies in Japan. We believe such educational
opportunities will not only serve as a complementary
pathway for the vulnerable populations, but will also
contribute to building the capacity of today's youth,
who will be rebuilding Syria tomorrow. Japan places
importance on activities to ease the pain suffered by
the Syrian people due to the long-lasting conflict and to
build resilience in their communities.

The situation of refugees and displaced people
in Myanmar and Bangladesh is a serious concern for
the international community. To address the situation,
Japan increased its emergency grand aid to $4 million in
September, in addition to the $12 million contribution
already made earlier this year through international
organizations, including UNHCR, which has been
assisting those affected by the current situation.

Japan places importance on UNHCR's efforts to
apply the Comprehensive Refugee Re sponse Framework.
The Framework will be an important element of the
global compact on refugees, which will be adopted next
year. We see the Framework as an initiative that in line
with the humanitarian-development nexus, which Japan
firmly supports. Based on that idea, Japan carried out

projects in the areas of humanitarian assistance and
development cooperation in collaboration with various
actors, including UNHCR, in places such as Uganda,
Iraq and Turkey. At the same time, we also pay further
attention to the Framework from the View point of
adding another important element to the humanitarian-
development nexus: peace, something on which Japan
places increasing importance. The role of the Security
Council, together with the Peacebuilding Commission,
is crucial to supporting the political process for peace
and to complete this nexus.

Lasting solutions for the refugee issue cannot be
achieved solely through emergency humanitarian
assistance. Supporting the self-reliance of refugees
is necessary for the day when, through the political
process, the time comes for them to repatriate or
resettle. When a humanitarian crisis ends and refugees
return to their home countries, providing seamless
assistance - such as peacebuilding for reconstruction
and stabilization, poverty reduction and economic
development for stabilization and prevention of the
recurrence of conflict - is essential.

Japan will continue to work within and outside
the Security Council to secure peace and prevent
the recurrence of conflict, which is a major cause of
refugees. At the same time, Japan intends to continue
its assistance in the areas of humanitarian assistance
and development cooperation to ensure effective
collaboration in those areas. Japan will learn from its
experience and hopes to work with the international
community, especially through closer cooperation with
UNHCR, for the delivery of effective assistance.

