Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his informative
briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. I welcome the
participation in this meeting of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, and I
thank him for his statement.

We once again note with concern that the security
situation in some parts of Afghanistan has continued to
deteriorate in spite of the efforts of the international
community. This insecurity remains a major obstacle to
efforts to achieve peace and stability in the country. If
not checked, this insecurity will continue to
overshadow the progress achieved by the Government
and the people of Afghanistan so far.

There is a need to sustain the momentum in the
Afghan-led peace and reintegration efforts, which
should be supported by the international community.
The holding of the Kabul Conference on 20 July was a
significant political development in Afghanistan. The
Conference proved that there is a shared interest by the
international community in helping the Afghan
Government and people overcome the challenges of
national development.
We welcome the Conference outcome, and in
particular the key commitments made by both the
Afghan Government and the international community.

We look forward to the finalization of the framework
of the national priority programmes presented by the
Afghan Government. The international community
should align its development assistance behind the
national priority programmes, whose timely
implementation will be essential to maintain the
momentum of the Kabul process.

Despite Taliban threats and attacks aimed at
disrupting the parliamentary elections that were held
on 18 September, it is encouraging to note the
significant increase in the participation of Afghan
women.

Regionally owned initiatives stand the best
chance of success in addressing concerns that cut
across national borders. We encourage the Afghan
Government's continued cooperation with neighboring
countries based on the common desire to increase joint
efforts in responding to security concerns and bolster
economic cooperation in the region. The conclusion of
the Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement in
July was a significant development that will facilitate
the realization of the full economic potential of those
two countries.

The development challenges that Afghanistan
faces require sustained, long-term support from the
international community. A well coordinated and well
resourced civilian effort is critical to overcoming these
challenges. In this regard, we commend UNAMA for
its continued role in facilitating a coherent Afghan-led
agenda in security, governance and development. We
believe that this role is critical for the success of the
Kabul process, through which Afghans will assume full
leadership and full ownership.

