Mr. Ka (Senegal) (spoke in French): I wish at the
outset, Sir, to congratulate you on the assumption by
your country, Tunisia, of the presidency of the Security
Council for February. At the same time, we thank you
for the timely convening of today's debate, which is
explicitly setting out the challenges of peace-building
and ofthe management of post-conflict situations.

The question of peace-building is both sensitive
and complex in all its aspects, because it has two bases
and, more specifically, because it rests on two pillars
whose characteristics are often difficult to reconcile.
They are the need, first, to safeguard the gains of a
peace agreement that is supposed to put an end to a
conflict and, secondly, to bring about the adoption of
measures that will promote the linkages among peace,
security, stability and economic and social
development so as to enable communities rent asunder
by conflict to regain peace, rebuild their country and
restore a stable society whose members have attained
reconciliation.

To be effective and credible, therefore, any
approach to post-conflict peace-building should include
the immediate implementation of a series of
determined, consistent measures to prevent actions that
could jeopardize a peace agreement and possibly lead
to a resumption of hostilities. In the long term,
integrated and sustainable action should follow, aimed
first and foremost at the rebuilding of the conflict-
ravaged country.

Finally, if it is to have any hope of success, any
approach to peace-building should consider the
underlying causes of the conflict, not merely its effects:
in many countries at war, especially in Africa, those
causes commonly include fragile political institutions,
endemic poverty, colossal debt and a climate of
insecurity at home and abroad.

To address all these elements, it is not only
necessary to take difficult political decisions; also,
Governments and the international community must
manifest a strong and unequivocal commitment to
become genuinely involved in long-term development
activities supported by the adequate and timely
provision of resources. But we are obliged to note with
regret that in the majority of situations - for example
in Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic - neither Governments nor the international
community were able to respond promptly and
effectively to the needs dictated by the situations for
supporting the peace-building process that had been put
in place.

Mr. President, in your note entitled "Peace-
building: towards a comprehensive approach", you
rightly stressed that

"Peace-building calls for an integrated
strategy comprising a series of actions on various
fronts: political, military, diplomatic, economic,
social and institutional which together form a
coherent social context". (S/2001/82, annex)

Meeting such a great challenge requires clear and
sustained political will and synergistic efforts that are
well formulated and well organized.

To construct an integrated strategy for peace-
building it is necessary, first, to avoid making - as the
Minister for Development Cooperation of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands recently put it - an artificial
division of conflicts into various stages: pre-conflict
prevention; the conflict itself; and the post-conflict
period. Such a division derives from a particular mind-
set and bears no relation to the facts on the ground:
most present-day conflicts, especially in Africa, result
from institutional weakness, from power struggles and
from societal fragility; these often undermine the
legitimacy of Governments. These factors must be
taken into account when the mandates of peacemaking
and post-conflict peace-building missions are being
defined.

Secondly, given its multidisciplinary nature,
peace-building must be an essential element of an
integrated, comprehensive approach which includes
poverty reduction, promotes policies of good
governance and the rule of law, and strengthens the
elements of an active civil society that can provide
support and advice during the peace-building phase.

Thirdly, the international financial institutions
and the bilateral donor community must have a better
defined involvement in peace-building, for we know
that the structural adjustment programmes that
accompany the economic reform process too often
trigger vulnerability that can give rise to frustration and
social tension which, if not carefully treated, can create
a climate that can destroy peacemaking and post-
conflict peace-building efforts. It is therefore important
for international financial institutions and the donor
community to take these dangers into account and to
try as best they can to strike a just balance between the
demands of macroeconomic stability and the priorities
for the restoration of peace, which call for greater
flexibility in allocating resources for the economic
recovery of countries emerging from war.

Fourthly, a sine qua non for restoring stability to
countries emerging from conflict is unquestionably the
way in which former soldiers, refugees and displaced
persons are treated. The highest priority should be
attached to programmes of disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration, with a
View to finding humane solutions that address the
causes of conflict and that thus avoid weakening the
legitimate expectations raised by the conclusion of a
peace agreement. Unfortunately, the examples of
Guinea-Bissau and of Sierra Leone remind us that
adequate resources arrive too late.

Fifthly, if we wish to see peace built, we must
also pay specific attention to the struggle against the
distribution of light weapons, which often fall into the
hands of outlaw groups, and we must address the issue
of the orderly return of displaced persons and refugees
to their country of origin. We must also tackle the
living conditions of refugees in host countries, whose
burden must be eased by substantial international
support programmes.

Sixthly, in order to build sustainable peace, we
must strive after every conflict to establish a culture of
peace, tolerance, national rebirth and social
equalization so as to rebuild society along more
harmonious and egalitarian lines.

In making these recommendations, we cannot
overemphasize the need to provide support missions
for peace-building programmes with sufficient
resources to allow them credibly to discharge their
peacekeeping mandate.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that peace-
building is a multidimensional process. Its
commendable objectives are to break cycles of
violence and, above all, to contribute to the
establishment of a climate of peace and sustainable
development through the use of consistent strategies in
various fields. Such a process clearly calls for the
United Nations, and above all the Security Council, to
assume the primary responsibility in the maintenance
of international peace and security. This reflects the
great importance that my delegation attaches to today's
debate and, in particular, to the results of the Council's
deliberations.

