Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Altalli for
their briefings.

We are deeply disappointed that the Syrian regime
has, at the last meeting ofthe Constitutional Committee,
yet again deployed its strategy of obstruction, delay and
tactical games. That is all the more disappointing after
the first round was more successful than many had
expected. Unfortunately, it is a pattern that we have seen
all too often over the past years - by creating artificial

discussions on agenda items, the regime wants to avoid
any real and substantive debate. Unfortunately, that
goes hand in hand with repeated statements by Bashar
Al-Assad, in which he disassociates himself from the
Constitutional Committee. We therefore strongly urge
the Syrian regime to stop obstructing and finally fully
commit to the constitutional process.

The current situation illustrates that the launch
of the Constitutional Committee is merely a first step
towards a political solution to the Syrian conflict.
Nevertheless, we remain convinced that its meetings
can be helpful to build some trust and therefore become
a door-opener for the broader political process, as
outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). However, in order
for that to happen, all sides need to seriously engage.

The establishment of the Constitutional Committee
in itself is not the political transition that was called for
in resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
of2012 (S/20l2/522, annex). We need a genuine political
process under the auspices of the United Nations that
will lead to actual change in Syria and a post-conflict
order that fulfils the legitimate hopes of the Syrian
people for peace and security.

Germany is the second-largest bilateral donor in
terms of humanitarian assistance to Syria. However,
when it comes to the issue of reconstruction, we remain
steadfast in our position. Germany and other States
members of the European Union will only assist in the
reconstruction of Syria when a comprehensive, genuine
and inclusive political transition is firmly under way.

Ms. Altalli's briefing was a stark reminder that
every time we speak about the Syrian conflict, we must
not forget its root causes. It was, first and foremost, the
Syrian regime's policy of brutal violence, repression
and persecution that caused this conflict, and this policy
is still keeping Syrian internally displaced persons
and refugees from returning home. The Syrian regime
has arbitrarily detained tens of thousands of innocent
Syrians merely because they dared to make use of
their freedom of expression. The Syrian regime has
tortured thousands of innocent Syrians to death merely
because they dared to ask for political reform and
freedom in Syria. Calling ordinary citizens terrorists
in order to create the pretext for their arrest and torture
is outrageous.

Arbitrary arrests, torture, sexual violence, forced
disappearances and extrajudicial killings of detainees
continue, even in so-called reconciled areas. The
Syrian regime's systematic use of the worst methods
of torture is sickening - even children continue to be
among the victims. The Syrian regime must stop such
acts immediately.

Since our meeting at the beginning of August
dedicated to the issue of detainees and missing persons
(see S/PV. 8593), there has unfortunately been no
progress on ending these gravest of human rights
violations. On the contrary, in recent months, there
have once again been credible reports on an increased
number of detainees being transferred to the infamous
Sednaya military prison in order to be executed without
a fair trial. At the same time, the Astana working group
on detentions and abductions in the Syrian conflict
has unfortunately not been able to agree on a prisoner
exchange and has not advanced on the issue. However,
meaningful progress on this issue is crucial in order
to build confidence. The Syrian regime must therefore
finally inform the families of the tens of thousands of
missing persons of the fate of their loved ones, grant
the United Nations or the International Committee of
the Red Cross unconditional access to all detention
facilities under its control, allow persons in custody
access to medical treatment, and release all political
prisoners and arbitrarily detained prisons, starting
with incarcerated minors and the sick. We also call on
Russia and Iran to use their influence over Damascus
in this regard.

I shall now turn to the situation in Idlib. We are
deeply concerned about the ongoing military attacks,
including air strikes, in the so-called de-escalation zone
of Idlib and remain extremely worried about a potential
large-scale military offensive in and around Idlib. We
reiterate our call for a genuine and lasting ceasefire, the
protection of civilians and adherence to international
humanitarian law. We condemn the recent air strikes
and ground-based strikes by Syrian regime forces and
their allies, which resulted in further civilian casualties.

Strikes against civilians and civilian infrastructure
are inexcusable; they are a violation of international
law and have to be part of the investigation by the
Commission ofInquiry. The Syrian regime and its allies
must comply with their obligations under international
law and protect civilians and civilian infrastructure.

We are concerned by the presence and attacks
of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other United Nations-
designated terrorist groups in Idlib, and we agree that
the role of terrorist organizations in Idlib must be
addressed. However, the fight against terrorism does
not justify indiscriminate attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

I would like to say a final word about the situation
in north-east Syria. The risk ofa further destabilization
of the whole region persists, and we therefore call upon
all actors in the north-east to immediately implement
a lasting ceasefire and halt all military operations.
We are concerned by the increased use of improvised
explosive devices in residential neighbourhoods and
local markets that have mainly been carried out in areas
under the control of Turkish forces and affiliated armed
groups. We deplore the loss of human lives and strongly
condemn any indiscriminate attack on civilians.
The risk of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) resurging and committing terrorist acts in the
region and beyond remains indubitably real. We are
committed to ensuring the defeat of ISIL and other
United Nations-designated terrorist groups.

We also reject any resettlement of Syrian refugees
into north-east Syria - or into any other part of Syria,
in fact - that is not a safe, dignified, and voluntary
return to the homes of those refugees or Violates the
rights of the local population.

We remain concerned about a deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in north-east Syria and reiterate
our call to all parties to ensure safe and unhindered
humanitarian access for all Syrians currently in need
of it.

