Mr. Hague (United Kingdom): I, too, thank the
Prime Minister of Qatar and the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States for their reports and their
powerful words, and we are all grateful to you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this debate.

Our task as a Council is clear: we must address
the horrifying violence that has engulfed Syria for the
last 10 months, which is an unmitigated tragedy for the
people of that country and a real threat to international
peace and security, and we must do so in a way that
gives the greatest possible chance of a peaceful and
lasting solution. The League of Arab States has
proposed a way to achieve this, and it should be
congratulated and supported in doing so. Its plan is at
the heart of the draft resolution put forward by the
Kingdom of Morocco, with the full support of the
United Kingdom and, I think, with the support of the
majority of Security Council members.

If implemented in full, the Arab League plan
would lead to an end to all violence against Syrian
civilians and attacks against Syrian State institutions. It
would remove the major stumbling blocks to reform
and give confidence to the Syrian people. It would start
an inclusive Syrian-led political process that would
allow the Syrian people to determine their future
peacefully, and it would lead to a national unity
Government and elections.

Syria needs a path out of conflict and misery, and,
with this plan, the Arab League has provided one that
is credible and viable. It has done so after three months
of engagement, described by the Secretary-General,
with all sides in Syria; after multiple visits to
Damascus by ministerial delegations from Arab nations;
on the basis of the work of over 150 Arab League
monitors inside Syria; and in the light of their own
deep understanding of their own region.

The Arab world is now asking the Security
Council to put its weight and authority behind the plan.
This is not the West telling Syria what to do. It is not
the permanent members of the Security Council
seeking to impose their view. This is the Arab nations
calling on the Security Council to help address the
crisis in Syria and the threat that it poses to the
stability of their region. The Secretary-General has
come here and urged us not to let the Syrian people
down in their plight.

Members of the Council have often called for
Arab leadership in the past, and that should be
respected now by all nations of the world. Can any
member of the Council today claim to be in a better
position to judge how best to support peace and
stability in Syria than these Arab nations themselves?

The draft resolution does not propose imposing
change on Syria from outside; it calls for the Syrian
people to be allowed to make their choices for
themselves. It does not call for military action and
could not be used to authorize it. Indeed, the Secretary-
General has stressed that the plan of the Arab League
specifically does not include any outside intervention.
It does not contain coercive measures. It is not a
Chapter VII draft resolution. But it should, in our view,
put the leaders of Syria on notice that measures will be
considered by the Council if there is not an immediate
end to the violence and if the Arab League plan
continues to be ignored. That warning is important. For
too long the Syrian Government has promised reform
and continued the violence.

At any time over the last 10 months they could
have stopped the bloodshed; they could have seized the
initiative; they could have introduced bold and lasting
reform that meets the aspirations of Syrians for greater
political freedom.

But the facts over recent months speak for
themselves. When the Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2011/16) on Syria in August last
year, the death toll stood at approximately 1,000. When
a draft Security Council resolution was put forward in
October and vetoed here (see S/PV.6627), 3,000 people
had died.

We believe that today, nearly 6,000 Syrians have
died in appalling circumstances. That includes, as we
have heard, 384 children. Between 30 and 100 people
currently die every single day from the violence in
Syria. They will be dying as we speak. Thousands
more are enduring torture, imprisonment and sexual
violence, including the rape of children.

The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
spoke about the idealism of children in his country in
the 19505 and 19605, without noting the irony that the
descendants of those children, the children of 2012, are
now being tortured and murdered in the name of their
own Government. It is not acceptable to try to blame
the situation in Syria on everyone else, from outside
intervention to the Gulf States, to French diplomats, to
Lawrence of Arabia - this does not excuse such
repression and violence, which is shame on any nation.

We know about those crimes because they have
been documented by impartial bodies of the United
Nations. How long will Syrian families have to live in
fear that their children will be killed or tortured, before
the Security Council adopts a meaningful resolution?
How many people need to die before the consciences
of all world capitals on this subject are stirred?

The people of Syria cannot afford to wait while
more false promises and half-measures from their
Government are accompanied by brutality on the
ground. There will be no reform or political progress in
Syria while such violence continues. There can be no
doubt that the violence is worsening; the risk of civil
war is intensifying; and the threat to the stability of the
region is growing.

With each day that passes, finding a way back
from the brink will be harder, and innocent lives will
be needlessly and wrongfully lost - deaths which the
Council could help to avert by acting in a united
manner.

Today, as I understand it, we all agree around this
table that the Security Council has a role to play. We
all want a peaceful political solution that ensures the
stability, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.
We all agree that this process should be led by the
people of Syria themselves, with the support of their
region and the international community. We all agree
that the rights of minorities in Syria must be
safeguarded and respected. We all agree that military
action would not be an appropriate response to the
complex situation in Syria, something this draft
resolution makes absolutely clear. We all welcome the
work of the Arab League. So, based on agreeing on all
those things, now we must have the will to match such
agreement by being able to agree on a draft resolution.

Even as we meet, the gravest of crimes are being
committed in Syria. Responsibility for those crimes
lies overwhelmingly at the door of the Syrian
authorities. But if the Council cannot agree to adopt a
resolution condemning the violence, backing the Arab
League and enabling a peaceful resolution, then that
failure of the Council will be judged by the people of
Syria and of their region.

We should unite behind the Arab League plan,
and that is what I urge all members of the Council to
do this week. We should remain seized of the situation
in Syria, returning to the matter if the violence still
continues. To fail to do so would be to undermine the
credibility of this institution, betray the Syrian people,
snub the Arab League and fail in the Council's
responsibilities.

