Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Tension is
now at its height and the international community is
holding its breath as the Security Council prepares to
take a painful and wrenching decision, fraught with
consequences both for international peace and
security - since the issue at hand is nothing less than
the authorization of the use of force against a country
whose people have for the past 25 years suffered the
horrors of war and all types of privation - and for the
Organization itself, which was committed at birth by its
founding Charter to "save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war". In these circumstances, it would
have been improper, to say the very least, if not
contrary to the spirit and the letter of the Charter, for
this Council to take its decision alone and in a veiled
manner, without hearing the voices of those who do not
sit in this Chamber but who still have something to say
on an issue of the gravest concern to them.

Yes, the Council must hear us - we the States
Members of the United Nations above all - and, we
hope, listen to us, because, in carrying out its duties
with respect to international peace and security, it does
so, ultimately and by the very provisions of the Charter
that endows it with its daunting responsibility, on
behalf of us all. Its decisions therefore commit us
collectively and in solidarity, for better or for worse.

This is even more true now that doubt has gripped
some of its non-permanent members, who are being
subjected to unbearable pressure and who, faced with
an impossible choice and caught up in a relentless
machine, are seeking to find their bearings and to take
a decision that would best serve the interests of the
international community and the cause of peace and
security throughout the world.

Yes, the Council must also hear the regional
organizations and other groupings that have spoken out
in recent weeks with remarkable unity at the level of
their heads of State and Government - be it the
European Union, the African Union, the Non-Aligned
Movement, the League of Arab States or the
Organization of the Islamic Conference - for a
peaceful settlement to the crisis, the primacy of the role
of the United Nations and respect for international
legality.

It is all the more duty-bound to listen to do so
because close cooperation between the Security
Council and regional organizations is desirable,
encouraged and clearly provided for by the very
Charter of our Organization and, just this once, because
all these bodies and regional groupings, the importance
of which is hardly negligible, are calling on the
Security Council in a remarkable outburst of unanimity
to ensure that the logic of peace prevails over that of
war.

Yes, the Security Council must lend an ear to
international public opinion and civil society, which, in
recent months, have tirelessly expressed, with force
and conviction, their rejection of war and their
devotion to peace. This message has been sent with
fervour by all religious leaders throughout the world,
including His Holiness the Pope.

Indeed, in a world where borders are falling and
humanity is coming in the face of adversity to see that
it is both a single entity and highly vulnerable, this
glass house in which we meet today has become the
crucible of our common hopes and aspirations and
cannot ignore the outcry of the outside world, but
contrarily is duty-bound to legitimize its actions and
enhance its authority by paying heed to world opinion.

Yes, finally and above all, the Security Council
cannot reject with a mere wave of the hand the reports
of the inspection missions that it itself created,
dispatched and instructed to oversee the
implementation of its resolutions. Indeed, what are Mr.
Blix and Mr. ElBaradei - to whom we pay a well-
deserved tribute for their courage, selflessness and
professionalism - asking for if not for just a few more
months - not a few weeks, nor yet a few years - in
which to conclude their work by obtaining Iraq's
peaceful disarmament?

"After a period of somewhat reluctant
cooperation, there has been an acceleration of
initiatives from the Iraqi side" (S/PV.47I4, p. 5),

Mr. Blix has said before this Council. This assessment
was made by a man in whom we have placed our
confidence and of whom we should therefore be proud.

In fact, important developments have taken place
in recent days, all of which testify to a healthy change
of attitude in Iraq. These include the destruction of Al
Samoud 2 missiles; the handing over of fragments of
R-4OO aerial bombs; the opportunity to analyse soil
samples in areas where, according to the Iraqi
authorities, VX gas and anthrax cultures have been
destroyed; the remission of dozens of new documents;
interviews with scientists without the presence of
minders; and the overflight of Iraqi territory by United
Nations aircraft.
Moreover, Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei have given
clear denials of accusations and allegations made
against Iraq, which only enhance the conviction of
Member States, which have no choice but to trust the
United Nations, that only impartial inspections, outside
the play of power, can establish the facts beyond any
doubt and lead, with clarity and respect for the law, to
the disarmament of Iraq.

To be sure, such progress has been achieved only
because the international community demonstrated its
unity and resolve in unanimously adopting resolution
1441 (2002) and, through direct and ongoing
supervision of the inspections, by keeping the pressure
on all those who must cooperate with the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency.

To be sure, Iraq must do more to convince the
inspectors that it has indeed eliminated the weapons of
mass destruction that it had in the past. It must do so
promptly and unambiguously in the interest of the Iraqi
people, the peoples of the region and international
peace and security. Pressure must therefore be
maintained and the inspectors should be given more
human and material resources and, above all, be able to
count on increased cooperation from the Iraqi
authorities.

Paradoxically, however, at the very moment when
the hope is growing that Iraq will commit itself
decisively to disarmament, the threat of an armed
conflict has suddenly imposed itself and we now fear
the worst.

The burning question that arises today is: Now
that the inspections are beginning to bear fruit and that
Iraq has entered into a phase of proactive cooperation
with the inspectors, as required by resolution 1441
(2002), is it reasonable that the inspections should be
abruptly cut short and that Iraq should be disarmed by
force, at the risk of sacrificing hundreds of thousands
of human lives; causing the ruin and destruction of the
country; jeopardizing its unity and territorial integrity,
and thus the stability and security of an entire region
that is already highly unstable; and perhaps unleashing
evil forces that may promote or provoke extreme
actions by which we shall all suffer?

We feel that the answer is self-evident:
Everything should be done to avoid the use of force.
There are proposals on the table here in the Security
Council that can enable the Council to solve this crisis
threatening the very future of our Organization - if
only the political will exists and if those who disagree
with the manner of disarming Iraq make the effort to
talk among themselves to understand one another. This
can happen in rediscovered unity and in accordance
with the provisions of the United Nations Charter,
which are incumbent upon us all and which no one has
the right to disregard.

In the face of such perils, Algeria once again
expresses its deep concern at the threat of war now
emerging. It hopes and prays for a peaceful settlement
of the crisis and for respect by all for international
legality. Algeria supports without reservation the
efforts to achieve the disarmament of Iraq by peaceful
means. In other words, disarmament should be carried
out through inspections, no doubt enhanced, of targeted
objectives, a more precise timetable, and the
establishment by the head of UNMOVIC of a list of
disarmament tasks that remain to be fulfilled.
Disarmament also requires the effective cooperation of
Iraq, which Algeria urges once more to comply
scrupulously with the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

What is at stake is the stability and security of the
entire Middle East and, beyond that, international
peace and security. Also at stake is the credibility and
authority of the Security Council, which remains for us
all, both large and small nations, the keystone of the
system of collective security to which we have all
freely adhered by becoming Members of the United
Nations - credibility and authority that must be
safeguarded at all costs. For there are other dangers and
challenges, undoubtedly more imminent and more
urgent, that threaten us. Who better than the Council
can face them with the necessary legitimacy and
wished-for success?

That credibility and authority will obviously be
better safeguarded and enhanced if the Security
Council finally undertakes, with the same
determination and rigour, to see that its resolutions are
respected everywhere and in all circumstances,
beginning in that part of the world where Israel, a serial
aggressor of its neighbours, flouts international legality
and is quietly amassing in complete impunity the most
deadly weapons of mass destruction and regularly
threatens the States in the region. By demonstrating
firmness with regard to that country and by
endeavouring resolutely to achieve a just and final
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, The
Security Council will demonstrate to all that it is truly
an irreplaceable tool in the service of peace, justice and
security throughout the world.
