Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like, first, to
associate my delegation with the statement to be made
later in this debate by the representative of Belgium on
behalf of the European Union.

It is a matter of the deepest concern and regret to
the Government and the people of Ireland that
prospects for a just and lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict have receded in recent months; that
violence has dangerously escalated; that the excessive
and disproportionate use of force is almost daily
causing the deaths of innocent civilians; that people are
again dying in indiscriminate bombing attacks; and that
commitments entered into by the parties, instead of
being built upon, are being reversed.

In View of the increasing spiral of violence and of
what, at times, seem deliberately provocative acts, as
well as the apparent absence of direction in the peace
process, it is fully appropriate for the Council once
again to address the issue. Furthermore, the Council
cannot ignore the fact that long-standing resolutions
remain unfulfilled.

When we last spoke in the Council on this issue,
on 15 March, Ireland, together with many other
delegations, said that the disproportionate use of force
by Israel, instead of stabilizing the situation, would
merely aggravate it further. We and others also
emphasized that attacks on Israeli civilians, in addition
to being utterly wrong in themselves, would do nothing
to bring about the justice desired and deserved by the
Palestinian people, and would in fact put off the day
when they can begin to live their lives in freedom and
dignity.

It is unfortunate that the warnings given at that
time by Security Council delegations - delegations
that have the interests of both parties at heart - were
not heeded. Violence and provocation have been taken
to new levels and the parties are no longer engaged in
dialogue. Instead, a corrosive cycle of mutual
misunderstanding, ritual condemnation and fear is
filling the vacuum left by the ending of substantive
dialogue. It is a deeply dangerous and untenable
situation.

The present situation is all the more regrettable
because, since our last meeting on this issue, the
recommendations in the report of the Sharm el-Sheikh
fact-finding committee, chaired by Senator George
Mitchell, pointed with clarity and imagination to the
way forward. On 22 May, the members of the Security
Council called on the parties immediately to begin the
steps required to implement those recommendations,
including those on confidence-building measures.

It is now well past time that the obstacles to the
implementation of the recommendations of the
Mitchell report were removed. Effective and immediate
steps must be taken to bring an end to acts of violence,
and the report sets out clearly what is required of the
Palestinian Authority in that regard. However, it is not
helpful to impose unilateral conditions for the
commencement of the implementation of the Mitchell
recommendations; that would impose a veto on
progress, as those who are bent on wrecking the peace
process want.

Neither is it helpful for one party to commit itself
only to part of the process. Of course, it is very
important for a cessation of violence to be achieved
and maintained. However, we made the point in March,
and we emphasize it again today, that the current phase
of violence arises primarily out of the frustration to
which the long years of occupation have given rise.
The Mitchell report refers to the humiliation and
frustration that Palestinians must endure every day as a
result of living with the continuing effects of
occupation. In such conditions, without the prospect of
a fair and honourable settlement at the end of the
process, the calm necessary for the resumption of
dialogue is unlikely to be achieved.

The Mitchell report also underlines the
difficulties that Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories - settlements which the entire international
community holds to be illegal - have presented to the
peace process. It is long past time that the Israeli
authorities unambiguously committed themselves to a
freeze on settlement construction activity.

On 9 August, a horrific bomb attack took place in
Jerusalem. Other such attacks have taken place, which
could have, but fortunately did not, lead to a similar
death toll. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ireland,
in condemning that attack, said that the commitments
given by the sides to secure a cessation of violence and
to implement the recommendations of the Mitchell
report must be observed, and he stressed how much
there was to be lost by sinking ever deeper into the
spiral of attack and retaliation. He said that negotiation
towards a comprehensive peace settlement offered the
only hope of a way out of the current spiral of Violence
and the dreadful prospect of a wider conflict in the
region.

The Irish authorities are gravely concerned at the
closure of Orient House, which has in recent years
become a symbol of the Palestinian people's
aspirations to sovereignty, and of other institutions in
occupied East Jerusalem, as well as at the incursions
into territory which under the interim agreements had
been transferred to the control of the Palestinian
Authority.

We fully understand the depth of feeling that
existed in Israel after the horrific suicide bombing
attacks. We fully accept that the Israeli authorities have
a right and duty to protect the public. However, an
action against Palestinian institutions, and against
symbols of nationhood important to Palestinians, is an
action against a people as a whole, not just against their
leadership, and certainly not against terrorists. Such
actions do not serve the interests of peace. As the
European Union stated, they run counter to the
declared objective, which must remain the restoration
of security for all.

Also running counter to this objective are the
other collective punishments against the Palestinian
people: the closures and restrictions on movement,
with the resulting devastating impact on the Palestinian
people and the Palestinian economy; the withholding of
due revenue, resulting in the disastrous financial
condition of the Palestinian Authority; and the
extrajudicial killings. None of this will bring peace.
None of these things will bring one day closer, for
Israel, secure borders recognized by its neighbours.

It is becoming increasingly difficult for the public
at large, in the region and outside of it, to understand
why the international community - which is
increasingly ready to intervene quickly and effectively
on other issues of international peace and security - is
apparently helpless to do anything effective in response
to the growing crisis in the Middle East.

In his statement of 9 August, the Foreign Minister
of Ireland stated that recent events underlined the
urgent need for a third-party monitoring mechanism,
which, at this critical time, would serve the interests of
both parties.

Ireland also welcomes the statement made by the
G-8 on 19 July, which reaffirmed that full
implementation of the Mitchell report was the only way
forward, outlined the elements necessary for a cooling-
off period and said that third-party monitoring accepted
by both parties would serve their interests in
implementing the report.

Grave psychological barriers exist to a
resumption of dialogue. This was clear in March, when
Deputy Prime Minister Peres referred to them in stark
terms in this Chamber. It is even clearer now. We have
made appeals to the parties here today, but the
breakthrough that is needed, as in many other conflicts,
requires outside mediators that have the trust of both
parties. My delegation supports the calls that have been
made for the resumption of active and effective
mediation.

Is any delegation here ready to declare that the
Middle East peace process cannot be revived? An
enormous amount has been achieved since the first
peace conference was convened in Madrid 10 years
ago, and since the Declaration of Principles was signed
eight years ago. There have been mistakes and
setbacks, and the process has suffered grievously from
a lack of continuity. A clear message must go out from
this meeting of the Security Council that too much has
been achieved and the stakes for both parties and for
the region as a whole are too great to throw it all away.
My delegation therefore welcomes recent reports of
moves by Deputy Prime Minister Peres to reopen
dialogue with representatives of the Palestinian
Authority.

Building peace in the region is, in the end, about
building conditions of justice; about removing threats
and affronts to justice; about achieving psychological
as well as physical security as preconditions for true
peace; about tackling what can only be described as a
bondage of fear - in all its aspects - that seems at
time to overwhelm wiser judgements and counsels.
After 10 months of violence and instability, the
message of the Council to both parties must be to offer
the full and active support of the international
community to help them to turn once again to the only
possible way forward: dialogue and peace-building.

