Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I was expecting the Under-Secretary-General
to begin his statement by offering his condolences to the
Government and the people of Syria for the hundreds
of innocent civilian victims in Jableh and Tartus who
perished a few days ago. The Council denounced that
action and express its condolences in a press statement
a couple of days ago.

Like the Council, I was surprised to hear what the
Under-Secretary-General said about his visit to Turkey
and what he saw there - surprising things, as he put it,
in Syrian refugee camps in Turkey. He saw children who
had no food to eat. What I would like to ask him, and
the Council, is what happened to the billions pledged
at various conferences in Kuwait and elsewhere for
the host countries Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon? What
happened with the propaganda being put out in the
countries of the Gulf and elsewhere that talks about the
refugee camps as if they were five-star hotels? Why
does the Under-Secretary-General not know about
the Saudi cleric Abdullah Al-Muhaysini, who recruits
children and acts as a mufti for the terrorist group Ahrar
Al-Sham, which is expanding in northern Aleppo and
Idlib? Those are facts that we have to consider. What
he said about Jableh and Tartus, which were shelled
during a suicide attack by a terrorist, is an incomplete
description, to put it mildly. He knows perfectly well
that Da'esh and Ahrar Al-Sham claimed responsibility
for the terrorist acts there, and the perpetrators' identity
is therefore very well known to him.

Some Council members claim to be concerned
by the humanitarian situation and the protection of
human rights in Syria. These States hold meetings,
make statements and issue communiques right, left and
centre, as though they were doves of peace and only
worried about the prosperity, stability and peace of the
Syrian people. That is how they present themselves.
However, the reality is very different because anyone
who wants to know can just look at the behaviour of
these States and see that they play a critical role in the
suffering of the Syrian people and the tragedy that has
befallen them, as well as in the way it is being treated, as
recalled in the statements on the protection of civilians
in Syria, Iraq and Libya.

Some States protect the terrorist entities, including
within the Security Council. That became obvious
when some refused to label Jaysh Al-Islam a terrorist
organization in the Security Council, despite the
request made by the Russian Federation. Those bodies
work in an alliance was with Jabhat Al-Nusra, which
is a terrorist organization, and commit terrorist acts
every day. Jaysh Al-Islam targets civilians in their
shelters in Damascus and Aleppo and other cities.
They perpetrate terrorist acts. Recently such acts were
carried out together with Da'esh in Jabla and Tartus in
Syria, as was just mentioned. This, as I said, resulted
in hundreds of innocent lives lost. Those same States
refused yesterday the request of the Syrian Government
to call Jaish-e-Mohammad a terrorist organization.

This situation becomes more glaring when these
same States invite these groups to participate in the
Geneva negotiations, as though there were such a thing
as moderate terrorism and as though they would both
allow and not allow terrorism. The same States enable
the access of representatives of these entities into their
countries and allow them access to the media. That was
the case with the head of Jabhat Al-Nusra, who was
received by the Qatari channel Al-Jazeera on several
occasions, and with the representative of foreign
relations of Ahrar Al-Sham, who was in the United
States on a British passport in January. There was an
article about that in the Washington Post, on 18 July
2015, and in the Telegraph. This is an attempt to burnish
the image of that terrorist group, to use terrorist groups
for political blackmail and to implement a particular
agenda.

This has become obvious in the statements made
by the representatives of these States - including
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia
and Turkey, as well as other countries - when they
clearly threaten to maintain their support for terrorism
in Syria unless the leadership is changed. The same
States impose unilateral illegal economic sanctions
on the Syrian people. That increases the suffering of
the Syrian people and is a huge burden on the public
and private sectors, which are trying to provide food
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and ensure the people's basic
needs are met. This has forced some sectors of the
population to leave Syria out of a sense of insecurity
and a lack of subsistence, but the Council ignores this
dire humanitarian situation in Syria.

How can we talk about putting an end to the
suffering and tragedy of the Syrian people inside
and outside the country and putting an end to the
humanitarian crisis in Syria? How can we know that the
humanitarian and political situation is uncertain? What
can we do to implement some of our goals? Suffering
should not be used by certain Governments as a tool
for political and other types of blackmail, as President
Erdogan did a couple of days ago when he threatened to
change the refugee situation if Turkish nationals were
not given a visa exemption for European countries.
How can the humanitarian situation improve when
President Erdogan uses Turkish territory, including the
United Nations corridors, as a transit area for tens of
thousands of foreign terrorist fighters? Furthermore,
the Turkish regime provides weapons to terrorists and
uses humanitarian convoys as a cover.

The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria appears not to know about any of this, despite the
fact that I myself told him about it on several occasions.
Furthermore, we have drawm the attention of members
of the Security Council to this matter in detail in
our official communications. The Erdogan regime
imprisons customs officers, judges and reporters who
describe the situation honestly. Why is it that the
Secretariat rewarded the Erdogan regime by holding
the first World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul when
the regime allows children to be recruited in refugee
camps?

How can we put an end to the crisis without
addressing the violations of the relevant Security
Council resolutions on combating terrorism, in
particular resolution 2253 (2015), which deals with
training for terrorism committed by Israel, Qatar and
Saudi Arabia? This has clear consequences for the
security and stability of the region.

I would like to discuss the way that the issue of
humanitarian access is manipulated. The report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/460) presents this
inaccurately, and what he describes is very far from
the reality and based on unreliable sources. Two days
ago we sent two identical letters to the President of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General with
regard to this matter, but I will limit myself to simply
underscoring the following points.

The claim that the Syrian Government prevents
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to Darayya is
totally false. In fact, the Syrian Government allowed
the United Nations and the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) to enter Darayya on 17 May to
provide humanitarian assistance. The representative of
the ICRC informed the Foreign Ministry that it was not
able to enter Darayya owing to logistical administrative
and security reasons. When it comes to the reservations
raised by some with regard to medical supplies, the
Government of Syria agrees to allow medical assistance
to be provided to all regions except for tools that can be
used by terrorists.

The Government of Syria stands ready to cooperate
with the United Nations to address all convoy-related
issues. As regards inter-agency convoy requests, I
recall that the United Nations submitted 26 requests for
inter-agency humanitarian assistance convoys for hot
areas in May, within the framework of the May plan. The
Syrian Government accepted 19 of those 26 requests.
As I said, 19 were accepted, but as of 24 May -two
days ago - the United Nations had sent only three
convoys out of the 26 requested. The Government of
Syria accepted 19 and the United Nations only sent three
inter-agency humanitarian assistance convoys. If there
are sometimes delays when it comes to authorizations
and their implementation, that is a result of our concern
for the safety and security of humanitarian workers,
and the concern that humanitarian assistance reach
those to whom it is destined.

The Government of Syria remains committed to
reducing the humanitarian suffering of our people.
We are ready to implement any national measures
needed in order to attain that objective. We continue
to cooperate with the United Nations and to facilitate
the work, but cooperation is not a one-way street. The
United Nations also has to cooperate, coordinate and
consult with the Syrian Government when it comes
to humanitarian assistance, instead of criticizing it
and calling it into question without result. The United
Nations and other international organizations have, in
the five years of the crisis' existence, been able to get
humanitarian assistance to millions of people thanks
only to the cooperation of the Government of Syria.

Lastly, we frequently talk of the danger of terrorism
and the importance of fighting terrorism. That should
not be interpreted to suggest that we do not understand
the depth of the humanitarian crisis in some regions
of Syria or that we do not understand the importance
of improving the humanitarian situation in Syria. On
the contrary, we do. However, we believe that in order
to put a lasting end to the humanitarian crisis, we need
to deal with the issue seriously, and to tackle terrorism
that is supported from the outside and external
interference in our internal affairs, and not through
financial contributions pledged in various conferences
as a matter of form - although those contributions
have their own significance.

The Syrian Government underscores the importance
ofthe political dimension. We participated in the Geneva
negotiations seriously. The problem was that some
States had imposed the Riyadh delegation as the only
interlocutor. That delegation came with preconditions,
which were to ensure that the negotiations failed.
Indeed, they withdrew on several occasions, following
direct instructions from their sponsors.

