Mr. Suan (Myanmar): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing my delegation to participate
in this meeting. My delegation wishes to congratulate
you on the Kuwaiti presidency of the Council. I am
confident that under your able leadership, the Council's
important debates will bear fruitful results. I assure
you of our support and cooperation.

I also thank Mr. Miroslav Jenea and High
Commissioner Grandi for their briefings on the
situation in Myanmar.

We appreciate the constructive approach adopted
by the Secretary-General and the United Nations in our
engagement. We will continue to cooperate with the
United Nations.

In this connection, we are glad that the visit of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Patten
to Myanmar last December was very positive. We are
working closely with her Office for further cooperation.

My delegation is keeping in close touch with
members of the Council as well as with the Secretariat
to maintain a constructive partnership in the spirit
of cooperation.

Since the issuance of the presidential statement
on the situation in Myanmar on 6 November last
(S/PRST/2017/22), Myanmar has made great strides
towards the restoration of the rule of law, peace and
stability, and preparations for the repatriation of
displaced persons from the Maungdaw area. The
implementation of the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State has gained momentum
in the process of promoting sustainable peace, stability
and development in Rakhine state.

Myanmar and Bangladesh have made significant
progress in our bilateral efforts for the repatriation of
displaced persons. After the signing on 23 November
last of the memorandum of understanding on the
arrangement on the return of displaced persons, on
19 December 2017 the terms of reference for the joint
working group were signed; the first meeting of the
group was held on 15 January. The physical arrangement
for repatriation agreement was signed by the two
sides on 16 January. According to that agreement,
the repatriation process was scheduled to commence
on 23 January. The returnees will be received at two
reception centres and then temporarily accommodated
at a camp before permanent settlement.
As an initial step, Myanmar will receive 300
returnees a day to ensure a smooth and safe return.
The number will be increased based on the progress of
the return and will be reviewed in three months. The
number of transit camps and reception centres may be
increased based on requirements as the repatriation
process progresses.

In the process of repatriation, Myanmar will draw
on the services of the Office ofthe United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as needed and
at the appropriate time. Recently, on 5 and 6 February,
UNHCR conducted its second workshop on voluntary
repatriation in Myanmar.

In an effort to expedite the implementation of the
repatriation process, Myanmar provided to Bangladesh
a list of 500 Hindus and 750 Muslims, verified as
Myanmar residents, to be included in the first batch
of repatriation.

In addition, on 30 January the Myanmar Ministry
of Foreign Affairs provided the Bangladeshi side with
information relating to a resettlement plan, the provision
of livelihood assistance, access to basic services, and
safety arrangements for verified returnees.

We have made the necessary preparations and are
now ready to receive the first group ofreturnees. We will
continue to work in close consultation and cooperation
with Bangladesh for the voluntary, safe and dignified
repatriation of displaced persons in accordance with
the bilateral agreement.

I would like to take this opportunity to inform the
Council that the Minister of Home Affairs of Myanmar
will be visiting Bangladesh on 15 February to discuss
with his counterpart matters relating to cooperation
in repatriation and to find a solution to the problem of
people being stranded on the zero line of the border.
Officials from both sides of the border will also be
meeting at the border on the same day to encourage
people to return to their villages, because the building
of houses or habitations on the zero line of the common
border is prohibited in the boundary agreement. We
appreciate the traditional good-neighbourly relationship
with Bangladesh and we are confident that we will be
able to overcome all problems arising between the two
neighbours with a spirit of friendship and cooperation.

In recent days, members of the diplomatic corps and
representatives of United Nations agencies - including
the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, World Food Programme, the United Nations
Food and Agriculture Organization and the World
Bank - have been given access to the Maungdaw
areas to observe the preparations for repatriation and
the situation on the ground. The Government has
arranged a day trip for all diplomatic corps members
residing in Myanmar, including United Nations agency
representatives, to Rakhine state in three groups. The
first and second groups went on 6 and 9 February,
respectively. The third group will be going on
15 February. Likewise, visiting dignitaries, such as the
Foreign Minister of Japan and the Foreign Secretary
of the United Kingdom, have also visited the area with
their accompanying media.

We are fully aware that the Government has the
primary responsibility to protect its own people. As
lives in the affected areas, especially the Maungdaw
area, return to normalcy, the police forces have largely
taken over the security responsibility in most parts of
Maungdaw district. Although no major clashes with
terrorists have been reported in the past six months,
there is always a threat posed by Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army terrorists, who are taking refuge among
innocent people. They will take every opportunity to
undermine law and order and public security. They will
not hesitate to use their brutal tactics of intimidation
and killing of innocent people who want a peaceful life
in harmony with other communities in Rakhine. The
recent media reports of the killing of two camp leaders
from refugee camps in Bangladesh sent a warning to
those who want to return to their villages.

Under such circumstances, and in order to establish
the rule of law and sustain peace and security, the
capacities of the security forces must be strengthened.
It is regrettable that, at a time when we most need
international support for building the capacities of our
security personnel, some countries have adopted new
restrictions and sanctions on Myanmar with regard to
cooperation in the security sector. Such actions could
have negative effects on the maintenance of peace and
stability in conflict areas.

On humanitarian assistance, the Government and
the Union Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance,
Resettlement and Development in Rakhine have been
providing food and household needs to all communities
in Rakhine state, in addition to building infrastructure
and increasing business activities for the economic
development of the region. The Red Cross Movement
continues to play an important role in providing services
to address the urgent need of humanitarian assistance
in affected areas.

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian
Assistance on Disaster Management is also actively
participating in the Government-led mechanism to
deliver humanitarian assistance. We highly appreciate
ASEAN's understanding, support and constructive
engagement in our efforts to find a peaceful and lasting
solution to the Rakhine issue.

The Government of Myanmar has embraced the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State as a road map to resolve the root causes
of the problem of Rakhine state and achieve sustainable
peace and development for all. The Government is
committed to implementing the recommendations
made by the Advisory Commission, as well as
other recommendations made by the Maungdaw
Region Investigation Commission. The Committee
for Implementation of the Recommendations on
Rakhine State has begun taking steps towards their
implementation. The Committee has recently published
its first report on the progress of the implementation of
the recommendations.

The Union Enterprise for Humanitarian
Assistance, Resettlement, and Development has been
spearheading various projects with great momentum
in the implementation of the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission. One of the most significant
developments in that regard was the formation on
14 December of a 10-member advisory board to the
Committee for Implementation of the Recommendations
on Rakhine State, headed by Mr. Surakiart Sathirathai,
former Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Thailand. The primary purpose of the board
is to provide an external perspective and advice to
the Committee for a more effective and efficient
implementation of recommendations.

The board has also already provided five points
of advice to the Implementation Committee as
preliminary reflections. The points made by the board
concern the sustainability of implementation projects,
the wider participation of United Nations agencies
in the repatriation and resettlement process, and the
granting of full humanitarian access, among others.
We are encouraged by the board's conviction that
constructive and positive work can be done to help
bring peace, reconciliation and economic progress to
all communities in Rakhine state.

Concerning allegations of human rights violations,
the Government of Myanmar has always made its
position very clear that it will not condone any action
of abuse. If there is concrete evidence, action will be
taken against the transgressor in accordance with the
law, no matter who or what he is. With regard to the
Reuters report of December last year on the finding
of 10 bodies in a cemetery in Inn Din, Maungdaw, the
Tatmadaw immediately formed a high-level enquiry
team and conducted an investigation of the incident.

It was found that 10 Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army members had been arrested by security forces
on 1 September 2017, soon after the terrorist attacks
on 25 August. The next day, 2 September, they were
executed and buried in the village cemetery without
being handed over to the police. Therefore, actions
are being taken against 16 individuals, including
army and police officers and some villagers who
acted in violation of standard operating procedures
and rules of engagement. The action taken on the part
of the Tatmadaw is a positive step forward in taking
responsibility, and deserves encouragement.

Recently, the Associated Press and the BBC reported
widely on alleged mass graves in the village of Gu
Dar Pyin, in Buthidaung township. The Rakhine state
Government sent a 17-member inspection team to the
village, comprised of regional administrative officials,
local Rakhine and Muslim community elders, doctors,
immigration officers and security officers. According
to the interviews and area inspections, no mass grave
was found in the reported area. Moreover, the local
elders confirmed that there had been no such incidents
in the village. However, the Rakhine state Government
is now extending the investigation to nearby villages.
The Government of Myanmar will continue to ensure
accountability for all crimes committed, as no one is
above the law.

The case of two Reuters reporters has attracted
much attention in recent weeks. Myanmar recognizes
the freedom of the press, and they were not arrested
for reporting. The two reporters are charged under the
Official Secrets Act for illegally possessing confidential
Government documents. Every citizen is bound by the
existing law of land. It is important that the action of
a journalist also be within the bounds of the law. In
accordance with judicial procedure, they have full legal
rights as defendants in the course of legal proceedings.

Achieving durable peace, harmony and
development in Rakhine state will be contingent on
nationwide peace and the success of the democratic
transition of Myanmar. The greatest national endeavour
for Myanmar today is to forge lasting peace. Without
peace, stability and the rule of law, the country will not
be able to realize its ultimate goal of building a genuine
democratic federal union that will guarantee security,
freedom and progress for all people.

To that end, the previous Government initiated the
Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement with ethnic armed
groups to sustain peace. Eight out of about twenty
armed groups signed the Agreement during the previous
administration. I am pleased to inform the Council that
today, 13 February, another two ethnic groups -the New
Mon State Party and the Lahu Democratic Union - have
signed the Agreement in Naypyidaw, bringing the total
number of signatories to ten. The People's Republic of
China, India, Japan, Thailand, the European Union and
the United Nations have also signed the Agreement as
international witnesses.

The 21st Century Panglong Conference is the
forum bringing together all stakeholders to undertake
political dialogue towards peace and lay the foundation
for a democratic federal union. The first session of
the Panglong Peace Conference, held in 2016, was the
most inclusive peace conference in Myanmar's history.
The second session of the Conference took place in
May 2017 and reached an agreement on part 1 of the
37-point Pyidaungsu Accord, which will constitute part
of the basis for a future democratic federal constitution.
Preparations are now under way for the third session of
the Panglong Conference.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
the Myanmar Government's sincere appreciation to all
our friends around the world and to the United Nations
for supporting the peace process. We hope that we can
count on the continued support and encouragement
of the international community in our efforts for
lasting peace, sustainable development and democratic
nation-building.

The current humanitarian crisis, which involves
the Muslim people of Rakhine state, did not result
from communal violence, as happened in 2012. It
is the consequence of terrorist attacks on security
posts, which triggered the security response of the
Government forces. Such attacks were a clear and
real threat to the security, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Myanmar. The matter is not a religious
issue, as some people are trying to portray. The majority
of Muslims in other areas across Myanmar have lived
peacefully and in harmony with people of different
faiths throughout history.

The challenges facing Rakhine state include
poverty, resource competition, human rights,
citizenship and immigration perspectives, to name a
few. There is no easy quick fix to those highly complex
challenges. Ultimately, it is up to the people of Myanmar
to determine how to achieve a peaceful and prosperous
Rakhine state. The solution must come from within. It
must not be imposed from outside.

We appreciate the concern expressed by our
friends and welcome the constructive cooperation
of the international community. We need a solution
to solve the problem. We would not allow action that
would exacerbate the problem. In the policymaking
process, we should not become hostage to the one-sided
media and activists. Important judgments and policy
decisions should be based on a careful examination of
the information.

Iwouldliketoconcludebyexpressingmydelegation's
sincere appreciation to the members of the Security
Council who have demonstrated an understanding
of the complex challenges that we face today. We are
grateful for their support and encouragement, which
we will continue to need. We believe that only mutual
understanding and constructive cooperation will bring
about positive results. The Government of Myanmar
is determined to overcome all the challenges with the
full support and contribution of the entire population of
Myanmar. We will not allow the immediate challenges
to undermine or to delay our ultimate goal of building a
fully democratic federal union, with lasting peace and
sustainable development.

