Mr. Douste-Blazy (France) (spoke in French):
On 14 February 2005, former Lebanese Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri and 22 others were assassinated in a
cowardly terrorist attack in the heart of Beirut. We
have solemnly gathered here today to reaffirm our
resolve to seek the truth and to punish those guilty of
this heinous act.

At the outset, on behalf of the Government and
the people of France, I wish to pay tribute to the
memory of Rafik Hariri. He embodied Lebanon's
enduring wish for independence, democracy and
freedom - a wholly legitimate wish that France,
linked to that country by so many ties, has consistently
supported and encouraged.

The Lebanese people were deeply shocked by this
tragedy, which occurred at a time when Lebanon was
gradually recovering its sovereignty and regaining
control of its destiny. The Lebanese people, along with
the rest of the international community, demanded to
know the full truth about this political assassination, so
that justice would be done and, in particular, so that an
end would be put to impunity.

The Security Council heeded that call. By
deciding unanimously last spring to establish an
International Independent Investigation Commission, it
restored hope to an entire people. The Commission, led
by Judge Detlev Mehlis, has done remarkable work
under very difficult circumstances. It submitted its
report to the Security Council 10 days ago.

Its findings, after several months of thorough and
rigorous investigation, are extremely serious. I will
recall its two main points. First, there is converging
evidence of involvement by Lebanese and Syrian
officials in this terrorist act. Secondly, Syria has not
cooperated in good faith with the Commission, and it
must clarify many of the unresolved questions.

The Security Council could not remain silent in
the face of such findings. France, along with the United
States and the United Kingdom, therefore proposed a
firm resolution responding to the report by the
Independent Investigation Commission.

I am pleased that the Security Council was able to
reach an agreement on this text quickly. It has only one
aim: the truth, the whole truth, about Rafik Hariri's
assassination, so that those responsible for it, whoever
and wherever they may be, answer for their crime.

By adopting this resolution unanimously today,
the Council is sending a threefold message. First -
and France deems this essential - it sends a message
of solidarity with the Lebanese people and
Government, which have shown unwavering courage
and determination these past months. We are also
sending an important message of support to the
International Independent Investigation Commission
and to its Head, who must be able to continue their
work, alongside Lebanon's judicial officials, under the
best possible circumstances. Lastly, the Council makes
a clear, firm and urgent appeal to Syria. The Syrian
authorities must cooperate fully with the Commission
so that light can be shed as quickly as possible on the
attack that took the life of Rafik Hariri.

The resolution has been adopted unanimously.
Syria's leaders must understand that the Security
Council, and, through it, the international community
as a whole will tolerate nothing less than immediate
and complete cooperation and that it will respond
accordingly to any failure by the Syrian authorities to
meet their obligations.

More than eight months have passed since the
cowardly and tragic assassination of Rafik Hariri and
22 other innocent people. Despite continuing attacks
and attempts at destabilization, Lebanon has stood
firm. The legislative elections held in June took place
in freedom and transparency. The new Government, led
by Mr. Fouad Siniora, is working and moving forward.
The Lebanese people, in this difficult period, have
shown that they are taking charge of their own destiny.
They will neither weaken nor yield in the face of
terrorism.

It is the duty of the international community to
help Lebanon at this crucial time in its history.
Resolutely continuing the inquiry into the 14 February
terrorist attack, revealing the truth and punishing the
guilty are essential to strengthen Lebanon's
sovereignty and stability.

My country is convinced that the resolution we
have unanimously adopted today will contribute to that
end.

