Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Thank you,
Mr. Minister, for being here today and presiding over
our meeting. Our thanks go also to your Ambassador,
Mr. Arias, for organizing today's open debate on what
we have all agreed is a crucial and deeply worrying
issue. I join others in thanking our French colleagues
for their excellent leadership of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

The United Kingdom is committed to playing an
active role in international efforts to protect children
affected by armed conflict. We welcome the valuable
and high-quality work of Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict. We are grateful to her for her
briefing today, and also for the briefings by
Ms. Veneman and Ms. Becker.

The United Kingdom supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation to include child protection
advisers within the mandates of peacekeeping and
relevant political missions in future to strengthen
monitoring and reporting.
We also recognize the role of non-governmental
organizations and civil society groups on the ground,
which often operate at personal risk and without whose

08-2361]
support this mechanism could not operate half as
effectively as it does.

We welcome this latest report, and we are pleased
to note a number of positive developments. The recent
evidence suggesting that active recruitment and use of
children by armed groups in Cote d'Ivoire has ended is
encouraging. The engagement of the Government of
Nepal in preparation for the release and rehabilitation
of child combatants is also welcome, although
implementation of these plans is overdue.

The decrease in unlawful recruitment of child
soldiers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
further positive sign. The cooperation of the authorities
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with the
International Criminal Court on the indictment of
Thomas Lubanga Dyilo and Germain Katanga, and in
the recent arrest of Mathieu Ngudjolo Chui, is very
welcome. Nevertheless, serious challenges remain, not
least with regard to abuses perpetrated by illegal armed
militia in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The United Kingdom welcomes the fact that
parties to conflict in countries such as the Central
African Republic, Cote d'Ivoire, Burma and the Sudan
are cooperating with monitoring and reporting
mechanisms and have made progress on concrete time-
bound action plans to stop recruitment of children and
other violations and abuses. But greater engagement is
needed.

We would welcome further details on progress
made in the development and implementation of the
action plans of parties within Burma. We urge the
Myanmar Government to adhere to its commitment to
the Special Representative to cooperate in establishing
a monitoring and reporting mechanism.

All six grave violations outlined in the report
continue to be of great concern to the United Kingdom.
Bearing in mind the Secretary-General's
recommendation, we are ready to contribute to a
review of the violations that trigger the listing of a
party in the annexes of his reports.

With that in mind, we are especially concerned
that instances of sexual and gender-based violence
during conflict, including rape, have increased, in
particular, in Darfur, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi. There is evidence that rape is
being used as an instrument of war in those regions to
terrorize local populations. Further data collection and
analysis is needed to provide a basis on which to hold
those responsible to account.

It is important that such crimes do not go
unpunished. The United Kingdom fully supports the
role of the International Criminal Court in
investigating and prosecuting these and other
violations and abuses against children in armed conflict
that fall within its jurisdiction.

To be relevant, the Security Council's work on
children and armed conflict has to have an impact on
the ground. As I have emphasized, progress has been
made, but serious challenges remain. We must continue
to evaluate our efforts and to monitor the
implementation of our Working Group's conclusions. A
number of persistent violators are mentioned in the
report before us. The United Kingdom strongly
believes that the Security Council and its Working
Group should make full use of the range of options for
addressing systematic violations, as set out in
resolution 1612 (2005) and in the Working Group's
toolkit. That might involve use of targeted measures
against perpetrators who refuse to undertake the
actions we demand of them. Certainly, inaction should
not be an option.

