The Secretary-General: It gives me great
pleasure to join the Council today. As members know,
we had hoped to hold this debate in September to mark
the opening of the General Assembly's special session
on children, but the meeting had to be postponed for
obvious reasons.

The United Nations has always sought to alleviate
the plight of children affected by war. The situation in
Afghanistan has only reaffirmed this concern. For that
reason, the United Nations Children's Fund and the
Office of my Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict are working with Mr. Brahimi to
ensure that the protection of children and of civilians in
general is a key part of the efforts to restore and rebuild
Afghanistan. This generation of Afghan children must
become a harbinger of peace.

The draft resolution before the Council today tells
each of us what we have to do to protect children in
armed conflict. It calls on States to punish conduct that
fuels and exacerbates conflict. It draws attention to
issues such as the recruitment of children and
trafficking in arms and natural resources. It urges
donors, lenders and others to use their financial
leverage. And it insists that the Council, the United
Nations system, the international financial institutions
and others use their influence as well.

Field monitoring is also essential, and I shall
continue to ensure the deployment of child protection
advisers. The Council also needs timely, accurate
information about implementation of its resolutions,
and I am committed to providing those reports. I also
stand ready to bring to the Council's attention the
identities of parties that are in violation of any of the
provisions of the draft resolution.

War, violence and political instability continue to
inflict appalling damage on the world of children. I
look forward to working with the Council in the
struggle to keep their needs uppermost in our minds,
and to ensure that the rights of children and their
protection is maintained as one of our main agenda
items. I hope that we will all agree on that.

