Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to thank Special Envoy De Mistura for
his briefing. I appreciate his tireless efforts in seeking
a political settlement to the question of Syria.

The political process in Syria has recently
gained positive momentum. The memorandum of
understanding on the stabilization of the situation
in Idlib's de-escalation zone, which was signed by
Russia and Turkey, is, in broad strokes, being smoothly
implemented. Heavy weapons and armed groups are
being withdrawn from demilitarized zones. China
welcomes the gradual stabilization of the situation
in Idlib and appreciates the efforts made by Russia
and Turkey.

We hope that the ceasefire in Syria will be sustained,
thereby creating the conditions for the establishment of
the constitutional committee and Geneva peace talks.
China also welcomes the reopening of border crossing
points between Syria and Jordan, which will restore a
major trade channel in the Middle East.

The political process in Syria still faces challenges.
Terrorism continues to threaten the security and stability
of Syria and to hamper reconstruction and the return
of refugees. The international community must remain
united, coordinate its efforts, cut the supply chain of
funds and weapons to terrorists, prevent the resurgence
of terrorism and consolidate the achievements made
in counter-terrorism. China has always believed that
political negotiations are the only feasible solution to
the question of Syria.

First, the international community should seize the
opportunity offered by the alleviation of the situation
in Syria and revitalize the political process there. The
key now is to work steadily to establish the Syrian
constitutional committee, which must be representative
of and acceptable to all. The international community
should remain committed to the mediation efforts
taken up by the United Nations and Special Envoy De
Mistura, relaunch the Geneva peace talks as soon as
possible, further leverage the role ofthe Astana process
and facilitate full dialogue and consultations among all
the parties in Syria.

Secondly, the countries of the region should take
action based on their long-time interest in the overall
stabilization of the region and play a constructive role
in seeking a political settlement. Achieving peace and
stability throughout the entire territory of Syria remains
an arduous task. We hope that all the parties will fully
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria, jointly ensure the effective
functioning of the Idlib demilitarized zone, stabilize
the overall situation in Syria and create the necessary
conditions and environment for its political process.

Thirdly, the Syrian Government and the
opposition parties must proceed in accordance with
the fundamental interests of the country and its people,
the principle of a Syrian-led and -owned process and
resolution 2254 (2015). They must promote the political
process, settle differences through negotiations, foster
national reconciliation and work gradually to arrive at
a political settlement that fits with Syria's reality and
addresses the legitimate concerns of all the parties,
whom we encourage to initiate measures conducive to
reconciliation and enhance mutual trust.

China is ready to join hands with the international
community to further support the political process in
Syria and to contribute to improving the humanitarian
situation in Syria and restoring peace and stability in
the country and the region.

