Mr. Madeira: I would like to begin by
congratulating the Togolese Republic for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. Your
presence here, Mr. President, is a testimony to your
personal commitment and that of your country to the
advancement of peace, security and stability in Africa
and in the world, in general. Allow me to convey the
apologies of the Chairperson of the Commission,
Mr. Jean Ping, who could not be with us here today
owing to prior unavoidable commitments. He wishes
the Security Council successful deliberations.

The discussions we are holding today are of
particular relevance to the efforts being made by the
African Union (AU) to address the multifaceted
challenges facing the continent in terms of peace and
security. The Common African Defence and Security
Policy, adopted by our Union in 2004, has clearly
defined what Africa's security and stability rests upon.
The Policy emphasizes not only the traditional threats,
such as intra-State conflicts, but also non-traditional
threats emerging from a changing international
environment, including transnational organized crime
ranging from arms, drugs and human trafficking to
contraband smuggling, piracy and money laundering.

Today, the impact of transnational organized
crime is more evident than ever before. More
alarmingly, crime is converging with other transnational
threats, such as extremism and terrorism. Failure to
address those threats comprehensively, effectively and
collectively puts at risk the very foundations of the
viable democratic States in Africa that our people have
been striving for since independence.

The African continent is particularly vulnerable to
transnational organized crime. Porous borders,
weakened State institutions as a result of prolonged civil
strife, poverty, environmental degradation and
challenges to securing natural resources are but a few of
those vulnerabilities. A response to those threats should
therefore be comprehensive and multidimensional.

More importantly, strong commitment on the part
of all stakeholders is an imperative. In a globalized
world, criminal networks span continents, and Africa is
being affected by crime spillover from other regions.
We can no longer afford to think in terms of national
interests alone. We need to carefully envisage how we
can best respond to internal and transnational threats.

Over the past few years, the West Africa region,
the Sahel region and the continent as a whole have
undertaken commendable efforts towards putting in
place joint decision-making and operational
mechanisms to combat crime, terrorism and piracy.
Their efforts deserve the full support of the
international community.

As recently as 29 January, at the initiative of the
African Union, ministers and other senior officials of
the countries of the Sahel region met in Addis Ababa to
discuss common security challenges, on the basis of
the report and recommendations of the joint AU-United
Nations mission on the impact of the Libyan crisis on
the Sahel region that visited the region in December
2011. I am pleased to inform the Council that in a few
weeks' time an expert-level meeting will be convened
by the African Union, in collaboration with United
Nations, to agree on the required follow-up measures.
That will be followed by a meeting of the African
Union Peace and Security Council on the situation in
the Sahel region.

As we redouble our efforts to confront
transnational crime, we need to enhance the
effectiveness of our action through institution-building
and reform. Of equal importance, we must strengthen
the rule of law and accountability, in order to curb
crime in a sustainable manner. We also need to realize
that confronting crime is not only about patrolling
borders and waters. We must also commit ourselves to
creating alternative economic opportunities for the
most vulnerable sections of our populations by
addressing the underlying socio-economic conditions
that give rise to crime, poverty, environmental
degradation and social exclusion.
Over the past few years, various studies and
research have been conducted and many more reports
written on the growing threat of transnational
organized crime in West Africa, the Sahel region and
Africa as a whole. Now we need to start talking about
what we can do, in the spirit of shared responsibilities,
to confront this menace. In Africa, efforts should focus
on the implementation of and effective follow-up to the
numerous instruments that have already been adopted.

I would therefore like to thank you, Mr. President,
once again for your leadership and for providing us
with this forum to discuss this critical issue.

