Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to begin by congratulating you on
your capable leadership of the Security Council's work
this month, Mr. President. I would also like to express
our deep appreciation to your predecessor, our sister
State Kuwait, for its successful presidency last month.

I am honoured to deliver this statement as chair of
the Group of Arab States this month. On behalf of the
members of the Arab Group, I would also like to express
my appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, for her valuable briefing.

The Arab Summit held in Tunis in March and the
emergency Arab Summit held in Mecca last month both
underscored the primacy of the Palestinian cause. It is
therefore a priority for Arab countries. The Summits
also reaffirmed the Arab identity of Jerusalem as the
capital of Palestine and further highlighted that the
Arab countries are committed to peace as a strategic
choice. We have underpinned the importance of a
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
which is a strategic Arab choice, embodied by the Arab
Peace Initiative, which was adopted by all Arab States
in Beirut in 2002 and was endorsed by the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.

The Initiative continues to represent the most
comprehensive plan to address all the elements of a
final settlement, at the forefront of which is the issue
of refugees. It accords Israel acceptance, peace and
security. We are committed to the Initiative and all its
provisions, including the need to withdraw from Arab
occupied territories, especially the occupied Syrian
Golan. We call on the international community to join
us in working towards the just settlement of that cause.

The Israeli hostile practices persist. We strongly
condemn Israeli authorities' demolition of dozens of
homes in Sur Baher, in East Jerusalem, an area that is
home to hundreds of Palestinian citizens. The Saudi
Council of Ministers has condemned such acts, and
we call on the international community, particularly
the Council, to uphold its responsibilities to protect
the Palestinian people and put an end to the Israeli
occupation and its systematic violations of Christian and
Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem, at the forefront of which
is the blessed holy sanctuary of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.

We condemn the Israeli attempts to change the
historical status of Jerusalem, and we caution against
the illegal settlement activities on Palestinian territory.
We also call for the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) and underscore the significance of the historic
Hashemite custodianship over the Christian and Islamic
holy sites in East Jerusalem, particularly Al-Aqsa, and
the leading role of Jordan in protecting those sites, as
well as the Arab identity of Christian and Muslim sites
in Jerusalem.

We stress the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Libya and reiterate our rejection of all military solutions
and all external interference. We call for an expeditious,
comprehensive political settlement through inclusive
dialogue, based on the road map, under the auspices of
the United Nations, with a View to restoring security
and stability in Libya and ending the suffering of the
Libyan people. We reiterate our support for all efforts
to eliminate terrorist groups and uproot the threat faced
by Libya, its neighbours and the region at large.

We stress the need to achieve a political solution to
end the Syrian crisis in a way that fulfils the aspirations
of the Syrian people, promotes the integrity and
sovereignty of Syria and ends all external interference
and active terrorist organizations in Syria, based on the
Geneva outcomes, the statements of the International
Syria Support Group and relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2254 (2015).

There is no way to stop the bloodshed except through
a peaceful settlement that could achieve a real transition
to a new political reality, agreed by all components of
the Syrian people, through the Geneva road map, which
is the only path towards a peaceful solution. We are
committed, together with the international community,
to alleviating the humanitarian situation in Syria. We
reiterate our support for the Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Geir Pedersen, and his efforts to find a solution
to the Syrian crisis and to establish a constitutional
committee as soon as possible.

The ongoing negative conduct of Iran in the region
will lead only to further threats to international peace
and security. Iran's clear support for the Houthi coup
militias and its supply of arms threaten regional
security, commercial shipping lines and civilians in the
region. The threat to close the Strait of Hormuz and
the continued attacks on and detention of commercial
ships require the Council to fulfil its obligations to
stand firmly against such practices in order to maintain
international peace and security.

We are seeking to restore peace and security in the
region, and the only real means to do so is for all nations
to respect the principles of good-neighbourliness and
refrain from the use of force or the threat of the use
of force and non-interference in the internal affairs of
other States. Iran's activities in the region contravene
those principles, undermine the requirements to build
trust and threaten stability and security. We reaffirm our
readiness to establish friendly and cooperative relations
with Iran, based on the principles ofnon-interference in
internal affairs and respect for sovereignty.

The continued activity of the Houthi coup militias,
which are supported by Iran, and their continued control
over critical State institutions in the capital of Sana'a,
for the fifth consecutive year have created a hotspot for
terrorist organizations in the region, enabled the spread
of epidemics and led to the deterioration of humanitarian
crises. The militias are using humanitarian assistance
as a weapon to maintain their control and achieve their
political aspirations. The conduct of those militias and
the attacks on the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reveal the
nature of their ideology and destructive principles. We
call on the Council to enhance the implementation of
resolutions 2140 (2014), 2216 (2015) and 2451 (2018).

We also emphasize that the solution for the Yemeni
crisis is only through political dialogue, in line with the
Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and the outcomes
of Yemen's National Dialogue Conference.

