Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States is pleased that the Security Council has
once again unanimously taken action against what is
clearly a grave threat to international peace and
security. The Iranian leadership's continued defiance of
the Council in failing to comply with resolutions 1696
(2006) and 1737 (2006) requires that we uphold our
responsibilities defined in the Charter of this esteemed
body and take necessary action. While we hope that
Iran responds to this resolution by complying with its
international legal obligations, the United States is
fully prepared to support additional measures in 60
days should Iran choose another course.

We are here today because of the decisions of
Iran's leadership. Their actions include more than 20
years of deception of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). A nuclear programme has been hidden
from the international community, in violation of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), a programme that slowly and incompletely is
emerging from the shadows, only because of the efforts
of international inspectors and outside groups.

Let me quote from paragraph 29 of the IAEA
Director General's most recent report summing up the
basic problem:

"given the existence in Iran of activities
undeclared to the Agency for 20 years, it is
necessary for Iran to enable the Agency, through
maximum cooperation and transparency, to fully
reconstruct the history of Iran's nuclear
programme. Without such cooperation and
transparency, the Agency will not be able to
provide assurances about the absence of
undeclared nuclear material and activities in Iran
or about the exclusively peaceful nature of that
programme." (S/2007/ 100, annex, enclosure)

The unanimous adoption today of resolution 1747
(2007) sends a clear and unambiguous message to Iran:
the regime's continued pursuit of a nuclear-weapons
capability, in violation of its treaty obligations as well
as its obligations as a State Member of the United
Nations, will only further isolate Iran and make it less,
not more, secure.

In the light of that history, it is not only
appropriate, but the responsibility of the Security
Council, to act. And we have done so in a careful and
deliberate manner. In July of last year, we adopted
resolution 1696 (2006), which demanded that Iran
verifiably suspend all its uranium enrichment-related
and reprocessing activities and cooperate fully with the
steps required by the International Atomic Energy
Agency. That resolution was ignored by Iran.
Resolution 1737 (2006), adopted unanimously last
December, took appropriate action against the regime
in the light of the failure by Iran's leadership to comply
with the decisions of the Council. It, too, was ignored
by Iran. Instead, Iran has expanded its enrichment
activities and continued construction of the heavy-
water research reactor at Arak, while scaling back even
further its cooperation with the IAEA.

Iran called the Council's decisions invalid and an
extralegal act, and vowed that the new resolution
would not be an obstacle in the way of Iran's nuclear
progress. Sadly, Iran continues to defy the will of the
international community, the decisions of this Council
and its obligations under international law. For that
reason it is entirely appropriate and necessary that we
have adopted stronger measures to persuade the regime
to make its country more secure by abandoning its
pursuit of nuclear weapons. Should Iran choose a
different path, this resolution makes clear that we are
prepared and willing to adopt additional measures.
Indeed, in the face of Iran's continued defiance, the
United States expects that the Council will continue to
incrementally increase pressure on the Iranian
Government.

Let me be clear, though, to the Iranian people:
these measures that we are adopting today are in no
way meant to punish the civilian population of Iran.
Resolution 1747 (2007) is properly tailored to target
Iranian institutions and officials that support Iran's
nuclear and missile programmes. It forbids Iran to
provide any arms to anyone, anywhere, and calls on all
nations not to export to Iran any major arms. The world
has benefited greatly from the rich, vibrant culture that

the people of Iran have to offer. My own country is
proud to be home to hundreds of thousands citizens
and residents of Iranian origin, and we are fortunate to
benefit from their many contributions to our society.

We hope for a different dynamic with Iran. As
President Bush has stated,

"Iran now has an opportunity to make its choice.
I would hope they would make the choice that
most of the free world wants them to make,
which is there is no need to have a weapons
programme; there is no need to isolate your
people. It is not in your interest to do so. And
should they agree to verifiably suspend their
enrichment, the United States will be at the table
with our partners."

The decisions of the Iranian leadership, however,
required the Council to act. It is our solemn
responsibility to take measures which will not only halt
the development of Iran's nuclear weapons programme,
but encourage the leadership of Iran to choose a
different path, which will benefit the entire Iranian
nation - including its Government-professed
aspiration for nuclear energy.

With respect to the measures adopted today, we
would also like to note our understanding that the new
resolution does not introduce any changes to the
provisions contained in paragraph 15 of resolution
1737 (2006). The asset freeze, therefore, does not
prevent a person or entity designated in the annexes to
resolution 1737 (2006) and resolution 1747 (2007)
from making payments due under a contract entered
into before that person or entity was listed in those
cases covered by paragraph 15.

The Iranian leadership has claimed that this
Council seeks to deprive Iran of its right to peaceful
nuclear energy - and we may hear that again today.
That is simply not true. The six Governments,
including my own, that have been trying in vain to get
to negotiations with the Iranians over the past year
recognize Iran's right to peaceful, civil nuclear energy
in conformity with all articles and obligations of the
NPT. In fact, the generous proposal put on the table by
the six parties last June - an offer that remains on the
table today - includes assistance in the construction
of civilian light-water nuclear power plants. These
plants would generate electricity for the people of Iran
but be of no use to Iran's nuclear weapons programme.
Many other Governments around the world, including

some represented on this Council, enjoy national
civilian nuclear energy programmes without any
difficulties, demonstrating that there is no
incompatibility between a country's right to a peaceful
nuclear energy programme and its non-proliferation
obligations.

Iran's rejection of this offer sends a deeply
troubling signal to the entire international community.
Nonetheless, my Government also associates itself
with the statement read by the United Kingdom
reaffirming our offer and willingness to resolve this
issue through negotiations.

The current path chosen by Iran's leadership
poses a direct challenge to the very principles on which
the United Nations was founded. Iran's leadership
openly proclaims that the Council is "illegal" and that
its resolutions are "torn pieces of paper". Iran's
Supreme Leader has pledged that Iran would undertake
"illegal acts" if the Council proceeded with the
adoption of this resolution. Article 2 of the Charter
makes clear that all Members shall refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. Calls by Iran's leaders to
have Israel, a State Member of the United Nations,
"wiped off the map" stand in stark contrast to
everything for which this body stands. That contrast is
amplified by Iran's continued well-known role as one
of the world's leading State sponsors of terrorism.

The United Nations was born from the ashes and
horrific events of the Second World War and the
Holocaust. Sadly, we have seen attempts by Iran's
President to question the undeniable tragedies that
unfolded during that period. That is why it was so
significant that the General Assembly established a
formal day of remembrance of the Holocaust, in
addition to its adoption by consensus of a resolution
rejecting denials of the Holocaust. To forget the past,
or, even worse, to attempt to rewrite it is to invite it to
be repeated, and we cannot allow that to happen.

In a few moments, we will hear from the Iranian
delegation. In the past, we have heard Iranian
representatives profess Iran's peaceful intentions,
claim- incorrectly - violations of Iran's rights,
argue about so-called double standards, and raise other
false claims designed to distract the international
community and world opinion from the issue at
hand- that is, Iran's non-compliance with its

obligations. We hope that the Iranian delegation's
presence here reflects its Government's understanding
of the weight that should be attached to the decisions
of the Council and the binding obligations that Iran has
a Member of the Organization under Article 25 of the
Charter to accept and carry out the decisions of the
Security Council. We look forward to their response
and hope that their message is one that the Council and
the entire international community can embrace.
Anything less would signal continued disregard and
disdain for the body to which they are here to speak.

In closing, let me reiterate that the United States
remains firmly committed to finding a peaceful and
diplomatic solution to resolve what we all feel is a
grave threat to international peace and security. While
we regret the need for this resolution, our vote here
today shows that the Council can and will act
accordingly when countries violate their international
obligations. We look forward to Iran's full compliance
with this resolution, which would signal its willingness
to engage in constructive negotiations over the future
of its nuclear programme. Such negotiations, if
successfully completed, will have profound and
tangible benefits for Iran, and, most importantly, for
the Iranian people.

