Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Secretary-General for his strong
and particularly enlightening briefing, as well as for his
personal commitment, in addition to that of the staff of
the Secretariat and Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to spare no
effort in implementing resolution 2401 (2018). Allow
me, on behalf of France, to especially commend the
United Nations teams and all the humanitarian actors
working under extremely difficult conditions in Syria.

Two weeks ago, we unanimously adopted a text
calling for an immediate cessation of hostilities of at
least 30 days, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian
access and medical evacuations in Syria. I would remind
those present that those demands apply to the whole of
Syria and all parties. We negotiated the text together
for several weeks and, I repeat, unanimously adopted
it. Each member of the Council around this table has
therefore endorsed the content by deciding to assume
responsibility. That responsibility fell particularly on
Russia, as a permanent member that voted for resolution
2401 (2018), sponsor of the Astana talks and a Power
engaged in the Syrian situation, as it claims to be.

We had agreed to a clause to meet 15 days later
to review its implementation. The Secretary-General
has just provided us with a very clear picture of that.
Since 24 February, civilian casualties have continued
to climb into the hundreds every week. The regime is
pursuing, in defiance of its people and the Council, an
air and land offensive that it has never intended to halt,
with the support of Russia and Iran. However, let us
not be deceived that civilians are not the "collateral
victims" of those military operations. Rather, they are
themselves being targeted by the regime, deliberately
and methodically to starve and rape, destroy their
health centres, kill and sow terror and death. The hell
on Earth experienced by eastern Ghouta is not just the
effect of the regime's policy; it is the very purpose of
the regime's murderous madness, with its daily tally of
war crimes and crimes against humanity, for which the
regime will have to answer.

Let us call a spade a spade: Who can stop the Syrian
regime? Everyone knows that, apart from a military
operation, it is Russia that is in the best position to
do so today. It is therefore legitimate that today, more
than ever before, everyone looks expectantly towards
Russia, which has so far been unwilling, or unable, to
exert sufficient pressure on the regime.

Two weeks after the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), we are here in the Chamber to face the facts. First,
what has happened since the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018)? In the light of the inexorable worsening of the
humanitarian situation in eastern Ghouta, the Security
Council has rallied around a cessation of hostilities and
made every effort to seek consensus, and finally did
reach consensus on 24 February. We knew then, and we
said so, that this result was only a precondition, and that
the longest and most difficult part of the path towards a
humanitarian truce was still before us. However, every
day since 24 February the fighting has continued. In
the days that followed, despite Russia's unilateral
announcement of a daily five-hour truce - well below
what resolution 2401 (2018) requires - the intensity of
the fighting has increased. Since resolution 2401 (2018)
was adopted, there has not been a single day when
eastern Ghouta, an enclave that has been starved and
besieged for months, has not been bombed by the regime
and its supporters. The fight against terrorism - and
this cannot be repeated enough i cannot be used as
a pretext for such a bloodbath of civilians or for such
contempt for international humanitarian law.

Eastern Ghouta is now a textbook case of war
crimes, and even of crimes against humanity. It cannot
be ignored: the Syrian regime, with the support ofRussia
and Iran, is engaged in a war oftotal submission against
its people. Violations of the ceasefire by the Damascus
regime, with the support of Russia and Iran, have been
massive and ongoing, and I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for clearly exposing those violations.
Let me briefly review some of these violations.

Between 24 and 27 February, 72 attacks by the
Syrian regime and its Russian and Iranian allies, from
more than 14 locations, were reported. Between 24 and
28 February, Russian military aircraft carried out no
fewer than 20 bombing missions in Damascus and
eastern Ghouta. Between 27 February and 2 March,
field observers documented at least 25 air strikes by the
regime and Russia during the five-hour humanitarian
breaks declared by Moscow. Since 18 February, more
than 29 hospital have been hit, and few health facilities
are still in operation. On 8 March, a health care facility
in Mesraba was completely destroyed by bombardments.
According to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights,
as of 11 March, 607 people, including 99 children and 79
women, had been killed since the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018). I would repeat: 607 people have been killed.
In addition to the dead, there are many injured persons,
arbitrary detentions, enforced disappearances, rapes
and many other intolerable violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. Finally, further
credible allegations of the use of chemical weapons
have been made since the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018). As the highest French authorities have pointed
out, France will brook no compromise when it comes to
the use of those abject weapons.
The humanitarian needs are immense, yet the
regime deliberately continues to block the entry of aid,
despite the presence of Russian soldiers at the crossing
points, as what happened to the convoy on 5 March
shows. Indeed, the population continues to be deprived
of relief and of any possibility of medical evacuation,
even if more than 1,000 people need it.

Still, we cannot give up. On behalf of France, I
would like to make a new and urgent appeal to those
who can make a difference on the ground, starting with
Russia. France is not posing; it is taking action. My
country has been and remains one of the countries most
committed to the implementation of resolution 2401
(2018). Right after the resolution's adoption, France
stepped up its contacts and efforts at the highest level so
as to contribute to the resolution's swift implementation,
so that the Astana guarantors would assume their
responsibilities and so that the commitments made
collectively would be respected. President Macron has
met with Presidents Putin, Erdogan and Rouhani, as
well as with the Secretary-General on several occasions.
Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian visited Moscow
and then Tehran. To Russia, we proposed concrete
measures for implementing resolution 2401 (2018).

Although our efforts aimed at reaching out have been
ignored, we stand by our proposals. Let us not deceive
ourselves: without an immediate implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018), the worst is yet to come. After the
regime has conquered the rural zones of eastern Ghouta,
the worst would be a conquest - street by street, house
by house - in a torrent of fire, for the urban zones
of the region, which are by definition the most densely
populated areas. It is of the highest urgency, therefore,
for us to come together to ensure that the resolution is
fully implemented before the street battles promised by
the regime's military planners begin. I would like to
highlight three essential elements in that regard.

The first is implementing a monitoring system
to ensure maximum pressure on the parties. The
main reason resolution 2401 (2018) has not been not
implemented is that the Syrian regime has been engaged
in its murderous folly and the regime's supporters
have been unable or unwilling to stop it and prevent a
worsening of the humanitarian situation. But the failure
to implement resolution 2401 (2018) is also the result of
our not being able to put in place a sufficiently targeted
follow-up mechanism to the resolution in the Council.
This must be our priority, and I am convinced that it is
our only chance to compel the Syrian regime to comply
with its international obligations. France therefore calls
for appropriate decisions to be taken in the coming days.

It is essential and urgent that humanitarian convoys
reach eastern Ghouta in adequate security conditions
and carry out their delivery of aid, and that medical
evacuations be allowed. For that to happen, the truce must
be sustainable and flexible in order to take into account
delays in the delivery, discharge and distribution of
aid. Medical authorizations must not only be delivered
in an expedited manner; they must also come with
all the security guarantees needed by patients, their
families and the humanitarian actors who assist them.
Indeed, the protection due them under international
humanitarian law must be unconditionally guaranteed.

The second element I would like to highlight is the
departure of terrorist fighters from Ghouta as proposed
by armed groups. In their letter to the Security
Council, the three armed groups in eastern Ghouta,
upon the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018), indicated
their commitment to upholding the resolution, made
concrete proposals for a comprehensive cessation
of hostilities and committed themselves to taking
combatant members of their groups out of Ghouta. The
United Nations offered its assistance in those exchanges
and carried out important work along those lines, to
which the Secretary General just referred. I call on
Russia today to conclude and implement the relevant
agreements without delay. This is one of the keys to
implementing the resolution.

The third element is political negotiation. A lasting
cessation of hostilities in Syria requires a political
process consistent with the terms of resolution 2254
(2015), our shared road map for ending the conflict.
Staffan de Mistura has our full support in bringing
this mission to a successful conclusion and swiftly
convening negotiations in Geneva, which is the only
legitimate forum for a credible solution. In order to
achieve results, United Nations mediation requires
that necessary pressure be exerted on the parties. We
therefore call once again on Russia, as well as Iran, to
fulfil their responsibilities, as we are fulfilling our own.

Collectively we have the capacity, if we so
wish, to stop the endless descent into the abyss that
characterizes the Syrian tragedy, and finally create a
real political dynamic. On behalf of France, I therefore
call once again for all members of the Council to
finally rally their words and action in the service of
this shared objective, which matches to our interests
and responsibilities. It is never too late to save lives,
and it is our responsibility - if we accept it - to end
the tragedy of Syria, on which our generation, and the
credibility of the Security Council, will be judged.

