My delegation welcomes the delisting of the Tatmadaw - the Myanmar Armed Forces - from the violation of recruitment and use of children, which is mentioned in this year's annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525). We thank the Secretary-General for giving due recognition of Myanmar's commitment to and efforts aimed at ending violations against children. We shall continue to work relentlessly to fulfil our strong commitment to ending all violations against children and building a safe and bright future for them. Over the past eight years, Myanmar has taken many steps to prevent and end recruitment and use of children. One significant action was the recent ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, following, in July 2019, the enactment of a new Child Rights Law. It demonstrates our commitment to aligning our national policies and regulations with the Convention. The new Child Rights Law prohibits all forms of violence against children as well as the recruitment of persons under the age of 18. The Law provides stronger legal protection for children affected by armed conflict and criminalizes the six grave violations against children. In January 2019, the Government established an interministerial committee for the prevention of the six grave violations during armed conflict. Since 2012, over 1,000 child soldiers have been released and reintegrated into their communities. The Government provides each former child soldier with one- time financial assistance as well as educational and livelihood support to help them reintegrate into society. In collaboration with the International Labour Organization (ILO) to end forced labour, the Government has established a complaint mechanism to prevent underage recruitment for military service. Recently, in June this year, Myanmar ratified the ILO Minimum Age Convention, 1973. In line with the Joint Action Plan, the Tatmadaw issued three command orders prohibiting recruitment and use of minors in 2019. It also issued a command order on rules of engagement in 2017. With regard to the grave violations, the Government has adopted a national action plan on the prevention of killing, maiming, and sexual violence against children in armed conflict. As part of the action plan, the Government will soon be launching nationwide awareness-raising activities. The country task force on monitoring and reporting will be able to play an important role to provide technical assistance in the implementation of the national action plan. Despite tremendous challenges posed by increased armed clashes in Rakhine state, the Government has scaled up its efforts to grant humanitarian access to displaced people, especially women and children. The World Food Programme and the International Committee of the Red Cross have been granted permission to provide food and emergency items to affected people in Rakhine state and southern parts of Chin state. The Government's response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic adheres to the principle of leaving no one behind. Myanmar welcomes the policy brief entitled The Impact of COVID-19 on children. My delegation also supported the joint statement in response to the Secretary-General's call on countries to prioritize children's safety, education amid the COVID-19 pandemic. In response to the devastating effects of the pandemic on vulnerable people, especially children, Myanmar has reinforced domestic preventive mechanisms and enhanced cooperation with international partners, including the United Nations. On 9 May, in response to the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire, the Tatmadaw announced a three-month nationwide unilateral ceasefire to help fight the COVID-19 pandemic. The unilateral ceasefire will be applied to all areas except where terrorist groups have taken positions. The Government is also supporting and encouraging engagement between the country task force for monitoring and reporting and the armed ethnic groups signatories to the Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement (NCA) to prevent recruitment and use of children. Efforts are being made to find a lasting solution to the ongoing armed conflict through political means. During the third session of the Union Peace Conference - the 21st Century Panglong Conference - an article prohibiting the six grave violations was adopted as part of the NCA. I thank Special Representative Gamba and her Office, UNICEF and the United Nations country team for their commendable efforts and crucial contributions in the successful implementation of the joint action plan. We also appreciate the work of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, with which we will continue to cooperate. We are committed to maintaining and further strengthening the existing mutual understanding, trust and cooperation between Myanmar and the United Nations in our common efforts aimed at ending in the near future all grave violations against children.
