Mr. Dookeran (Trinidad and Tobago): May I join
the many others who have commended New Zealand
for its ground-breaking and high-level initiative to
address peace and security challenges facing small
island developing States. We view this debate as a
way to further strengthen multilateralism, which is the
most crucial vehicle to resolve the peace and security
challenges we face. This is an important first step in
deepening effective multilateralism, as the absence of
it is a threat in itself to peace and security. Trinidad
and Tobago will support all initiatives to advance the
multilateral engagement that you, Sir, have initiated at
the highest level here today at the United Nations.

I also join with my colleagues in commending the
Prime Minister of Jamaica for her very comprehensive
statement today, as well as my colleagues from the
Bahamas, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines for their contributions and
for bringing to the fore at this forum some of the critical
risks we face in the Caribbean region in relation to the
issue of peace and security.

Transnational organized crime and its global
networks pose daunting challenges to the security of
all States, but especially to small island developing
States (SIDS). Small States and large States alike must
accept the responsibility and meet their obligations to
cooperate in the multilateral arena in addressing those
threats. Indeed, transnational organized crime has been
identified in the Caribbean Community Crime and
Security Strategy as an "immediate, significant threat".
Transnational organized crime attacks the functioning
of our State institutions, adds new vulnerabilities to
our governance mechanisms and fosters instability in
the system. In doing so, it undermines the fundamental
premises of our democracies, the rule of law, human
rights and development itself.

Trinidad and Tobago cannot be a bystander to

such destabilizing developments. We have and will
continue to join multilateral efforts aimed at repelling
the peace and security challenges that not only affect it,
but affect all Member States. That is why Trinidad and
Tobago is pleased to have co-sponsored resolution 2220
(2015), on concrete measures to counter and eliminate
the illicit transfer and misuse of small arms and light
weapons. In the same context, we and our Caribbean
sister countries outlined our steadfast commitment to
the full implementation of a robust and effective Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT), which is a matter of record.

The ATT offers the promise to address a number of
security problems faced by the international community.
In order to fully achieve its purpose and objectives,
the ATT must become universal and be implemented
by all States, whether manufacturers, exporters or
importers of conventional arms. The failure of some
States to embrace the ATT will serve to continue to
facilitate the illegal transfer of arms to SIDS. Available
statistics confirm the fact that such illicit trade has a
direct linkage to the increased incidence of violence
and criminality in the Caribbean region.

As a firm believer in the role of the United Nations
in leading the way in resolving major international
problems such as terrorism, Trinidad and Tobago
co-sponsored resolution 2178 (2014), on foreign
terrorist fighters. In keeping with the provisions of
that resolution, Trinidad and Tobago will continue to
collaborate with other Member States in several areas,
such as terrorism financing and exchanging information
on the transit of foreign terrorist fighters.

Lasting peace can be achieved only if women are
more involved in decision-making processes related to
peacebuilding and post-conflict development, which
are necessary for the sustainable development of our
societies. The empowerment of women is an integral
aspect of national development, as well as an essential
pillar in the maintenance of peace and security. It is
with that conviction that Prime Minister Kamla Persad-
Bissessar of Trinidad and Tobago introduced at the
General Assembly the first-ever resolution on women,
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control. We
therefore continue to be a firm believer in devising
solutions to peace and security and using the United
Nations apparatus where appropriate, but we know it
is necessary to go beyond that. That is why, as a newly
elected member of the Peacebuilding Commission, we
are committed to working with others to support peace
efforts in countries emerging from conflict and to add
our voice wherever it is appropriate in that respect.

All States have a role to play in designing new
additions to the global peace and security architecture.
Peace and security is indeed the business of all nations,
large and small alike. With that in mind, Trinidad and
Tobago offered itself as a location for the secretariat of
the Arms Trade Treaty. We do so with the confidence
that we possess the required infrastructure and other
prerequisites to host that important institution. It is
our hope that State parties to the ATT will reaffirm
the principle of equitable distribution in the location
of major global bodies when taking a decision on the
siting of that organization.

This open debate on global peace and security
has far-reaching possibilities in building consensus
on acute social risks facing the issue of security, and
with particular reference to the small island developing
States, in ushering in a new diplomatic momentum on
an effective multilateral approach and in designing
concrete instruments, whether in the field of climate
change or elsewhere, so as to ensure that we have a
safe world and a more secure planet. For all this we
are indeed indebted to you, Mr. Murray McCully, as
President of the Security Council and to New Zealand,
for the leadership you have displayed so far.

