Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and I
welcome your choice of Somalia as the subject of the
thematic debate during your presidency. Through you, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
participation in the meeting and to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia, and to wish him, on behalf of the Government
of the State of Qatar, success in achieving his
ambitious programme to serve his country.

Over the past few years, and since the national
reconciliation conference in Djibouti, Somalia has
witnessed a range of positive developments at the
domestic, regional and international levels. However,
the looming threats in that country call for the
continued support of the international community.

We condemn all forms of violence and all acts
that threaten stability and the security of Somali
citizens, the internationally recognized Government
and the international forces, and we regret any
casualties that they have suffered. We also take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to the African
Union and the countries contributing troops to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Since
security remains the most critical challenge faced by
the Transitional Federal Institutions, we must increase
the package of support provided to AMISOM.

The problem of piracy off the Somali coast has
reached an unprecedented level. Military action to
deter pirates and protect merchant ships in the Indian
Ocean is indispensable. However, it is also necessary
to put an end to the impunity enjoyed by the pirates.

We have stressed repeatedly that we should not
deal with Somalia only as a security problem, since
any approach aimed at addressing the lack of security
and stability will not be successful unless it addresses
its various dimensions and is implemented within the
framework of cooperation and close coordination
among the United Nations, the African Union, the
League of Arab States and other subregional
organizations on the basis of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter.

For many years, Somalia was considered to be a
forgotten country. It will be very important for efforts
to help the country to be coordinated through
cooperation among the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the specialized agencies in accordance
with their mandates. The international community has
a responsibility to do its utmost to end this crisis,
which is one of the most difficult in the world.

The full version of my statement has been
circulated to members of the Council.

