Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I deliver this statement on
behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.

The multilateral system is under pressure, as are
the norms that underpin it. A rules-based international
order is in the interests of all Member States. It brings
predictability and creates the conditions for tackling
global problems. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and
the Paris Agreement are the results of multilateral
cooperation. All such agreements are crucial to
addressing global challenges. Climate change, conflict,
instability and human rights violations impede global
sustainable development.

We must step up our collective efforts to prevent
and curb conflicts and wars and build basic social
and economic infrastructure for the whole of society,
especially for those in the most vulnerable situations.
We must understand and make use of the linkages
among human rights, sustainable development and
peace and security. It is crucial that we apply a gender
perspective in all policy areas and that we engage both
women and men.

The consequences of instability affect us all, and
global security threats require global responses. The
Security Council must be able to act, and so must we as
Member States. Terrorism and Violent extremism in all
their forms and manifestations represent a truly global
threat. That threat requires a global response. The
Nordic countries believe that any measures aimed at
countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism
must be in compliance with the rule of law and human
rights.

Furthermore, the Nordic countries encourage the
Council to make full use of its mandate to engage in,
support and promote mediation efforts, as it did by
providing united and clear support for the Colombia
peace process. However, mediation is not a quick fix
and cannot take a one-size-fits-all approach. Social
and economic development remains crucial if we are to
address the root causes of conflict.

We recognize that regional organizations are often
best placed to take the lead in mediation efforts. We
welcome and support the strengthened relationship
between the African Union (AU) and the United Nations
and between the AU Peace and Security Council and
the Security Council. The World Trade Organization
(WTO) is an essential multilateral tool that strengthens
our ability to trade and interact with the world. We need
to defend and reform the WTO. Free trade agreements
have contributed to economic growth, the reduction of
poverty and falling child mortality rates. The Nordic
countries are staunch supporters of rules-based and
predictable trade arrangements.

We, the United Nations, must also do our
part 4 and we must do it better. The world needs a
stronger, coherent, effective and responsive United
Nations, which is why all Member States should
continue to back the Secretary-General's reform
agenda. We, the Nordic countries, will be consistent
partners for a common future.

