Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): It is my honour,
on behalf of the Haitian delegation, to congratulate the
Permanent Mission of Sweden to the United Nations on
having undertaken the initiative to convene this very
timely open debate on strengthening the protection of
children affected by armed conflict.

More than 20 years ago, Graca Machel denounced
in her famous report (see A/51/306) the "moral
vacuum", a space devoid of the most basic human
values in which children are slaughtered, raped and
maimed, exploited as soldiers, starved and exposed
to extreme brutality as a result of the deliberate and
conscious decisions of adults. Here in this Chamber
last year, the Secretary-General of the United Nations
strongly denounced the alarming level of unacceptable
suffering endured throughout the world by children in
conflict (see S/PV.8082). Children become both the
victims and the perpetrators of violence. This is one
of the most alarming trends in the dynamics of these
armed conflicts, a tragic consequence of which is to
strips away layers of protection afforded by families,
society and law, as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/465) rightly notes.

Of course, we welcome the modicum of progress
that has been made. The case of the sisterly Republic
of Colombia is a striking example. The efforts of
Governments, United Nations agencies and civil society
institutions cannot be ignored in circumstances that are
often extremely difficult. Nevertheless, it is clear that,
for the most part, the spiral of horror persisted in 2017
and continues to do so, often with full impunity. At a
fundamental level, nothing has really changed since.

Be it in Syria or Yemen, South Sudan or the
Central African Republic, Afghanistan or Myanmar,
images of destroyed villages, civilian populations
caught in the crossfire, bombed schools and hospitals
and wounded or dead children lying under the rubble.
Such images remind us daily of the bitter truth that
war - whether internal, civil, ethnic, interreligious,
local or regional - violates all children's rights.

The impact of armed conflict on children must be
everyone's concern and everyone's responsibility. We
must therefore make the protection of children affected
by armed conflict a genuine priority. That demands that
all actors of the international community redouble their
efforts to translate into real change for those children
the good intentions and commitments made in the
myriad treaties and resolutions adopted over the past
few decades.

Everyone agrees that the issue is a pressing one.
Whether victims of war, children of economic migrants,
displaced persons or refugees fleeing conflict zones,
the tragic plight of children affected by conflict
challenges our universal conscience. It is now time for
action. It is up to us to ensure that child protection is
not merely a slogan, but that it becomes the necessary
and indispensable axis of strategies for establishing,
consolidating and sustaining the peace championed by
the United Nations.

May today's public debate revive the enthusiasm
of the Security Council so that it can fully play its
irreplaceable role in peacekeeping and sustaining peace,
overcome the challenges that too often paralyse its
efforts to help children affected by armed conflict, take
timely preventive action to protect them from violence
and the atrocities of war, and enforce the legal norms
ensuring their rights to life, to grow up in the midst of
their families and communities, to health, to personality
development, and to be loved and protectedn.

