Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, and commend the German
delegation for organizing this important debate in an
efficient and interesting way.

Albert Einstein once said that we cannot solve the
problems we have created with the same thinking that
created them. The challenges of climate change call for
innovative solutions and new ways of doing business at
all levels of Government and society. Today's debate
provides a timely opportunity for the international
community to think outside the box and advance
progress on a very important aspect of this issue. The
effects of climate change on peace and security are
real. They are already appearing, and will become
increasingly evident in the years to come. Drought and
land degradation may create food shortages. Ocean
acidification could destroy whole ecosystems and
deplete fish reserves. Rising seas may destroy usable
land, forcing communities and even nations to relocate.

This issue affects us all. However, Israel
recognizes that it holds particular significance for
Pacific small island developing States, which face the
prospect of severe land degradation and even total loss
of their territory. Already, we have seen rising ocean
levels cause degradation and loss of land in many
regions, including among the Pacific small island
developing States. These consequences present not
only economic risks but also serious threats to social
stability and security.

My country recognizes the need for an
immediate, coordinated and wide-ranging international
response to the challenges associated with climate
change. Israel is a committed party to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCC), the Kyoto Protocol and post-2012

 

negotiations. We supported the Pacific small island
developing States when they initiated the process for
the adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/281,
bringing this issue to the attention of the General
Assembly.

The loss of territory in small island nations as a
result of climate change raises significant legal issues.
Israel recently partnered with the Marshall Islands to
advance dialogue on these issues, hosting a conference
at Columbia University Law School last May.

Israel continues to work towards achieving our
nation's target of a 20 per cent reduction in greenhouse
gas emissions by 2020, while serving as a full and
active partner in global efforts to address climate
change. To that end, the Israeli Government has
established a ministerial committee on environmental
protection and climate change that incorporates all
relevant Government ministries, as well as
representatives from civil society and other significant
stakeholders. The committee has formulated a national
climate change plan for Israel. We are working to reach
our ambitious reduction standards through a wide
range of efforts, including by improving the efficiency
of energy systems, promoting green building and
increasing the use of renewable energy sources.

In response to the arid and semi-arid conditions
that prevail throughout much of our country, Israel has
developed significant experience in combating
desertification and has unique expertise in the fields of
afforestation, agriculture and highly efficient water
conservation. Knowledge in these fields will be critical
as we prepare for and adapt to changing climatic
conditions. Israel will continue to share its expertise
with other countries through a number of capacity-
building projects and programmes. To that end, we will
again initiate a draft resolution on agriculture
technology for development at the next session of the
General Assembly that will promote the use of
sustainable agriculture technology to enhance
conservation and mitigate environmental degradation.

Israel looks forward to continuing to engage with
others to advance progress on this issue, which to our
minds remains critical for our common future. Indeed,
all countries, big and small, have an obligation to each
other and to the next generation to respond to this issue
with unity, ingenuity and conviction. As we consider
that obligation, I am reminded of a lesson from an
ancient Jewish text that teaches us to remember that

 

God said to Adam in the Garden of Eden: "See to it
that you do not spoil and destroy my world; for if you
do, there will be no one to repair it after you".

