Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegations of Australia, Jordan and
Luxembourg for having submitted resolution 2165
(2014), which Chile co-sponsored and which was adopted
unanimously today. However, as has been said, we must
not forget that it is a resolution that would not have been
necessary if all parties to the conflict had implemented
presidential statement S/PRST/2013/15 of 2 October
2013 and resolution 2139 (2014). It is unacceptable that,
following the implementation of resolution 2139 (2014),
the humanitarian situation has deteriorated even further.
Chile supported that resolution because it is a clear call
to all parties to respect international humanitarian law
and human rights, ensure the protection of civilians and
allow humanitarian access to the affected population.
None of those are happening today.

The resolution adopted today seeks to propose
specific measures to improve humanitarian access,
reiterating elements contained in both the presidential
statement and resolution 2139 (2014). It therefore
complements those documents. We appreciate the
inclusion of the reference to the accountability before
the law of those who have committed human rights
violations and abuses. That is essential in order to put
an end to the prevailing culture of impunity in the
conflict today.

Chile is aware that the resolution establishes certain
procedures and new mechanisms, whose subsequent
use in other humanitarian situations should be
rigorously assessed case by case. Notwithstanding the
above, we believe that, given the negative experience
since resolution 2139 (2014) was adopted in February,
the bureaucratic obstacles and the bias to which the
distribution of such aid has been subject, and the extent
of the crisis, those mechanisms reflect the urgent need
for specific action on the ground.

In conclusion, we would like to recall the appeal
of the Secretary-General in his six points on Syria of
20 June with regard to the fact that the international
community must do its utmost to protect the people
and their human rights, human dignity and security.
Furthermore, we also agree that there should be an end
to the militarization of the conflict, including the flow
of weapons from abroad to all parties. We hope that
the consensus shown by the Security Council today,
reflected in the clear message that we are send to all
actors, is heard.

Any effort of the Council to address the
humanitarian situation Will be insufficient if a political
solution is not achieved. That is why we value the
fact that, despite all the difficulties and the negative
outlook, we continue to insist on that. As the resolution
points out, the only sustainable solution to the crisis is
an inclusive political process led by the Syrians, with
a view to fully implementing the Geneva communique
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). While thanking
Mr. Brahimi for his efforts in pursuit of peace, we now
give our support to the appointment of Mr. Staffan
de Mistura as Joint Special Representative of the

Secretary-General for Syria.

