Mr. Kaludjerovie (Serbia and Montenegro): Let
me, first of all, thank the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, Judge
Fausto Pocar, for his report and congratulate him on his
appointment as President of the Tribunal. I wish him
every success in his future work and hope that the
Tribunal's completion strategy will be brought to a
close during his mandate, to which we will make our
full contribution. Let me also express our gratitude to
Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte for her briefing, as well as
for her engagement and tireless efforts in bringing
those responsible for war crimes to justice. We in
Serbia and Montenegro appreciate those efforts very
much, despite the occasional strong assessments
critical of my country, as demonstrated in her briefing
today. I would also like to thank the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Judge
Mose, and that Tribunal's Prosecutor, Mr. Hassan
Bubacar J allow, for their comprehensive briefings.

The State Union of Serbia and Montenegro and
its member States would like to express their firm
commitment to the successful and full completion of
cooperation with the ICTY, in particular the
Prosecutor's Office. The Council is aware of the
readiness and the full political will of the highest
authorities of Serbia and Montenegro to do all in their
power so that the remaining indictees can be
transferred to the custody of The Hague Tribunal. As is
known, the main obstacle is that those persons are not
within the reach of our law enforcement authorities. At
the same time, we would like to emphasize that it is of
utmost importance to expand and step up international
cooperation in those cases, since it has turned out that
some indictees, such as Lukic' and Zelenovic, were
located in States far away from Serbia and
Montenegro. For our part, we shall undertake
additional measures and activities to bring our
cooperation with The Hague Tribunal to a fully
successful result.

On this occasion, I would particularly like to
point out that we are absolutely resolved to fully
cooperate with the ICTY in terms of granting access to
documents and archives. A decision has been made to
take this question off the agenda finally by enabling
full access to documents and archives. Serbia and
Montenegro has no interest in hiding anything of the
recent tragic history surrounding the bloody break-up
of the former Yugoslavia and the ensuing civil wars.
Admittedly, our peoples suffered enormously in those
wars, and it is essentially in our national interest to
bring those responsible to justice by establishing
individual responsibility and thus contribute to
reconciliation among peoples that used to live together,
side by side, despite their differences, and setting an
example for others. Consequently, officials from the
Prosecutor's Office will be given access to the
requested documents needed for the ongoing
proceedings. For our part, we shall create the necessary
technical conditions for archival access.
The Council is aware of the fact that the
Tribunal's Trial Chambers, in line with the Tribunal's
Rules of Procedure, honoured some of our requests for
them to observe protection measures concerning
certain documents containing information of vital
national interest. This is a generally recognized
practice under the international law, and we shall, in
good faith, limit it to exceptional cases in order not to
impede the establishment of individual responsibility
for war crimes.

The State Union is fully committed to the area of
cooperation with the ICTY and the Office of the
Prosecutor, which should build our national capacity to
take over the criminal prosecution of and proceedings
against persons who, under Security Council
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004), do not fall
into the category of highest-ranking officials. In order
to contribute to the Tribunal's completion strategy, the
State Union and its member States stand ready to
enable their domestic courts to take over cases from the
Tribunal and from the Office of the Prosecutor.

In that regard, several days ago, on 12 December
2005, the Belgrade District Court's special department
for war crimes completed court proceedings for the war
crimes committed in 1991 at the Ovcara farm, near the
town of Vukovar. Eight persons were sentenced to
maximum 20-year prison terms, while six persons were
handed lesser prison terms ranging from five to 15
years. Collectively, they were sentenced to 231 years in
prison. Three additional proceedings in the same court
are currently under way or should start soon. The
judicial proceedings for the Zvornik case against six
indictees opened recently, while the case against the
members of the notorious Scorpions group is set to
begin on 20 December 2005. The special department of
the Belgrade District Prosecutor's Office for the
prosecution of war criminals has undertaken
investigations and investigation procedures against
some 40 persons suspected of war crimes.

In the field of normative improvements to
legislation aimed at ensuring successful trials involving
transferred cases, I would like to inform the Council
that a new criminal code has been adopted by the
National Assembly of Serbia. It is of particular
significance that the law fully regulates objective and
command responsibility, making it possible for persons
indicted for war crimes to be properly tried in domestic
courts. Although that has been possible in the past
through the implementation of international
conventions - which, under our laws, take precedence
over domestic legislation - the introduction of the
concept of command responsibility into the domestic
legal system would serve as an additional factor in
favour of transferring cases from the ICTY to domestic
jurisdiction. We steadfastly believe that, in order to
ensure the administration of international justice and
the achievement of reconciliation among the peoples
and States in the territory of the former Yugoslavia, it
is best that our nationals be tried by domestic courts.

The Republic of Serbia has amended its
legislation to provide for witness protection by
adopting a special law. The ability of witnesses to give
testimony without fearing for their safety or for that of
their families is particularly important in trials of
persons accused of war crimes. Once their status has
been determined by a body composed of
representatives of the police, the prosecutor's office
and the court, they are protected by a special police
unit designed to provide effective protection in
complex cases such as those involving war crimes. The
2006 budget of the Republic of Serbia has allocated
resources for protection programmes and for a special
police unit.

Although we have already completed the larger
part of our cooperation with the ICTY, the authorities
of Serbia and Montenegro are fully aware that a small
but extremely important part of that cooperation must
still be completed. In that respect, we will do our
utmost to ensure that the deadlines envisaged in the
Tribunal's completion strategy are met. I would like to
stress once again that it is, above all, in our national
interest to honour our international obligations. That is
why we will do everything in our power to ensure that
our cooperation with the ICTY is fully and efficiently
completed.

