The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Liberia, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bull (Liberia)
took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 24 July 1997 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, document
S/ 1997/581.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the successful
holding of presidential and legislative elections in
Liberia on 19 July 1997. The Council notes with
satisfaction the letter from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council (8/1997/581) and the
declaration in the Joint Certification Statement by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Chairman of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) that the electoral process
was free, fair, and credible, and that the outcome of
the elections reflects the will of the Liberian voters.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties to
abide by the results of the elections and to cooperate
in the formation of a new government. The Council
also calls upon the new government to protect the
democratic system and to promote human rights and
fundamental freedoms under the rule of law.

"The Security Council congratulates the people
of Liberia on the courage and determination they
have shown in proceeding with the elections under
difficult circumstances. The Council commends all
international personnel, especially those of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) and the Military Observer Group
(ECOMOG) of ECOWAS, who contributed to the
successful holding of elections.

"The Security Council welcomes the goodwill
and cooperation demonstrated by the parties in the
electoral process, which provide a strong foundation
for the people of Liberia to achieve a durable peace,
the re-establishment of constitutional government
and a return to the rule of law. The Council
expresses the hope that the successful holding of
elections will encourage refugees to exercise their
right of return and calls upon the new Government
to fulfil its obligations under international law
regarding returning refugees.

"The Security Council notes that the successful
holding of elections represents a critical step towards
economic development. The Council urges the
international community to continue to provide
support and assistance to Liberia through this period
of reconstruction.

"The Security Council further notes that the
successful conclusion of the electoral process marks
the fulfilment of a key element of the UNOMIL
mandate.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/41.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.

