Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy
Nicholas Haysom for their substantive briefings.

We believe that the continuation of the joint efforts
of the parties, including the political dialogue at the
highest level, are key to the successful progress of the
intra-Sudanese peace process. The basis for cooperation
between Khartoum and Juba exists, namely, the
bilateral agreements concluded in September 2012
in Addis Ababa, as well as the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We welcome the improvement recently noted in
the relations between the two Sudans. We pay tribute
to the effective participation of Khartoum in the
mediation efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to revitalize the South Sudanese
Peace Agreement.

We note the efforts of the African Union and its
High-level Implementation Panel under the leadership of
Mr. Thabo Mbeki. We hope that the Panel will continue
to be an important mechanism for promoting the
normalization of relations between the two countries.

We note with satisfaction the generally stable
situation in Abyei, as well as the constructive relations
of the personnel of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNIFSA) with the local inhabitants
and the measures taken by UNIFSA to prevent
intercommunal clashes.

Among the positive aspects, we would also like
to highlight the periodic holding of meetings of peace
committees with representatives of the Ngok Dinka
and Misseriya communities. We welcome the fact that
law enforcement and economic matters are addressed
at such events. It is important that the Amiet common
market is slowly becoming the economic hub not
only for Abyei but for the region as a whole. We are
convinced that it has contributed to strengthening trust
and reconciliation between the two communities.

We regret that not all of the provisions of the
inter-Sudanese Agreement of 20 June 2011 are being
implemented. A power vacuum remains in the Area.
The demilitarized status of Abyei and the buffer zone
along the inter-Sudanese border is being violated. We
would like to see increased regular contact between the
leaders of the Sudan and South Sudan.

With regard to the enhanced Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM), we
welcome the progress made by the parties in fulfilling
their obligations to make it fully operational. We believe
that the J BVMM. is an important element in preventing

incidents between the two parties. We continue to
believe that scaling back UNISFA support for the
Mechanism could completely paralyse the structure
and have a negative impact on the prospects for a full
resolution to the situation in Abyei. Guided by that, we
supported the adoption ofresolution 2412 (2018), which
extended the UNISFA mandate by six months. We will
be ready to support a similar extension in October.
We took note of the letter of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/778), which includes proposals on
reconfiguring UNISFA. We believe that the issue must
be carefully addressed and examined. We understand
that there is little progress being made in resolving the
Abyei dispute. We note that a whole range of factors has
prevented Khartoum and Juba from demonstrating the
flexibility required to resolve the final status of Abyei.
In that regard, UNISFA plays a very important role
in maintaining stability in the region. Once again, we
would like to recall that UNISFA is operating within
the confines of traditional peacekeeping, in which
the parties to the conflict are States. When making
decisions on reconfiguring the Mission, it is important
to be guided by the basic principles of peacekeeping.
We believe that the changes proposed by the Secretariat
with regard to strengthening the civilian component
and changing the mandate and personnel ceiling of the
mission must first be supported by both Khartoum and
Juba. We must also take into account the views of the
troop-contributing countries. If not, the effect of the
reconfiguration could be the exact opposite of what
is intended.

