Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to briefthe Council on
behalf of the Peacebuilding Commission in my capacity
as Chair ofthe Central African Republic configuration.

I too would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, for the work accomplished and
efforts made in fulfilling his mandate. I would also
like to thank Mr. Herve' Ladsous for his exhaustive and
objectively optimistic briefing on the situation in the
Central African Republic.

The Central African Republic configuration would
liketo expressits satisfaction.We endorsethe conclusions
of Mr. Ladsous' briefing with regard to the peaceful
conclusion of the political transition and the return to
constitutional order in the Central African Republic.
Building on the positive momentum generated by the
Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation, the Central
African people have clearly and strongly expressed their
longing for peace and stability, thereby contributing to
the conclusion of the transition. Moreover, presidential
candidates have demonstrated patriotism and unity but
also responsibility by prioritizing the greater interests of
the nation by complying with the code of good conduct
and accepting the electoral results. Those peaceful
elections, in the situation that exists in the Central
African Republic, would not have been possible without
such a dynamic, combined with the strong engagement
and the coordination of efforts of all stakeholders at the
national, regional and international levels.

As mentioned in the letter of 3 March that the
configuration sent to Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera
to congratulate him on his election, I would like to
reiterate our commitment to continuing to provide full
support to the creation of an environment conducive to
peacebuilding. We also welcome the appointment as
Prime Minister on 2 April of Mr. Simplice Sarandji and
on 11 April of the members of the new Government,
four of whom, we are pleased to note, are women.

The Central African Republic has come a long way
since its relapse in 2013. With the end of the political
transition, the country is now at a critical, indeed
historic juncture, and our collective and timely support
for the people of the Central African Republic and its
new authorities is more important than ever if we are
to ensure that the priorities for peacebuilding will be
pursued. Those goals must be closely aligned with
the national priorities outlined by the President in his
inauguration address - a restoration of stability to
the entire territory through the implementation of the
processes of disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration and security sector reform; promotion
of national reconciliation and cohesion; reform of the
public finance system and the productive sectors; and,
lastly, rehabilitation of the country's public services.

For its part, the configuration, together with the
international community, has provided support to the
Central African authorities before and throughout
the transitional period in overcoming the challenges
resulting from the country's volatile situation. In that
context, it has also played a key role in supporting
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in their efforts
to raise the international community's awareness of
the situation and challenges in the Central African
Republic and to advocate for the holding of timely
elections, particularly in relation to mobilizing
resources for the electoral basket fund. Furthermore,
with regard to fighting impunity, in partnership with
the United Nations Global Focal Point for Police, Justice
and Corrections Areas in the Rule of Law in Post-
Conflict and Other Crisis Situations, the configuration
established a reference group aimed at providing a
supporting platform for re-establishing the penal
system and setting up the Special Criminal Court. The
next meeting will deal with the modalities of recruiting
international magistrates for the Special Criminal
Court in order to enable it to begin its sessions.

As this new and historic phase begins, the activities
of the Central African Republic configuration will have
to adapt to the new situation and be implemented in a
way that will ensure the appropriate and needed support
for the country's long-term political stability and
economic prosperity. To that end, its activities should
conform to three closely linked preconditions - they
should be action-oriented, timely and strictly aligned
with the priorities outlined by the national authorities.
Apart from this, our work should be structured around
three phases.

First, in the short term, we should facilitate a rapid
and coordinated response to the challenges that the new
authorities encounter from the very beginning of their
mandate, since we know that the people will have high
expectations of improvement in their living conditions.
Our collective support should therefore emphasize
efforts that let the people see immediate results from
the peace dividend, especially in the area of their basic
public service needs. In that regard, the configuration
will ensure that the various assessments ofurgent needs
and initiatives that are currently under way or being
planned by the principal stakeholders are coherent and
coordinated. The aim is to avoid a fragmented approach
within the donor community and to build positive
momentum for a successful future donor conference.

Secondly, in the medium term, we should continue
and strengthen coordination with the national
authorities and principal stakeholders in order to ensure
the implementation of a national development plan. The
configuration is also ready to support the various types
of engagement planned or currently under way in the
Central African Republic. Mechanisms based on mutual
engagement of the United Nations with the country,
such as Global Compact projects, or evaluations aimed
at identifying appropriate forms of support, such as
the World Bank's 2014 fragility assessment, which
was recently updated, are some specific examples.
Moreover, the principal Central African Republic
donors are engaged in multiple projects, along with
the Peacebuilding Fund, which has been providing the
country with critical and timely financial support for
the past few years.

Thirdly, in the long term, we should ensure
the establishment of a stable and inclusive political
environment that will promote a lasting peace through
an effective national reconciliation effort that reaches
every sector of society, with no exceptions. On the
economic front, we should support the identification of
the key sectors that can ensure economic growth and
recovery and encourage international investment. In
that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission's experience
in areas such as the mobilization of domestic resources
could benefit the country significantly. All of these
efforts - short-, medium- and long-term f are aimed
at supporting the establishment of a lasting peace and
paving the way for the reconstruction and development
of a country that has been devastated by a long
crisis. The humanitarian situation is still worrying,
particularly as regards internally displaced persons
and refugees. We call on humanitarian organizations
to continue to intervene in support of these people who
have lost everything.

I plan over the next few weeks to visit the Central
African Republic and to meet with the principal
international and regional stakeholders in order to
discuss these initiatives further and decide on the best
way for the configuration to support those efforts.
Indeed, this type of situation is where the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission can make a key contribution
as a catalyst for initiatives and by contributing to a
coherent and coordinated approach. Another important
aspect of our mandate will be to ensure that the Central
African Republic continues to be a top priority for the
international community.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
country is at a critical juncture for its future. The
Central African Republic has the potential to become
a success story, after all the previous attempts that
have failed to address the root causes of its instability.
The gravity of the country's recent conflict is a strong
incentive for the international community to rethink its
engagement with the country in order to turn the page
once and for all.

Lastly, the configuration welcomes the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/305) regarding the technical renewal of
MINUSCA's mandate. The proposal makes sense in
the context of the country's current situation and, as
Mr. Ladsous just discussed, will give the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, which is about to conduct
a strategic assessment of the Mission, enough time to
engage fully with the new authorities. As we all know,
the success of any long-term solution in a post-conflict
situation requires strong national ownership. That is an
absolute essential for the Central African Republic as
much as it is an obligation for the configuration, the
Security Council and the international community to
help the country to achieve it.

