Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
speak today on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM). At the outset, I would like to convey the
Movement's appreciation to the Portuguese presidency
of the Security Council - and to you personally,
Ambassador Moraes Cabral - for having convened
this important open debate to discuss the progress
achieved in the implementation of the measures set out
in the note by the President of the Security Council of
26 July 2010 (S/2010/507), and the related concept
paper (S/2011/726, annex) to direct the discussions
towards enhancing the transparency and efficiency of
the work of the Security Council in order to meet the
expectations of the general membership of the United
Nations.

I would like also to seize this opportunity to
congratulate Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco,
Pakistan and Togo - members of the Movement - on
their election as non-permanent members of the
Security Council for the years 2012-2013, and to thank
the outgoing members Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria for
all their efforts in support of NAM. principled
positions.

Without prejudice to the interlinkage between
Security council reform and improving its working
methods, as the latter represents a component of the
overall reform of the Council pursuant to General
Assembly decision 62/557, the Non-Aligned
Movement attaches great importance to the issue of
improving the working methods of the Security
Council, as reflected in its long-standing position
reiterated in the relevant paragraphs of the Bali Final
Document (see S/2011/407), adopted by the sixteenth
NAM. Ministerial Conference held in Bali, Indonesia,
in May 2011.

The Non-Aligned Movement appreciates the
work of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, and
the efforts of its Chair, Bosnia and Herzegovina. NAM
stresses the importance of further enhancing its key
role in improving the working methods of the Security
Council, taking into due consideration the positions of
the larger membership of the Organization, particularly
during the annual General Assembly debate on the
report. In this regard, the Movement expects that the
upcoming annual reports of the Security Council to the
General Assembly shall reflect in detail the activities
of the working Group and the conclusions of its
deliberations, including the steps taken to promote the
full implementation of presidential note S/2010/507
and any other future notes, in order to properly analyse
and assess what has been achieved and what needs to
be done.

NAM. welcomes the steps taken by the Security
Council, pursuant to note 507, in publishing its updated
programme of work and the tentative forecast on the
Council's website in a timely manner, and also
appreciates the practice of several Presidents of the
Security Council of briefing the wider membership
about the monthly programme of work following its
adoption by the Council at the beginning of each
month, and in this regard looks forward to that practice
being complemented by the holding of informal wrap-
up sessions at the end of each presidency to evaluate
what has been achieved.

In relation to this issue, the Movement welcomes
the personal initiative of some Presidents of the
Security Council in preparing a comprehensive and
analytical assessment of the work of the Council under
their presidency. This positive trend, when
institutionalized, will definitely provide a more
coherent account of how the work of the Security
Council evolves each month in dealing with issues on
its agenda. Therefore, those monthly assessments
should include cases in which the Council has failed to
act, including the reasons for the resort to veto, and the
views expressed by its members during the
deliberations on the agenda items under its
consideration.

Furthermore, the assessments and the annual
report should elaborate the circumstances under which
the Council adopts different outcomes, be they
resolutions, presidential statements, press statements or
elements to the press. It is imperative that the General
Assembly be aware not only of the decisions adopted
by the Council, but also of the rationale, reasons and
backgrounds of those decisions, as well as the
effectiveness and impact of those decisions on the
situation on the ground.

With regard to the Security Council's annual
report, the Movement welcomes as a step forward the

informal meetings between the July presidencies of the
Council and the wider membership on the preparation
of the annual report, which contribute to enhancing the
quality of those reports, which still need to be more
comprehensive and analytical. It would be relevant to
benefit from the input of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation in the preparation of the annual
reports. At the same time, the Security Council should
submit, pursuant to Articles 15 (1) and 24 (3) of the
United Nations Charter, special reports for the
consideration of the General Assembly.

The Movement notes the increase in the number
of public meetings, and expects that the quantitative
increase of those meetings shall be associated with a
qualitative improvement through the provision of real
opportunities and more meaningful exchanges of view
to take into account the contributions of non-Council
members, particularly those whose interests are or may
be directly affected by possible decisions of the
Council. Furthermore, statements or comments should
not be restricted to Council members after briefings by
the Secretariat or the Special Envoys and
Representatives of the Secretary-General; the
concerned party should be given the opportunity to
express its views and position on such briefings. The
general observations and positions formulated by
numerous non-members of the Security Council during
its debates or open debates should be properly taken
into account in any possible outcome of those debates
and should also be reflected in the Council's annual
report.

On the other hand, the Movement stresses the
importance of convening more frequent Arria Formula
meetings as a practical way to ensure more interaction
with non-Council members and regional and
subregional organizations, and of the Council's
continuing to hold informal interactive meetings,
similar to the recent meeting on 21 November of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa on lessons learned in coordinating
response and supporting local capacity.

The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the
continued briefings and consultations of the Council
with the troop- contributing countries (TCCs) as part of
the effort to plan and execute peacekeeping operations
more effectively and with clearer mandates. The
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should
involve TCCs more frequently and intensively in its
deliberations through sustained, regular and timely
interaction.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
initial and major concrete step towards improving the
working methods of the Security Council should be to
reach an agreement on permanent rules of procedure to
replace the current provisional rules, which have been
in force for more than 60 years. Moreover, the Security
Council should establish its subsidiary organs in
accordance with the letter and spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations, and those organs should function
in a manner that would provide adequate and timely
information on their activities to the general
membership.

The Security Council should fully take into
account the recommendations of the General Assembly
on matters relating to international peace and security,
consistent with Article 11 (2) of the Charter, instead of
continually encroaching on the functions and powers of
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council by addressing issues that traditionally fall
within the competence of those two organs. In that
regard, it is imperative to revisit the relationship
between the Security Council and the other principal
organs of the Organization in order to restore the
missing institutional balance in accordance with the
Charter.

Furthermore, regular interaction between the
Presidents of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Security Council is needed in
order to discuss and coordinate the agendas and
programmes of work of the respective principal organs
that they represent in order to establish increased
coherence and complementarity among those organs in
a mutually reinforcing manner.

It is indeed a positive step for the Security
Council to have held three open debates since 2008 on
improving its working methods in order to
systematically analyse the progress achieved in that
regard. The Non-Aligned Movement encourages the
Security Council to continue improving that practice,
not only by convening those debates, but also by taking
into consideration the views and proposals expressed
by the non-Council members in any outcome of such
debates.

In conclusion, the Movement believes that more
steps are needed, along with the necessary political
will of Member States, particularly the permanent

members of the Council, to improve the working
methods of the Council through both the General
Assembly and the Security Council. Transparency,
accountability and consistency are key elements that
the Security Council should observe in all its activities,
approaches and procedures. Improving the Council's
working methods would no doubt contribute to
strengthening its ability to maintain international peace
and security and to deal efficiently and effectively with
its mounting workload and with the multiplicity and
complexity of the issues on its agenda.

