Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic ofIran): Speaking
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), I
would first like to express NAM's appreciation of your
holding, Madam President, this fifth open debate of
the Security Council on its working methods and for
having prepared the concept paper (S/2014/725, annex)
on that issue. NAM. welcomes the note by the President
of the Security Council S/2013/515 and the intention
to provide more opportunities to the United Nations
general membership to express its views on the working
methods of the Security Council and to encourage the
continued participation of the broader membership
in such debates. NAM. also notes the endorsement of
the notes by the President S/2013/630, S/2014/268,
S/2014/393, S/2014/565 and S/2014/739 through the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions under Argentina's chairmanship.

For NAM, transparency, openness and consistency
are key elements that the Security Council should
observe in all its activities, approaches and procedures.
The Council has neglected those important elements
in numerous instances. They include reluctance
in convening open debates on some issues of high
significance, unscheduled open debates with selective
notification, repeatedly restricting the participation in
some debates and discrimination between members and
non-members of the Council, in particular with regard
to sequencing of and time limits for statements during
open debates, a failure to submit special reports to the
General Assembly, as required under Article 24 of
the Charter of the United Nations, the submission of
annual reports that still lack sufficient information and
analytical content, and a lack of minimal parameters
for the elaboration of the monthly assessment by the
Security Council presidency.

NAM. calls for the following specific measures
to improve the working methods of the Council and
to enhance its efficiency in fulfilling its primary
responsibility, namely, the maintenance of international
peace and security.

First, the rules of procedure of the Security
Council, which have remained provisional for more
than 60 years, should be formalized in order to improve
transparency and accountability. Secondly, NAM
has repeatedly asked the Council to comply with the
provisions of Article 31 of the Charter, which allows
any non-member of the Council to participate in the
discussions on any matter that affects it. We also believe
that rule 48 of the provisional rules ofprocedure should
be thoroughly observed.

Thirdly, the number of public meetings should be
increased, in accordance of Articles 31 and 32 of the
Charter. Such meetings shouldprovide real opportunities
to take into account the views and contributions of the
wider membership of the United Nations, particularly
non-members of the Council whose affairs are under
the Council's consideration.

Fourthly, closed meetings and informal
consultations should be kept to a minimum as an
exception, not a rule, as they were meant to be. They
should also include briefings by the Special Envoys or
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General and
by the Secretariat.

Fifthly, the establishment of subsidiary organs by
the Security Council should be in accordance with the
letter and the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.
Those organs should function in such a manner as
to provide adequate and timely information on their
activities to the general United Nations membership.

NAM. rejects the use of the Security Council as a
forum to pursue national political interests and agendas,
thereby aggravating situations rather than alleviating
them, contrary to its mandate enshrined in the
Charter. We reiterate the necessity for non-selectivity,
impartiality and accountability in the work of the
Council. The decision ofthe Security Council to initiate
formal or informal discussions on the situation in any
State Member of the United Nations or on any issue
that does not constitute a threat to international peace
and security is contrary to Article 24 of the Charter. In
such cases, there is a need for Council to continue to act
strictly within the powers and functions accorded to it
by Member States under the Charter.

In recent years, the Security Council has been
too quick to threaten or to authorize enforcement
actions, while being silent and inactive in other cases.
Furthermore, the Council has increasingly resorted
to Chapter VII as an umbrella for addressing issues
that do not necessarily pose an immediate threat to
international peace and security.

A careful review of those trends indicates that the
Council could have opted for alternative provisions
to respond more appropriately to particular cases.
Instead of an excessive and rapid use of Chapter VII,
efforts should be made to fully utilize the provisions
of Chapters VI and VIII for the pacific settlement of
disputes. Chapter VII should be invoked, as intended, as
a measure of last resort. Unfortunately, the provisions of
Articles 41 and 42 have, in some cases, been resorted to
too quickly without fully exhausting the other options.

Sanctions imposed by the Security Council remain
an issue of serious concern to the non-aligned countries.
In accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the imposition of sanctions should be considered only
once all means for the peaceful settlement of disputes
under Chapter VI of the Charter have been exhausted
and a thorough consideration of the short- and long-
term effects of such sanctions undertaken.

Sanctions are a blunt instrument, the use of which
raises fundamental ethical questions of whether the
suffering inflicted on vulnerable groups in the target
country are a legitimate means of exerting pressure. The
objectives of sanctions are not to punish or otherwise
exact retribution on the populace. In that regard, the
objectives of sanctions regimes should be clearly
defined. Their imposition should be for a specific time
frame, be based on tenable legal grounds and should
be lifted as soon as the objectives are achieved. The
conditions demanded of the State or party upon which
sanctions are imposed should be clearly defined and
subjected to periodic review. Sanctions should be
imposed only when a threat to international peace
and security exists, or there is an act of aggression,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Sanctions are not applicable preventively in instances of
mere violation of international law, norms or standards.

Finally, NAM. calls upon the Security Council to
further enhance its relationship with the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries (TCCs), including through
sustained, regular and timely interaction. Meetings
with TCCs should be held not only in the drawing up
of mandates, but also in their implementation, when
considering a change in, renewal of, or completion of, a
mission mandate, or when there is a rapid deterioration
of the situation on the ground. In that context, the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should
involve TCCs more frequently and intensively in its
deliberations, especially in the very stages of mission
planning.

