The President: I thank the representative of
Mexico for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of Mauritius.

First of all, I would like to thank the Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, Ambassador
Greenstock, for his comprehensive and informative
briefing on the work of the Committee. We would like
to join other delegations in paying special tribute to
him for the excellent work he is doing in the
Committee.

The 11 September attacks proved once again that
combating international terrorism is not only important
in its own right, but also remains the main priority of
the international community, regional organizations
and individual States. We came to realize that no
country, whether big or small, rich or poor, developed
or developing, could ensure its security from such
dastardly attacks carried out by terrorists. International
terrorism has, therefore, become a pressing, complex
and unpredictable global challenge that needs urgent
attention at all levels. Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), which is a binding and mandatory collective
approach to ridding the world of the scourge of
terrorism, is a most appropriate step in that regard, and
it requires unanimous support by all of us.

The overwhelming response from States within
the targeted time limit for the submission of national
reports, is a feat in itself. The large number of reports
received to date reflects the seriousness of the issue
and also the dedication and commitment of Member
States to the implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). This shows the strong and
resolute determination of one and all to do away with
the plague that international terrorism represents.
However, we cannot be complacent. As one of the
major threats to humanity, terrorism has made our task
more daunting. We are confident that by 27 March
2002, the review of the first set of reports will be
completed. In this regard, my delegation urges those
States that have not yet submitted their national reports
to do so expeditiously.

Combating international terrorism will not be
easy without a comprehensive and collective plan of
action. This is a fight in which all States need to act
promptly and decisively. Failure on the part of one
State can break the chain of support that the
international community desperately needs in order to
combat - by all means and in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations - the threat to
international peace and security posed by terrorist acts.
All States should, therefore, collaborate fully in the
implementation of the provisions of the resolution and
put in place necessary mechanisms at the national level
with a view to ridding the world of the scourge of
international terrorism.
At the national level in my country, every effort is
geared towards the prevention and suppression of
terrorist acts. In this regard, we are cooperating fully
with the international and regional organizations for
the implementation of the relevant international and
regional conventions relating to terrorism. In March
this year, the National Assembly of Mauritius will
consider the Prevention of Terrorism Bill, the Financial
Intelligence and Anti-Money-Laundering Bill, and the
Criminal and Related Matters (Mutual Assistance) Bill.
The Prevention of Terrorism Bill includes all the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) in the fight
against terrorism. We are convinced that the proposed
bills will consolidate the measures already in place for
dealing with terrorist acts and their financing.

On a regional basis, at the meeting of the
Committee of Ministers of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) Organ on Politics,
Defence and Security, held in Luanda, Angola, on 18
December 2001, Mauritius, along with other SADC
members, underscored the need for regional
mechanisms and a coordinated approach to the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). As parties
to the Luanda Declaration, member States
unequivocally condemned all acts of terrorism and
undertook to accede or ratify international instruments
on combating terrorism, adopted by the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations, and to
incorporate them into domestic laws. They also agreed
to cooperate at all levels in the exchange of
information and the identification of persons,
institutions and networks associated with terrorism,
and to prevent SADC members from being used as
bases or support centres for groups of individuals
involved in terrorist acts.

The fight against international terrorism is indeed
peculiar in that it requires close cooperation within and
among regions on related issues, such as the
suppression of drug trafficking, traffic in small arms
and light weapons and money-laundering. We believe a
strong commitment to addressing the problem of
poverty would be helpful as a priority, since poverty is
one of the breeding grounds for terrorism in most
cases. My delegation strongly supports all the regional
approaches adopted thus far in addressing these issues,
as required under paragraph 4 of resolution 1373
(2001).

My delegation fully supports the methodology of
work adopted by the Committee. The transparency and
even-handedness that have now become the rule of
thumb of the work of the Committee give the necessary
assurance to Member States that all norms of
objectivity and impartiality are being strictly observed
and applied. The Committee, being only a monitoring
body, is not here to pass judgement or to be interpreted
as a police force. It is a working organism, as the
Chairman rightly pointed out in his briefing, to assist
States in the implementation of all the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001).

With the guidance for Member States in the
preparation of their respective national reports, and the
appointment of a pool of experts to assist the
Committee as well as Member States requiring
assistance in various fields in the implementation
process, we are convinced that the mandate of the
Committee, as set out in the resolution, will be fulfilled
within the prescribed time frame.

Since terrorism strikes at the very heart of
everything for which the United Nations stands and
represents a global threat to democracy, the rule of law,
human rights and stability, a truly concerted
international effort to combat terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations is what we require. The Committee
can be an important tool in this regard, and we are
pleased to see that it is resolved to fulfil its mandate in
the most dedicated manner.

Before I conclude, I would like to pay tribute
once again to our colleague from Mexico, to whom we
bid a very fond farewell. We will certainly miss him
greatly.

I resume my function as President of the Council.

I shall now give the floor to Sir Jeremy
Greenstock to respond to questions and comments
made.

