Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
address the Council. Let me also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his report.
I also welcome Ambassador Tanin of Afghanistan.

In the months since our previous meeting (see S/PV.6983), we have seen the Afghan people - ever-
resilient in the face of ongoing instability - planting
their feet firmly on the path to democracy, prosperity,
stability and peace. They are working to move forward
into a better future for all Afghans. It is our fervent hope
that their Government will reflect that very aspiration.

(spoke in English)

The upcoming 2014 elections present a historic
opportunity to witness Afghanistan's first peaceful
democratic transfer of power. It will be a vital step. The
free and fair election of a Government with popular
legitimacy is the best guarantor of stability in the
coming years. A stable democracy requires institutions
that are open, transparent and accountable to the
people. Over the past three months, the Government
of Afghanistan has taken steps to strengthen the
foundation for such institutions. We welcome the
passage of the electoral law and the Independent
Election Commission (IEC) structure law, which have
clarified the electoral process as well as the structure
and mandate of Afghanistan's key electoral institutions.
We also welcome the appointment of commissioners to
the IEC and to the Electoral Complaints Commission.
As the campaign process gets under way, we expect the
Afghan Government to provide those institutions with
the resources and independence that they need to fulfil
their mandates, including the full vetting of candidates
and the investigation of all complaints of electoral
meddling or fraud. To succeed, it will be essential for
all eligible Afghans, especially women, to have an
opportunity to exercise their democratic rights.

A stable democracy also requires Government
institutions and a strong civil society that are committed
to protecting the rights ofthe most vulnerable, especially
women and girls, in Afghanistan. At the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework senior officials meeting in
July, Canada acknowledged the appointment of nine
commissioners to the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission (AIHRC). As the AIHRC prepares
for its review by the International Coordinating
Committee of National Human Rights Institutions
in November, we urge the commissioners to remain
vocal in pressing for greater respect for human rights
throughout Afghanistan, including the rights of women
and girls, and greater protection for freedom of speech,
religion and belief.

The Afghan Government needs to work to uphold
its human rights commitments, which its people expect.
Two issues in particular will be critical this fall. First,
we urge the Government of Afghanistan to exert all
possible efforts to support the AIHRC to ensure it
retains its "A" status. Secondly, Afghan women and
girls continue to await progress on the implementation
of the Elimination of Violence Against Women
(EVAW) law and the publication of the Government of
Afghanistan's report to its citizens on implementation
of the law, which is a deliverable under the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework.

(spoke in French)

We recognize that there are those who seek to pull
Afghanistan back from the path it is on, as witnessed by
the relentless targeting of the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF). Yet the ANSF continues to demonstrate
its professionalism and preparedness in responding to
such attacks.

The past few months have also seen a marked
increase in the number of attacks on civilians, including
humanitarian workers, Government contractors and
politicians, particularly women. Even in the face of
such callous cruelty, however, the Afghan people have
remained strong and are committed to the goal of
rebuilding their country and ensuring that Afghanistan
will never again be a safe haven for terrorists, and resist
the proxy wars of its neighbours through terrorism.

(spoke in English)

There is no question that this path toward
democracy, stability and peace is a long road and that
there are many who would like to see Afghanistan
reverse course. But Canada continues to support those
who are working to build a better future in the face of
those ongoing risks. We remain committed to helping
move the country forward on this path towards greater
security, fiscal stability, economic growth, improved
governance and full respect for human rights. Canada
is proud to have stood by our Afghan partners on that
journey and we will continue to do so going forward.

