Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We wish to
thank His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki, Chair of the
African Union (AU) High-level Implementation Panel
for Sudan, for his comprehensive briefing to the
Council. We would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios for his briefing. We welcome the presence
at this meeting of Ambassador Osman of the Sudan and
His Excellency Mr. Ezekiel Lol Gatkuoth of Southern
Sudan, and we thank them for their statements.

South Africa welcomed the news of the signing of
the agreement between the Government of the Sudan
and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLA)
today in Addis Ababa. We congratulate the parties and
commend them for their sustained and determined
efforts to resolve the conflict in Abyei. We also take
this opportunity to congratulate the Chair of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
President Mbeki, and Special Representative
Menkerios for their sterling and outstanding work done
to facilitate the temporary agreement.

The deteriorating security situation in Abyei
threatened the full implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and
potentially could have reversed the positive political
gains registered thus far in the implementation of the
CPA. The signing of the CPA ended decades of conflict
and ushered in a new era of hope for the people of the
Sudan. This hope was strengthened by the holding of a
successful referendum and by the positive statements
made by the leadership in both the North and the
South, following the announcement of the referendum
results.

Today, that hope has been renewed once again, as
the parties to the CPA, with the facilitation of the AU
High-level Implementation Panel and the involvement
of Mr. Menkerios, came to interim agreements to
resolve the conflict in Abyei. We welcome the
agreement reached by the parties on the temporary
administrative arrangements for the Abyei area, the
withdrawal of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Sudan People's Liberation Army from the Abyei area
and the deployment of an interim security force for
Abyei composed of Ethiopian troops.

My delegation welcomes and commends the
Government of Ethiopia for generously agreeing to
contribute troops for the implementation of this
security arrangement. We note that this agreement does
not substitute for or prejudice future outcomes on
negotiations on the final status of Abyei, and we
encourage parties to continue the negotiations with the
same resolve and determination as they have shown
until now.

It is my delegation's view that the Council's
positive response to the request contained in the
interim agreement will be crucial. For our part, South
Africa will do everything it can to assist in and ensure
the full implementation of the temporary agreement.

Regrettably, in the View of my delegation, the
current developments in Southern Kordofan increase
tensions between the parties, threaten to derail the
post-referendum negotiations and introduce a dire
period of uncertainty as the South prepares for
independence. My delegation is gravely concerned
about the security situation in Southern Kordofan,
which, in its view, increases the tension.

My delegation is gravely concerned about the
situation and the clashes between the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Sudan People's Liberation Army that
took place on 6 June. We are equally concerned about
the decision to terminate all Joint Integrated Units in
the Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States and the
instruction to deploy all SPLA forces in the two States
south of the border.

Reports of aerial bombardments leading to the
displacement of the civilian population in areas such as
Heiban are also a major concern for my delegation.
The impact of this insecurity in Southern Kordofan has
led to a humanitarian crisis in the region that has
resulted in the loss of life, the displacement of
thousands of people and the withdrawal of non-essential
staff from Kadugli.

The continued reports of shooting and looting in
Kadugli are of concern. We welcome the reinforcement
of the United Nations Mission in the area. The
escalation of violence and hostilities is detrimental, not
only to the people of the area, who are negatively
impacted by the violence, but to the establishment of
two future viable States living in peace and security.
We are less than a month away from the
declaration of Southern Sudan as an independent State
on 9 July 2011, which in itself is indicative of the
strides that both parties have made to ensure that the
CPA is implemented. It is through the collective efforts
of the parties to the CPA that we are on the brink of
achieving this important milestone. We therefore wish
to encourage and urge the parties to demonstrate the
same resolve and political will to address the current
security challenges facing the people of the Sudan. My
delegation appreciates the ongoing discussions with the
leaders of Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan on the

recent political and security challenges in those areas.

In this regard, we reiterate the call by the
Assembly of the African Union made during its
extraordinary session in which it urged the parties to
the CPA to spare no effort to overcome the current
difficulties and to conclude their negotiations on the
outstanding aspects of the CPA, including the issue of
Abyei and the post-referendum arrangements, under
the auspices of AU High-level Implementation Panel
on Sudan.

Finally, my delegation would like to express its
unwavering support to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Menkerios and the Chair of the AU
High-Level Panel in facilitating ongoing negotiations
between the CPA parties. South Africa stands ready to
support the two parties in constructing two viable,
independent States in the Sudan and in building a
mutually beneficial relationship between them based
on peace and development. In this regard, we call on
the international community to continue its support to
the parties as they address the critical challenges
confronting them.

