Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
too would like to thank Ms. Frechette for the
presentation she made today. We would also like to
thank the representatives of the agencies present here
and the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their work in the field and for their
briefings today.

Since the beginning of the Iraqi crisis - and
given the current circumstances - one of Spain's main
priorities has been to address the basic needs of that
country's population by contributing humanitarian
assistance as a matter of the greatest urgency, in
accordance with the demands of the new reality on the
ground. In that regard, and in a constant effort to
contribute to overcoming the challenges that have
arisen in recent weeks, Spain's contribution has played
out on several fronts.

First of all, my Government responded
immediately to the financial needs that emerged,
including the needs indicated in the Flash Appeal
launched by the Secretary-General. To date, Spain has
committed a total of about 65.45 million euros - about
$75.43 million - out of which 5 million euros have
been allocated to various United Nations programmes
and agencies and 7.2 million to the European
Commission's Humanitarian Aid Office.

Moreover, in terms of bilateral assistance, we
have provided 37 million euros in outright grants in
order to provide equipment in basic sectors and to
finance other projects and activities to assist the least
advantaged among the population. Lastly, in addition to
those amounts, 16 million euros have been earmarked
for humanitarian assistance provided in the context of
our Joint Humanitarian Support Unit.

The second pillar of Spain's response to the
situation in Iraq is based on the human dimension of
our contribution. As soon as coalition operations began
in Iraq, Spain sent a Joint Humanitarian Support Unit
composed of 900 men and women. I would like to
point out the fact that a medical unit containing many
hospital beds was among the tools available to the Joint
Unit.

Turning to the immediate future, and bearing in
mind what has been repeatedly stated here today with
regard to the still fragile security situation in Iraq, my
Government is considering the possibility of sending a
number of members of its Guardia Civil to assist in
maintaining law and order and, in the medium term, to
assist in training new members of Iraqi's security
forces and in planning their activities.

My Government hopes that, along with the
framework established through the Council's adoption
this morning of resolution 1483 (2003) - of which, as
members are aware, Spain was one of the original
sponsors - the measures adopted by various Member
States, including Spain, will contribute to improving
the situation, bringing stability to Iraq and well-being
to its people.

