Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): My delegation is
grateful to the Kuwaiti delegation for calling for
today's meeting on the situation unfolding in Gaza. We
also express our appreciation to Assistant Secretary-
General Taye-Brook Zerihoun for his comprehensive
and objective update.

We are very concerned about the increasing death
toll caused by the escalation of violence on the border
of the Gaza Strip and Israel. My delegation wishes to
convey its condolences to the Palestinian people for the
tragic death of civilians during what was supposed to be
a peaceful demonstration. We consider this occurrence
to be an irreparable and senseless loss of life.

Kazakhstan also fully supports the right of the
Palestinian people to self-expression and peaceful
demonstrations. It is very important that Israeli soldiers
correctly calibrate the volume of force used against
peaceful demonstrators. We join the position of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, which we, along
with Kuwait and Cote d'Ivoire, represent in the Security
Council, with condemnation of the use of weapons
against them. We believe this turn of events could be
a dangerous development in the situation in the Middle
East region as a whole. In that regard, Kazakhstan
calls on both sides to the conflict to exercise restraint.
We also consider it necessary to conduct a thorough
investigation into the incident, identify the perpetrators
and hold them accountable for what happened.

Kazakhstan considers it important to continue
efforts aimed at consolidating Palestinian ranks in the
Palestine Liberation Organization political platform as
a necessary condition for the practical realization of the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to create
their own independent State. We note that the parties
must find a solution for the difficult humanitarian
situation in Gaza.

The current situation requires coming up with
confidence-building measures for an entire region,
including in the economic field, with strong support
from the international community. In that regard,
Kazakhstan endorses the concern expressed earlier
by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process on the funding of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East this year (see S/PV.8214). A significant
reduction of its regular budget has already increased
the anxieties of 5.3 million Palestinian refugees who
have already suffered an extremely protracted refugee
crisis. Kazakhstan also expresses great concern over
the expansion of settlements, which are illegal under
international law and in the View of the Middle East
Quartet, and which are further escalating the tense
situation around the status of Jerusalem, resulting in
protests among populations.

Lastly, we call upon the leaders of Israel and
Palestine to take concrete steps to preserve the
possibility of peaceful coexistence and the two-State
solution and strengthen the prospects for peace. As we
always say in the Security Council, this effort should
be based on the inalienable rights of Palestinians to
statehood and of Israel to security. But we would now
also like to underline Palestine's inalienable right to
security. It is necessary to begin negotiations in the
very near future on each outstanding problem, aimed
at reaching agreement on pending issues and giving
them a so-called final status. Only innovative policy,
with a security-development nexus, a revamped
regional approach and a more transparent, efficient
and accountable United Nations delivering as one on
the ground, will help the parties to escape the kind of
tragedy that has occurred today.

