Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of Uruguay for its initiative in
drawing our attention to one of the most important
topics in the area of protection of civilians in armed
conflicts, namely, the protection of civilians and
medical care in armed conflict.

I thank the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing, as well as the other speakers. We are pleased
that the focus of Mr. Guterres's presentation today in
the open debate coincides with Ukraine's position,
in particular in terms of strengthening respect for
international law, the protection of civilians, including
medical and humanitarian personnel, and the prevention
of the forced displacement of refugees and internally
displaced persons. We share the deep concern for
the situation in Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq, the Central
African Republic, South Sudan and other places where
civilians, especially women and children, continue to
be victims of armed conflicts.

Attacks on hospitals and medical facilities are
a flagrant violation of international law. Stringent
international legal principles have long provided
absolute security to medical personnel and hospitals
in conflict zones, but in modern conflicts hospitals
and doctors have increasingly become the targets and
victims of military operations. Not very long ago, we
were all witness to the barbaric air strikes on medical
facilities in Aleppo and the methodical destruction of
the city's medical infrastructure.
When medical facilities come under fire or shelling,
or are bombed, it is a multidimensional tragedy. Not
only do such attacks sow death and destruction now,
but the civilian population is deprived of the possibility
of obtaining medical care and facilities for saving
lives in the future are destroyed. That is why last year
Ukraine co-sponsored resolution 2286 (2016). We are
grateful to the delegations that promoted it, including
the delegation of Uruguay, for such a timely initiative.
Currently, our common goal is to develop effective
mechanisms to monitor its implementation. In that
regard, we would like to stress the following points that
are important to us:

First, improving the procedures for documenting
cases ofviolence against medical personnel and hospitals
in armed conflicts. Gathering and documenting the
data on attacks against medical facilities and medical
personnel is a key element in developing an effective
preventive system.

Secondly, we need to ensure independent
and effective investigations of grave violations of
international humanitarian law against medical
institutions and personnel in situations of
armed conflict. In this vein, we deem it appropriate that
there be briefings or reports by the Security Council on
the situation in countries where medical care is under
threat of attack. Such reports, to our mind, should
include information on investigations of violations
committed by Member States.

An argument similar in content was made by our
delegation as well as by many other speakers during
the April meeting (see S/PV.7926) on the link between
human rights and conflict prevention. We see significant
parallels between our current topic of discussion and
human rights as part of the area of competence of the
Security Council.

Thirdly, it is vital to ensure accountability for acts
of violence against medical personnel and hospitals. It
is crucial that those responsible for such war crimes
be brought to justice. We share the view that when
national accountability mechanisms are insufficient,
Member States must fully cooperate in the fight against
impunity jointly with international institutions in the
area of criminal justice, including the International
Criminal Court.

We believe also that the Secretary-General can
play a key role through his good offices, including
in accordance with Article 99 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In time of war, people begin to fear even everyday
events and things that they take for granted under other
circumstances. Today, in eastern Ukraine, getting to
work, going to school, resting with one's family on
Sunday afternoon, or working in one's own garden very
often means a choice between life and death.

The aggressor country does not abide by the
standards of the Geneva Convention or General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions on
compliance with international humanitarian law.
Medical services continue to come under attack from
the occupied territories of the regions of Donetsk and
Luhansk. Medical emergency brigades in Ukraine are
subject to bombardments and are fired on, even though
they have emergency symbols on their vehicles and
even though the geographic emergency coordinates are
publicly known. In the region of Luhansk, in the area
controlled by the Government, eight health centres were
damaged, out of a total of 11 buildings. In the Donetsk
region, 29 health centres were damaged; five of them
were demolished and have not been rebuilt because of
the ongoing hostilities.

In February, in Avdiyivka, three BM. 21 Grad
missiles hit the hospital there, which continues to suffer
from the fighting, with continuing damage being done
to its electrical, water and heating systems. Despite all
of this, the hospital continues to provide medical care,
but the main building is so severely damaged that it
cannot be restored.

The policy espoused by the administration of the
Russian occupation in Crimea, which refuses the use
of substitute maintenance therapy, which is of vital
importance to patients, has led to dozens of deaths.

(spoke in English)

As stated by the Health Minister of Ukraine at the
seventieth World Health Assembly in Geneva just a
few days ago, the Government of Ukraine is unable to
provide any health services whatsoever to the millions
of Ukrainian citizens who remain trapped under
Russian occupation.

In the occupied region of Luhansk Oblast, the
situation has returned to the Dark Ages, with health
policies copied from the Russian Federation. There are
credible reports that anti-retroviral and tuberculosis
treatment is unavailable; the only source is delivery by
smugglers. There is a dangerous lack of detailed, data-
derived insights into child health and ofimmunization,
vaccine and polio status reports in the areas experiencing
the most intensive conflict.
As a party to the 1949 Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War
and its Additional Protocols, Ukraine committed to
complying with its provisions and is disseminating
knowledge of the norms and principles of international
humanitarian law. Particular attention is paid to
the protection of civilians, including medical and
humanitarian personnel.

In order to fulfil these obligations, the armed
forces of Ukraine organized personnel and staff
training on compliance with the norms and principles
of international humanitarian law during planning and
the use of force in armed conflict.

These activities were carried out in cooperation
with the delegation of the International Committee of
the Red Cross in Ukraine, the Danish Refugee Council,
Taras Shevchenko National University, the Red Cross
Society of Ukraine, the Ukrainian Helsinki Human
Rights Union, the international charitable foundation
Caritas Ukraine and other international and national
human rights organizations.

With the support of these organizations, in
2017 training activities for the study of international
humanitarian law covered all categories of personnel
of the armed forces of Ukraine. These measures also
cover personnel units returning from the immediate
area of the anti-terrorist operation, as well as those
moving to that area.

On 26 April, the Government of Ukraine adopted
resolution 329, on the establishment of the Inter-Agency
Commission for the Implementation of International
Humanitarian Law in Ukraine. Since 2014, when the
Russian aggression against my country began, we
have been able to do a great deal to protect civilians.
However, much work remains to be done. We also
count on the support and assistance of the international
community in the implementation of the relevant tasks.

