Mr. Augusto (Angola): We commend Spain
for convening today's meeting on a critical issue of
extreme concern for the international community
and welcome Mr. Alfonso Dastis Quecedo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain, who is
presiding over this important meeting. We also thank
Deputy Secretary-General Mr. Jan Eliasson, the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, the President
of the Stimson Center and the Vice-President of DHL
for their important contributions to the debate.

Resolution 2325 (2016) that the Security Council
has just unanimously adopted is yet another landmark
document to strengthen cooperation in addressing the
threat of terrorists and non-State actors acquiring,
developing, trafficking or using nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and their means of delivery, while
endorsing the 2016 comprehensive review on the status
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

The theme selected by the Spanish presidency for
today's debate - "Preventing catastrophe: a global
agenda for stopping the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors" - is very timely. Let
me also commend Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi and
his team on his leadership at the helm of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) over
the past two years. In that respect, multilateral efforts,
cooperation partnerships and the sharing of best
practices in the pursuit of positive security acquis and
resolution 1540 (2004), which was ground-breaking
when adopted in 2004, translated a renewed awareness
and international community resolve to address that
threat. Since its adoption, significant progress has been
made in applying a collective response, as demonstrated
by most Member States through the submission of
reports and the implementation of legislative and
operational measures in compliance with the resolution.

Over the years, the 1540 Committee has made a
tangible contribution to progress on the resolution's
implementation. The timely extension of the 1540
Committee mandate through resolution 1977 (2011)
further contributes to the institutionalization of
the Committee, which became an essential part of
the international non-proliferation effort. As the
comprehensive review highlights, there has been a
general increase in the number of measures undertaken
by States to prevent non-State actors and terrorists
from gaining access to weapons of mass destruction.
The dialogue between the 1540 Committee and the
Member States has further promoted State ownership
of anti-proliferation strategies.

The challenge encountered by the Committee
has been the decrease in the number of assistance
requests by States - a situation that requires greater
attention and resources in order to enable the assistance
mechanism to deliver an effective response. With regard
to international cooperation, the Committee notes the
importance of the provision of technical assistance
through regional and subregional organizations - a
factor that would improve the assistance mechanism
being provided, with the aim of more sound
implementation of the resolution.

While lagging behind in implementing the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004), there is a
concerted effort by African countries to improve their
performance. In that regard, in April the African Union
(AU) held a conference on the implementation of the
resolution in Africa with support from the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and the 1540
Committee. The conference also focused on addressing
the assistance requirements presented by AU members
and submitted its views and contributions for inclusion
in the 2016 comprehensive review.

The Republic of Angola is deeply concerned about
the issue of disarmament and the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. It is a State party
to the main international conventions on weapons
and disarmament, in particular the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; the Pelindaba
Treaty, which establishes Africa as a nuclear-
weapon-free zone; and more recently, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention. In that connection, a multisectoral
commission for the follow-up of international treaties
and conventions on weapons and disarmament has
recently been created, acting as a focal point for the
Angolan Government on the matter and operating under
the coordination of the Ministry of National Defence.

The commission has carried out various training
courses, with a view to exercising greater control on the
proper use of chemical and biological agents and their
precursors. It works with academia and communities to
raise awareness on the issue. The Angolan Government
has promoted training at home and abroad, in partnership
with other States and international organizations with
emphasis on the seminar on the prohibition of chemical
weapons held in September in Angola and Brazil as
part of the Angolan-Brazil mentorship programme. The
seminar for the legal drafters of the Chemical Weapons
Convention was held recently in Rwanda and aimed
especially at Portuguese-speaking African countries,
in partnership with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that Angola does
not own or produce weapons of mass destruction. It
advocates greater sharing of information and know-
how among States on the use of such technologies for
peaceful purposes and assistance to States in matters
of the national implementation of international legal
instruments and the dissemination of the values of
peace, stability and peaceful coexistence among people.

