Ms. Rice (United States ofAmerica): I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.

I will begin with Syria, where the horrifying
situation is getting worse. Escalating violence driven
by the Al-Assad regime has killed tens of thousands
and displaced millions of Syrians. There is no clearer
demonstration of the situation's threat to regional peace
and security than the Syrian Government's recent
shelling of Akakali, which the Council rightfully
condemned.

As the violence and atrocities mount, the United
States will not wait for all members of the Council to
get on the right side of history. Together with our allies,
we are supporting the opposition as it moves towards
an inclusive, democratic transition. We are further
pressuring the regime and addressing the growing
humanitarian needs in the region. At the same time,
we continue to support the efforts of Joint Special
Representative Brahimi to find a durable solution to
the crisis.

As President Obama told the General Assembly last
month, "the future must not belong to a dictator who
massacres his people" (A/67/PV6, p. 14). The regime
of Bashar Al-Assad will come to an end. Indeed, that
transition is not just inevitable; it has already begun.
Al-Assad's merciless assault upon the Syrian people
has not cowed them into submission; far from it. The
opposition is getting stronger, and parts of Syria have
slipped from the regime's control. In those areas, Syrian
citizens are banding together to administer towns,
reopen schools and rebuild their economy. The United
States is helping them do so, providing the unarmed
civilian opposition with help to organize in support of
the transition plan agreed in Cairo last July, with its
vision ofa democratic, pluralistic Syria where all of its
people have a say in how they are governed.

More than 1.5 million people have fled their homes
either to neighbouring countries or to safer places
within Syria. As the number of refugees grows, we
commend Syria's neighbours, including Turkey, Jordan,
Lebanon and Iraq, on their generosity and recognize
their need for additional support. The United States has
committed more than $130 million in food, medical
supplies and other life-saving assistance.

We encourage all Member States to respond to the
needs identified in the United Nations Syria appeals
and to coordinate closely with the United Nations
in responding to the crisis. As the Syrians plan for
transition, we are looking for additional ways to
support Syrian efforts to document serious violations
of international law, including the indiscriminate
bombardment and deliberate targeting of civilians.

No one can deny that Al-Assad's war against the
Syrian people now poses real challenges to all Syria's
neighbours, including Lebanon. From deadly attacks
by the Syrian regime across the border to tens of
thousands of refugees, Lebanon is already suffering
the consequences of the conflict. Hizbullah's active
and growing support for Al-Assad's war exposes
Hasan Nasrallah's claims of promoting Lebanon's
national interest as nothing more than a deadly form of
deception. The group's leaders may try to change the
subject by invoking hollow rhetoric about a so-called
resistance but the truth is plain to see. Nasrallah's
fighters are now part of Al-Assad's killing machine
and Hizbullah leaders continue to plot new measures to
prop up a murderous and desperate dictator with Iran.

We encourage the international community to
counter Hizbullah's terrorist activity and to do more to
expose its deepening involvement in Al-Assad's war. We
commend the Lebanese Government and the Lebanese
Armed Forces, in particular, for maintaining stability
and law and order at this critical juncture. We welcome
the efforts of President Sleiman and others to promote
dialogue, including with respect to the disarmament of
illegal militias, as called for in resolution 1559 (2004).
We reiterate our firm commitment to a stable, sovereign
and independent Lebanon.

Turning to Middle East peace efforts, as President
Obama said in his address before the General Assembly
last month: "The road is hard, but the destination
is clear: a secure, Jewish State of Israel and an
independent, prosperous Palestine" (ibid., p. 14). We
actively support the creation of a Palestinian State as part
ofa two-State solution as a result of direct negotiations,
without preconditions, between the Israelis and the
Palestinians. Unilateral actions, including initiatives
to grant the Palestinian Authority non-member State
observer status at the United Nations, would only
jeopardize the peace process and complicate efforts to
return the parties to direct negotiations. Any efforts to
use international forums to prejudge final status issues,
which can only be resolved directly by the parties, will
neither improve the daily lives of Palestinians nor foster
the trust essential to make progress towards a two-State
solution.

We remain focused on helping Israelis and
Palestinians to improve the environment between them
and to address the Palestinian Authority's chronic fiscal
crisis, in particular. We recognize the serious financial
challenges facing the Palestinian Authority and its
vital efforts to sustain the institutions of governance
that it has built. The Palestinian leadership has taken
several steps to address its financial challenges but it
needs our help. We appreciate the support of Israel and
of the wider donor community to provide the financial
resources to meet the basic needs of the Palestinian
people.

We all understand the severity of the current
economic situation in the Palestinian territories and the
consequences ofinaction. In parallel, we urge continued
international support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in order to further its efforts to provide the necessary
assistance for Palestinian refugees in the West Bank,
Gaza and elsewhere until a final negotiated solution is
reached.

Lasting peace between Palestinians and Israelis
requires both parties to take meaningful steps.
Palestinians should continue their security cooperation,
further strengthen public institutions and end
incitement. The onslaught of rockets fired by terrorists
in Gaza must cease immediately. We condemn those
attacks in the strongest terms. Israel should step up its
efforts to deter, confront and prosecute anti-Palestinian
violence and extremist hate crimes, including vandalism
at religious sites. We agree with President Peres that
"holy sites must not be harmed".

In the West Bank, the recent and repeated
destruction of Palestinian olive groves, which are a
critical source of income for the local population, is
deplorable. We look to the Israeli authorities to act
decisively to protect those resources and to investigate
such acts.

Like every United States Administration for
decades, we do not accept the legitimacy of continued
Israeli settlement activity. We continue to oppose
any efforts to legalize outposts. The fate of existing
settlements must be dealt with by the parties, along
with other permanent status issues.

Indeed, the road to peace is long and hard, but the
United States remained fully committed to helping the
parties to reach peace through a negotiated two-State
solution.

