Mr. Borg (Malta): My delegation would like to
join other delegations in expressing appreciation to
you, Mr. President, and to the other members of the
Security Council for giving us this opportunity to
participate in this interesting open debate on the
implementation of the measures set out in the note
contained in document S/2006/507, concerning the
working methods of the Security Council. I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank you, Sir, for your
concept paper (S/2010/165), which is making a
valuable contribution to this debate.

Improving the transparency, efficiency and
effectiveness of the working methods of the Security
Council must continue to serve as a pillar of Council
reform, which also continues to be the subject of
debate in the context of the five inextricably linked key
issues within the framework of the intergovernmental
negotiations. Increased transparency in the working
methods of the Security Council would increase not
only the credibility and legitimacy of the Council, but
also its accountability, in particular at a time when the
effectiveness of the Council is continually being tested.
In that regard, Malta welcomes the measures taken
recently by the Security Council to improve those three
dimensions of a progressive and open Security
Council.

While much more has to be done to reach an
optimal level of transparency, Malta believes that the
monthly briefings by incoming Council Presidents on
the programme of work and the increase in detail
contained in the annual report of the Security Council
that is presented to the General Assembly have
enhanced the relationship between the members of the
Council and the wider membership of the United
Nations. We also welcome the missions to the field
undertaken by Security Council members, thereby
bringing the work of the Council closer to
Governments and peoples.

It is an acknowledged fact that the adoption of
improved working methods depends in principle on the
members of the Security Council themselves. However,
we believe that the views of the general membership of
the United Nations should continue to receive positive
consideration by the Security Council membership,
including through the holding of open debates and
briefings and fewer closed meetings. That would in
turn enhance access to and participation in the work of
the Council for all members, especially small States.

There is a false perception that many issues
before the Security Council are the exclusive
responsibility of its members, and in particular of
permanent members. However, that perception is
fading with time owing to the growing recognition that
current threats are becoming increasingly global and
transnational in nature. No boundaries exist for such
threats. The matters that are brought to the attention of
the Council are therefore issues that call for the greater
involvement of and engagement by and with
non-members or the Council.

My delegation acknowledges that some progress
has been made with regard to regular consultations
between the Council and the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the Chairs of
the Commission's country-specific configurations. In
welcoming such an improvement, we feel that the
Security Council needs to make more space for the
Peacebuilding Commission in order to allow it to
further secure its place within United Nations
structures.
As a small State, Malta believes that an improved
and enhanced working relationship between the
Security Council and the other principal organs, in
particular the General Assembly, through regular and
institutionalized consultations should be a matter for
further consideration by the Council. The ongoing
dialogue between the President of the General
Assembly and the President of the Security Council is
commendable and should be further encouraged.

The number of challenges facing the Council is
on the increase, thereby placing additional burdens on
the workload and efficiency of the Council. In that
context, consideration must be given to making
existing United Nations technical information and
information-gathering capabilities more effective
through the use of information technology. Such
information - including prompt, relevant and current
information on matters with which the Council is
seized - should be made accessible not only to the
members of the Security Council, but also to the
membership of the United Nations a whole. That would
enable all Member States to better assess conflicts and
disputes that require an urgent, if not immediate,
response by all countries concerned. That would be
especially helpful in assisting the members of the
Council to take timely and appropriate action to
prevent the aggravation of particular situations or
disputes.

The working methods by which the Council
operates are crucial to the way the Council is held
accountable for the maintenance of international peace
and security. While noting the valid contribution being
made by the group of five small countries, Malta
encourages Council members to continue to explore
ways on how to improve the working methods of the
Security Council by ensuring enhanced transparency,
effectiveness and interaction with non-members of the
Council.

It is important that all Member States not only
feel that they own the United Nations reform process,
including that of the Security Council, but also that
they continue to assume the guardianship of our
Organization, of which the Security Council is a
principal organ.

