Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): First of all, I would like to offer my regards to
you, Mr. President, and convey my delegation's satisfaction
at the efficient and transparent way in which you have
presided over the work of the Security Council during the
month of July.

By adopting this draft resolution on Haiti today, which
my country is honoured to co-sponsor, the Security Council
will be clearly and firmly endorsing a broader and more
comprehensive View of the concept of international peace
and security, which we are duty-bound to protect and
defend, in accordance with the Charter. This new approach
to our responsibilities encompasses difficult and complex
situations such as that in Haiti, and also arises in many of
the other items on the Security Council's agenda,
particularly in the case of certain raging conflicts in Africa
and Asia.

Poverty and extreme underdevelopment are threats to
international peace and security. Civil wars and massive
flows of refugees are also objective threats to international
peace and security. The same applies to extreme
environmental degradation, terrorism, and a number of
socio-political phenomena and aspects of religious
fanaticism that have emerged in recent years and that we
have been forced to include on the international agenda.

The maintenance of international peace and security,
which is the Security Council's main responsibility, should
therefore be seen from a broader and more comprehensive
standpoint than the classical concept of conflict between
States or the ideological reasons and circumstances that
divided the world into blocs during the cold war.

This draft resolution on Haiti makes it clear that we
are making progress in unity and without major
discrepancies. We are moving in the right direction in terms
of understanding what - today, in 1997 - constitutes a
threat to international peace and security. Similarly, we
are making progress towards incorporating the concept of
the defence and protection of human rights as an essential
and mandatory component of the Security Council's
deliberations and agreements.

With regard to Haiti, the establishment and training
of a professional civilian police force will be a
fundamental factor in maintaining peace and security and
in ensuring the real and effective functioning of
democratic institutions, the rule of law and full respect for
human rights. However, this will not solve Haiti's major
economic and social development problems, which are so
starkly reflected in the United Nations Development
Programme's human development index. This aspect, as
is rightly set out in the draft resolution, is as urgent as the
matter before us today, and the debate on that question
goes on. This is the case in Haiti and in many countries
in Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa and Asia,
where underdevelopment, inequalities and extreme
poverty pose a real threat to international peace and
security.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General,
countries that are friends to Haiti and the Latin American
and Caribbean Group for their constant concern and for
the steps taken in recent weeks to reach this consensus in
the Security Council. I would also like to thank Canada,
the United States of America, France, Pakistan and other
countries whose support in terms of military personnel,
civilian police, logistics and financing is making the
Mission in Haiti possible. By adopting this draft
resolution, we will be undoubtedly supporting the people
of Haiti. However, at the same time, we will be helping
the United Nations move forward and determine its
proper role in facing the real challenges before the
international community at the end of the twentieth
century.

