I congratulate you, Mr. President, on the way in which you have presided over the work of the Security Council during July, and I thank you for convening this high-level open debate on climate and security. Climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time, and its adverse effects are undermining the ability of all countries to achieve sustainable development. Climate change is real and disproportionately affects people in vulnerable situations, and its global nature requires urgent international cooperation. Global temperature increase, biodiversity loss, desertification, drought, sea-level rise and natural disasters threaten well-being, livelihoods and ecosystems. Their adverse effects generate food insecurity, unemployment, inequalities and social tensions and exacerbate threats to peace and security, undermining the progress made over the years towards achieving sustainable development. The humanitarian consequences of climate change are also devastating, including the loss of millions of lives, displacement, vulnerability to exploitation and the likelihood of marginalization. It remains alarming that people have to travel long distances to obtain food and water, jeopardizing their opportunities for education and work, and that young people risk being recruited into violent extremism. We stress that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is the main intergovernmental forum with the necessary experience and expertise to negotiate a global response to climate change. We believe that the Security Council's discussions on this subject are complementary so as to better understand the links between climate change and international peace and security and mobilize the capacities of the various bodies of the United Nations system within their mandates. We believe that the degree of ambition necessary to combat climate change requires increased provision of means of implementation - adequate financial resources, capacity-building and technology transfer - to developing countries. We reaffirm the principles of equity and common but differentiated responsibilities and the right to development. The international community is aware that impacts on ecosystems and biodiversity and the abusive and illegal wildlife trade can increase the transmission of zoonotic and infectious diseases, such as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Earlier this month, it became clear that the COVID-19 pandemic is having a real impact on peace and security, which generates new vulnerabilities. We advocate prevention, capacity-building and resilience as essential components of disaster risk reduction to ensure preparedness and to build back better, as set out in the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, a document that includes guidance and early-warning mechanisms to address climate- related risks. Peace operations personnel must have the appropriate resources, training, information and tools with regard to the adverse effects of climate change and national contexts in order to assess and contain conflict situations. The Security Council could recommend that the UNFCCC further explore the links between climate change and peace and security. Input from national institutions and Resident Coordinators is also valuable in order to be operationally prepared. Peace and security are indispensable to achieving sustainability. We hope that this open debate will mobilize political will and increased resources to combat the adverse effects of climate change, particularly as we overcome and recover from the pandemic.
