Mr. Arias (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure for
me to address the Council in my capacity as Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

At today's meeting, I will address three important
issues. First of all, I should like to inform the Council
about the work done by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) during the last three months of the
past year. Secondly, I should like to point out the
principal themes of the tenth programme of work for
the current trimester. And, last but not least, I wish to
share with the Council the main aspects of the CTC's
report of 19 February on its own revitalization.

Before I begin, however, I would like to say that,
as members are aware, it is customary to hold this kind
of meeting every three months, but that, at the request
of several members of the CTC, the meeting was
delayed because it was believed that it would be
preferable for the report on revitalization to be ready
when I addressed the Council.

Let me begin with the CTC's work during
October, November and December 2003. In the
Committee's ninth working programme, we stated that
we would complete the review of 70 reports from
Member States and others on their implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The CTC has approved 44
reports and its sub-committees have reviewed and
considered 37 reports. Secondly, we will continue to
circulate the matrix on a monthly basis, with a view to
identifying assistance needs and offers, which we have
done. Thirdly, we will continue to update the Counter-
Terrorism Committee web site, which we have also
done. Fourthly, we will send to the Security Council
the list of States that submit their reports late, which I,
as Chairman of the CTC, have done.

Last but not least, the ninth working programme
also contains the commitment of the Chairman to
submit a report by 15 November on the problems
encountered by States and the CTC itself in
implementing the important resolution 1373 (2001).
The report from the Chair was sent to the Security
Council on 14 November and takes into account the
opinions expressed by the members of the Committee,
describing the main problems encountered and the
challenges to be met for the proper and full compliance
with resolution 1373 (2001) by States, the effective
operation of the CTC itself and the strengthening of the
Security Council with respect to the implementation of
the resolution.

Another important aspect of our work is that we
have continued to expand our contacts and cooperation
with international, regional and subregional
organizations, as outlined in the action plan agreed by
the Committee. The Committee has continued to
encourage and participate in meetings between
international and regional organizations, such as that
which took place in Washington, DC, on 7 October,
organized by the Organization of American States and
its Inter-American Committee against Terrorism. I take
this opportunity to express our gratitude for the work of
the Organization of American States and its Committee.

The Washington, DC, meeting reaffirmed the
commitment of all participants to pursuing further
coordination among their programmes in order to avoid
duplication and better to assist States in their efforts to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). The next follow-up
meeting is scheduled for next week, 11 and 12 March,
in Vienna and will be hosted by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. At the same time,
I have continued sending letters to various international
organizations suggesting the specific areas in which
such cooperation can be strengthened.

In pursuit of this policy during the period I have
referred to, I undertook a trip to strengthen the
Committee's connections to various organizations
headquartered in Europe. Over the course of four days,
I visited four capitals and met with eight organizations.
I met in Paris with the Counter-Terrorism Action
Group of the G8 and, in Vienna, with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. In Brussels, I
pursued contacts with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, the European Union Working Party on
Terrorism and the World Customs Organization.
Finally, I met in Strasbourg with the Council of
Europe. In every one of those meetings, we explored
better ways to increase cooperation between the CTC
and those organizations and to improve coordination
with their programmes in the fight against terrorism,
with the principal aim of avoiding overlapping.

As to the second issue, the main lines of the
CTC's current working programme are as follows. The
Committee will continue to study Member States'
reports on their implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). It has also been established that the CTC will
approve a report on the measures to be taken to tackle
the problems identified in its 14 November report. This
touches on the third issue, which I will address later.

It is also important that we review the
conclusions of next week's meeting between
international and regional organizations in Vienna. In
this regard, I am pleased to announce that we are
preparing a final joint declaration to be signed by all
participants, which will include concrete ways to
enhance our work in the fight against terrorism and
which will announce the establishment of a joint
assistance matrix that will be the responsibility of the
CTC and would give States and international
organizations alike an overall picture and a practical
tool for making better use of the technical assistance
programmes available.

Thirdly, and no less important, I wish to comment
on the main aspects of the 19 February report of the
CTC on its own revitalization, which has been circulated
today as a public document of the Security Council.

First of all, it is relevant to stress that the idea
behind the revitalization of the CTC has its origin in a
dual conviction - first, that terrorism is one of the
majors threats to international peace and security, and
secondly, that the United Nations must continue to play
the lead role in the fight against that threat and that the
role of the Security Council, through the CTC, must be
maintained and reinforced. The goal of the
revitalization is therefore to provide the CTC with the
means to become more operational, more proactive and
more visible. The revitalization of the Committee is
urgent and absolutely necessary to strengthen the fight
against terrorism by giving the CTC further means to
fulfil its mandate of monitoring the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001).

The report from the Chair, approved on 14
November, shows that the current procedures and
structures of the CTC must be reconsidered. That is
particularly true given that the CTC has evolved to
assume a more proactive role in the dialogue with
Member States, in evaluating the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), in facilitating technical
assistance to Member States and in promoting closer
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations.
All those challenges make it imperative to revitalize the
CTC.

The revitalization described in the 19 February
report gives the CTC the appropriate means to fulfil its
task within the existing United Nations structure. It is
also useful to point out the main goals of the
revitalization.
First, we must step up our efforts to promote and
monitor the implementation of all aspects of resolution
1373 (2001) through dialogue on the basis of its
guiding principles of cooperation, transparency and
even-handedness.

Secondly, we must strengthen the facilitation of
technical assistance to States.

Thirdly, we must strengthen the contacts and
coordination with other United Nations bodies and
enhance cooperation and coordination among
international and regional organizations.

Fourthly, we must improve the capacity to collect
information on the efforts of Member States and to
facilitate the provision of appropriate technical
assistance, including visits on the ground, always with
the approval of the State concerned.

Fifthly, we must improve the Committee's
capacity to make practical and concrete
recommendations to the Security Council in all areas
related to resolution 1373 (2001).

Sixthly and finally, we must expedite our work and
simplify procedures, adopt a proactive communication
strategy and develop and maintain a high degree of
capacity in all areas relevant to the resolution.

On the basis of those criteria, we have agreed that
the proposal for the new structure should be as follows.
The revitalized Committee will maintain the current
structure: the plenary, composed of Security Council
member States, and the Bureau, composed of the chair
and the vice-chairs. As an important addition, a
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
will be created, under which the current staff of experts
and Secretariat personnel will be reorganized.

The plenary will focus on policy and strategic
decisions, while the Directorate will be the executive
branch of the CTC and will be part of the Secretariat.
The staff of the new Directorate will be assigned to a
technical assistance and assessment office and an
information and administration office. To ensure the
necessary financial responsibility, the Committee's
financial resources will be subject, obviously, to United
Nations rules and regulations.

It is important to emphasize the main features of
this revitalization. First, it is consistent with Security
Council practice under the Charter and United Nations
rules and regulations. Secondly, it will not be a
permanent structure and will not set a precedent for
other Security Council bodies. We have agreed to
establish a sunset clause for 31 December 2007, under
which the Directorate will continue to exist only if the
Security Council so decides. For full implementation of
the revitalization, we need a Security Council resolution
one which, I stress, will not modify resolution 1373
(2001) or other existing relevant resolutions.

In the work before us, I appeal to all
representatives of Member States to continue and
strengthen their support, which is needed to fight
terrorism. The battle against this scourge, which, I
repeat - it is not a cliche - is one of the greatest
threats to peace and security in our time, cannot be
won without the full commitment and conviction of the
United Nations and the international community.

To this day, the Counter-Terrorism Committee is
the only comprehensive and general instrument within
the United Nations to help Member States implement
the measures contained in resolution 1373 (2001); that
is Why we must strengthen it. In the words of the
Secretary-General, "The work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the cooperation it has
received from Member States have been unprecedented
and exemplary" (S/PV.4453, p. 2). To maintain that
state of affairs and to be effective, the Committee must
be revitalized.

