Ms. Rice (United States of America): By passing
resolution 1636 (2005) this morning, we in the United
Nations have declared our support for the
Commission's search for truth, which is being ably led
by Mr. Detlev Mehlis. We have also affirmed our just
demands on the Syrian Government and made it clear
that failure to comply with these demands will lead to
serious consequences from the international
community. There is a close link between these two
actions.

For the past 30 years, Syria's occupation of
Lebanon penetrated all aspects of its society.
Beginning last year, however, Syria's interference
became so corrupt and unbearable that it began to
galvanize opposition against itself, both within
Lebanon and among the international community. Late
last August, the Syrian Government dictated the
extension of Lebanese President Emile Lahoud's term
of office. In response, the international community
acted - though some on the Security Council did not
want our action to single out Syria by name. Hence, in
resolution 1559 (2004) the Council called for the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from Lebanon and
summoned all States to respect Lebanese sovereignty.

When the Syrian Government met none of those
demands, Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, a
respected leader and admired philanthropist, resigned
his post in protest. Then, not four months later, Prime
Minister Hariri was assassinated in a terrorist bombing
that claimed the lives of 22 other people as well. After
mourning their murdered leader, one million Lebanese
citizens united in downtown Beirut to publicly call for
truth, justice and freedom from Syrian domination.
Again, the international community acted. We
supported the aspirations of the Lebanese people and
helped them to compel Syria to withdraw its military
forces from the country. The Security Council
unanimously passed resolution 1595 (2005), which
established the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission to examine the
crime and to identify the guilty.

We have now received the Commission's interim
report (S/2005/662), and its findings are deeply
disturbing. We are told that there is converging
evidence pointing at both Lebanese and Syrian
involvement in this terrorist act. And we are told that it
would be difficult to envisage a scenario whereby such
a complex assassination plot could have been carried
out without the knowledge of senior Syrian officials.
We have also learned that Syrian officials have sought
to impede this investigation by intentionally
misleading the Commission, including by providing
false testimony. Syria has offered no truthful
explanations to those serious allegations. Instead, it has
chosen until now to dismiss the Commission report as
politically motivated.

The Syrian Government has actively and
consistently worked to break the will of the Lebanese
people and to thwart the will of the international
community. At this important time, with the unanimous
adoption of the resolution today, the United Nations is
taking a step to hold Syria accountable for any further
failure to cooperate with the Commission's
investigations and to consider further action if
necessary. The Chapter VII resolution that we have
adopted today is the only way to compel the Syrian
Government to accept the just demands of the United
Nations and to cooperate fully with the Mehlis
investigation.

With our decision today, we are showing that
Syria has isolated itself from the international
community through its false statements, its support for
terrorism, its interference in the affairs of its
neighbours and its destabilizing behaviour in the
Middle East. Now, the Syrian Government needs to
make a strategic decision to fundamentally change its
behaviour. Until that day comes, however, we in the
international community must remain united, and we
must remain resolute in our pursuit of truth, our
defence of justice and our support of liberty for the
brave and courageous Lebanese people.

