Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Sir, for having organized this
public information meeting, allowing us to review the
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000) five years
after its adoption.

We express our appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno and to the Executive Director of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), Mr. Piot, for the extremely informative
briefings that they have just made within that
framework. The briefings described the extent of
awareness-raising with respect to the gravity of the
problems posed by the HIV pandemic to the security
and stability of States and the challenges raised for the
United Nations in the area of peacekeeping.

Benin welcomes the broad partnership
established to promote the implementation of
resolution 1308 (2000). With respect to progress made
in identifying risk factors related to the specificities of
defence and public security forces and of troops
mobilized and deployed within peacekeeping
operations, resolution 1308 (2000) was a decisive
turning point with regard to the international
community's actions. The corner was turned with the
adoption of a systematic and consistent approach to
controlling the spread of the disease in the areas noted.

We welcome the commitment and tireless efforts
of UNAIDS and its sponsors in promoting
multidimensional cooperation with States, other
institutions of the United Nations system, and regional
and non-governmental organizations to implement the
strategies to counter the disease.

The statistical data on the disease's prevalence
among armed and security forces - and specifically
within peacekeeping operations - lead us to three
conclusions. First, prevalence tends to decline in those
units that have been provided with appropriate training,
and to rise in those that have not. Secondly, mortality
rates are relatively low in the armed forces of countries
where antiretroviral therapy has been provided by the
public health system. Thirdly, among the factors
promoting the spread of the disease among troops
involved in peacekeeping operations, some can be
objectively controlled if administrative authority is
exercised. That is the case, for instance, with
continuous rotation of troops and personnel. Strict
compliance with the rules in that area can greatly
contribute to preventing the epidemic's spread.
With respect to those three conclusions, we need
to intensify our efforts to strengthen preventive
practices and attitudes where they continue to lag.
Factors promoting the spread of the disease among
armed and security forces need to be addressed
adequately. Furthermore, the fact that only 109
countries are developing programmes for their
uniformed personnel clearly demonstrates how far we
still have to go in persuading States to recognize the
important of those programmes. The methodical
follow-up of the resolution's implementation has
enabled UNAIDS clearly to identify the challenges
facing uniformed personnel. The means need to be
found to act on those challenges.

We believe that it is important to draw attention
to the need to take the fight against AIDS into account
within the framework of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement
programmes. Efforts remain to be undertaken to
mitigate the financial constraints that handicap the
campaign against the disease in certain countries where
it is rampant and decimating human resources. The
Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria and other funds working in that field need to
be able provide significant support for Governments'
efforts to mobilize against the disease.

At the same time, it would also be desirable to
ensure the broadest possible dissemination of lessons
learned from recent assessments. That would make it
possible to raise leaders' awareness of the importance
of AIDS programmes for uniformed personnel.

We feel that United Nations AIDS policies in the
deployment of peacekeeping operations are most
sound. There is an obligation to be consistent with
regard to respect for human rights and the fight against
stigmatization and discrimination. Specifically, the
zero tolerance policy with regard to sexual exploitation
is entirely appropriate, as is the campaign to prevent
rape as a weapon of war in armed conflict.

In general, we support the recommendations set
out by UNAIDS to enhance the effectiveness of United
Nations and State efforts in the defence and civil
protection sectors, particularly in their advocacy of
Department of Peacekeeping Operations funding for
AIDS programmes within peacekeeping operations.
Moreover, we must raise awareness among troops
involved in peacekeeping operations prior to their
deployment. We further support the recommendation to
establish a partnership between peacekeeping training
programmes and national AIDS programmes in host
countries. That would allow us to establish synergies
and better to benefit from the contribution of
peacekeeping operations in terms of human resources
and assets.

