Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I would like
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I am convinced that you will guide the
work of the Council with wisdom and skill. I would
also like to thank your predecessor, Sir Emyr Jones
Parry, for his work at the helm of the Council last
month.

The Council of the Arab League held an
emergency meeting today at the level of permanent
representative to consider the consequences of the
repugnant Israeli attack against Syrian territory. The
League considers that this attack constitutes an
escalation that threatens international peace and
security, as well as representing a deterioration in the
situation such that it could spin out of control and
involve the entire region in a cycle of violence. It calls
upon the United Nations to discharge its
responsibilities to preserve international peace and
security and to consider this question under Chapter
VII of the Charter.

The Council of the Arab League denounces this
attack and considers that it is yet another flagrant
violation of the United Nations Charter and of the
principles of international law. Israel is fully
responsible for all consequences that may result from
such aggression.

The Council reaffirms its support for and
solidarity with the Syrian Arab Republic and any
measures that it may adopt in self-defence against such
aggression. The Council calls upon the Security
Council to prevent Israel from continuing such
provocative acts. We call for the cessation of State
terrorism and Israeli measures against the Palestinian
people, Syrian and Lebanon in order to ensure that the
entire region does not become inflamed and experience
even greater insecurity.

This attack reaffirms the aggressive nature of
Israel and the fact that the Israeli Government rejects
any peace initiative. Israeli aggression against Syria is
part and parcel of Israeli policy to continue the
occupation of the Syrian Golan and the other occupied
Arab territories. It confirms that Israel is not devoted to
a just and lasting peace throughout the Middle East. It
is Israeli politics and its policy in continuing
settlements and annexation of Arab territories.

This attack acerbates the situation. It will have a
serious fallout that will make any peaceful settlement
of the conflict impossible. I call on the Security
Council to discharge its duty and see what can be done
now, because Israel works beyond the range of legality
as enshrined in all international resolutions. The
Security Council's double standards are enabling Israel
to continue to act outside international law, as if it
enjoys total impunity. The Security Council has
adopted 37 resolutions that Israel has not implemented.
Israel has not implemented any of those resolutions.

At the very heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict we
find Israel's occupation of Arab territories. Israel is
trying to distract people from this truth. Israel is
presenting its acts as if they are a way to eliminate
terrorism. That is naive. Israeli occupation of Arab
territories is at the very heart of this problem. It will
remain unsolved until Israel abides by international
legality and leaves those occupied Arab territories.
Measures and punishments exacted by Israel against
the Palestinian people do not bring peace to the region;
they lead to violence and continuing deterioration of
the situation. That situation can be solved only by
sitting around the negotiating table, and Israel must
implement the Security Council resolutions, the 2002
proposal from Beirut and the principle of land for
peace.

