I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings, and I am particularly grateful to Ms. Tai for bringing her story and her pragmatic and clear vision to the Council. Between them, they illustrated the dire and deteriorating humanitarian situation faced by millions of South Sudanese and the urgent need for the full implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. I also want to convey the United Kingdom's gratitude for the work of the humanitarian community in South Sudan. We have heard today how challenging the humanitarian environment is; with seven aid workers killed this year alone, it is a sad fact that South Sudan remains one of the most dangerous places in the world to be an aid worker. But we know that without them, countless more lives would have been lost. I should like to touch on three issues. The first is the implementation of the peace agreement. Two years ago the Council welcomed the leadership shown by all sides in signing the peace agreement. Despite significant delays, we also welcomed in February the leadership by the parties in forming the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity. Since then, we have seen some positive steps taken to build state-level institutions. However, the people of South Sudan need to see the dividends of peace. We have heard this a lot from colleagues today. Implementation of the peace agreement must now be accelerated, and we stand ready to support further progress. But ongoing violence is the key driver of humanitarian need in South Sudan. We are deeply concerned by the increased violence that has led to so many civilian deaths in recent months. We call on the Government in Juba and all those involved to make concerted efforts to stop the killing and address the root causes of conflict through effective governance and dialogue at the national and local levels. This includes addressing outstanding issues under the peace agreement, notably the appointment of a governor in Upper Nile state. We also call on non-signatories to engage in the Rome process and for all sides to respect the cessation of hostilities. With thousands of South Sudanese lives at risk, compromise and collaboration is needed now more urgently than ever. Secondly, on the humanitarian situation, the stalled peace process and increasing subnational violence have exacerbated the stark deterioration of the humanitarian situation. As we have heard today, the situation is desperate: 7.5 people million in humanitarian need, economic deterioration and a growing risk of famine. That has been amplified by the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic, by desert locusts and by flooding. Already, more than half the population faces acute food insecurity, and some areas now face the very real prospect of famine-like conditions. This must be addressed without delay. I was impressed by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock's innovative approach to dealing with those challenges. But the bottom line is clear: they need more resources. The other impediment is the limits of humanitarian access that hurt those who need it most. Again, it was good to hear that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is innovating to deal with challenges and provision, but it is also vital that South Sudan's Government ensure that humanitarian workers can access communities in need and that the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) can carry out its mandate unhindered. Finally, on the protection of civilians, it was incredibly worrying to hear about the spike in violence, particularly the presence of actors from outside South Sudan exacerbating the problem. Ultimately, the primary responsibility for protecting South Sudan's citizens rests with the Government of South Sudan, including with respect to those currently living in United Nations protection-of-civilians sites. The Mission's plan to re-designate protection-of-civilians sites should be implemented through close consultation with the communities affected and with humanitarian actors in a transparent process that prioritizes safety and security. Again, we were encouraged to hear Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer talk about how the Mission can adapt to its operating environment and find new ways to deliver on its mandate. As others have said, it is also critical that South Sudan cooperate with rather than inhibit UNMISS and ensure that the Mission can deliver on its protection- of-civilians mandate. I join Christoph and others in saying that we hope that the representative of South Sudan can join us in December to give us the Government's perspective on these issues and also to hear directly the Council's concerns and the briefings. The South Sudanese people deserve lasting peace and stability. We call on all parties to redouble their efforts to realize that aim in the spirit of cooperation envisaged in the 2018 peace agreement.
