Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation is grateful to you, Madam President, for
having organized this public meeting on the current
situation in the Middle East. We also thank Ms. Kane,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
the information she brought to our attention.

Once again, urgency compels us to consider an
extremely grave situation: that of Palestine. The spark
that ignited the conflagration was the kidnapping of an
Israeli soldier following a commando operation
targeting an Israeli military facility. We may well
wonder about the reasons - the real motives - behind
that act, or even about its appropriateness in a context
as delicate as that of a contentious Israeli-Palestinian
situation that is so sensitive to manage - all the more
so when we consider that recently, some rather positive
developments had eased our minds a bit in that regard.

I am referring to the inter-Palestinian talks
between Fatah and Hamas, which had shown some
progress, to the point where one could speak of a
certain de facto, implicit recognition of Israel by the
current Palestinian Government. I am referring also to
at least the announcement of a gradual resumption by
international partners of financial assistance to the
Palestinian authorities. Above all, there was the issue
of a return to the road map thanks to the joint efforts of
the parties, particularly President Abbas and Prime
Minister Ehud Olmert. Egypt and other international
partners were associated with those efforts. We
commend their goodwill and their readiness to assist.
My country cannot fail to deplore any bellicose
attitude, which, in such a context, weakens the chances
for peace and law while increasing those for tension
and crisis. Therefore, the kidnapping and holding of
the Israeli soldier by the Palestinian groups claiming
responsibility is unacceptable. It is an unfortunate act
that we cannot in any way encourage.

Israel thus found a pretext for carrying out
disproportionate military operations that have had the
result of intolerably worsening the ever more
precarious lives of the Palestinian people, who today
are largely deprived of water and electricity and
subjected to true official terrorism.

Previous speakers, including the representatives
of Palestine and Qatar, have already described how the
actions carried out by the Israeli army are in violation
of the relevant international conventions and
humanitarian law. Our indignation extends to the arrest
and detention of Palestinian officials, ministers and
parliamentarians, which mock the Palestinian
Authority's legitimate institutions.

At this stage, we should like to appeal to the
goodwill of all the parties to continue to give priority
to the objectives of peace within the framework of the
road map so that the Middle East can commit itself to
the path towards a peaceful solution and turn away,
once and for all we hope, from violence as a way to
settle the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

At this stage, that is all we would like to say. We
express the hope that the international community,
particularly the Security Council, will, to the extent
possible, lend its support to the efforts of the
individuals and institutions of good will that are
prepared to help Israel and Palestine live side by side
in peace and security.

