Mr. Hawke (New Zealand): I thank Kuwait for
convening today's open debate and Ian Martin for
his briefing.

We all have a stake in this issue because poor
working methods can lead to poor outcomes. While we
welcome note S/2017/507 as an important codification,
it must be equally met with a change in Council culture.
In that regard, I wish to make three points.

First, the Council's working methods should operate
to empower elected members to be fully involved
in collective decision-making. The legitimacy and
effectiveness of the Council's decisions are maximized
when it works as 15 rather than five. We welcome recent
progress in ensuring that incoming elected members
are better prepared for membership. However, they still
face significant disadvantages. Important decisions are
sometimes negotiated without them, leaving elected
members presented with last-minute take-it-or-leave-it
proposals with no realistic opportunity to participate.

So-called penholdership can become distorted to
exclude meaningful input from elected members. At
the same time, elected members should themselves
be ambitious and enact the change in behaviour they
wish to see in the Council. We encourage greater
consideration as to whether any issues faced by the
Council would benefit from elected members working
more closely. For New Zealand, one such example was
working with four other elected Council members to
draft and secure the unanimous adoption of resolution
2286 (2016) on health care and armed conflict. There
are many other such examples to look to for inspiration.

Secondly, the Council's working methods should
operate to enable meaningful engagement with troop-
and police-contributing countries. It is a problem that
can be addressed at least in part by taking simple
practical steps. During our Council term, we initiated
informal triangular consultations among the Council,
the Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries. Informality does not come naturally to
the United Nations but our aim was to create space
for a more fluid and timely exchange of information
and perspectives. We welcome the Council's pledge
in revised note 507 to continue and develop informal
consultations and we look forward to them becoming
more regularized.

Thirdly, the Council's working methods should
operate to strengthen its capacity to prevent conflict.
For the Council to act early and prevent conflict,
all Council members must be well informed of
developments and potential threats to peace and
security. The key is strengthening the Council's
situational awareness. Where issues are fast-moving,
with competing accounts on the ground, the Secretariat
can play an important role in providing authoritative
information to Council members.

For the Council's own legitimacy and effectiveness,
it is in all our interests that its culture and behaviour
reinforce that.

