Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting, for
keeping this theme on the agenda and, in particular, for
the way that Nigeria responded to the challenge of Ebola
within its own borders, as well as for your leadership in
helping so many others.

I welcome the briefings by Director-General
Chan - and thank her for beaming in from Hong
Kong - Special Envoy Nabarro, Mr. Tete Antonio
and Dr. Fallah, who spoke so movingly about the
determination of communities to survive. I want to
express my thanks to Dr. Nabarro for his tireless work
in coordinating the international Ebola response and
to Dr. Chan for her leadership of the World Health
Organization (WHO). I welcome her commitment to
better equipping the organization for future responses.
As others have said, all of us have a great deal to
learn from what happened this last time. I want to pay
particular tribute to Dr. Fallah's bravery and the power
of civil society that he represents in combating this
disease.

The African Union has made a significant
contribution to the fight against Ebola. All 835
African health workers deployed by the African Union,
including the 190 Nigerians who volunteered as part of
that effort, are a testimony to the region's commitment
to defeating Ebola.

In September last year, the United States Centres
for Disease Control and Prevention predicted that up
to 1.4 million cases could emerge in West Africa by
early 2015, posing a clear threat to international peace
and security. It is important to remember that that was
a real risk, but today the number of cases stands at just
over 27,000. The Ebola epidemic has been brought
under control. The Council usually discusses bad news.
Today, we should take a moment to mark that progress
and take steps to ensure that it lasts.

Curbing the spread of that terrible disease has
required hard work and sacrifice, in particular on the
part of local people in affected areas, but also ofnational
Governments in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea
and health-care workers from across the entire world.
Tragically, over 11,000 people have died. That number
would have been far greater without their dedication.
We can be proud that the international community
rallied to support the efforts to defeat Ebola.

The United Kingdom played its part. In Sierra
Leone, we committed over $660 million and built six
treatment centres and three diagnostic laboratories.
With the expertise of both our military and civilians,
we supported a command-and -control function that
made both the national and district responses more
effective. In total, over 1,300 military and health-care
workers deployed to support the response. Throughout
the crisis, we responded with pace, ambition and
innovation working with many others, including China,
Cuba, Denmark, Sweden, New Zealand and Australia.

Our collective efforts are working. From a peak of
over 500 new cases per week in Sierra Leone, we saw
only one last week. But that is still one too many. The
international community must remain committed to the
region and to getting to zero. As the recent cases in
Liberia show, even when a country has reached zero,
we cannot drop our guard. To get to zero and stay there
we must maintain our resolve and our support. The
affected countries are rightly taking steps to transition
out of crisis and into recovery, helping millions of
children back to school, restoring basic health-care
services and kickstarting economic activity. That all
requires the backing of everybody here.

We thank the Secretary-General for holding the
remarkably successful International Ebola Recovery
Conference in July. It will now be important for donors
to work closely with both the affected countries and with
each other to best coordinate activities for the benefit
of the region. The United Kingdom will continue to
stand by Sierra Leone and the region. We have pledged
$370 million in support ofPresident Koroma's two-year
ebola recovery strategy and our commitment to Ebola
recovery, including debt relief through the International
Monetary Fund, is now over $500 million.

Collectively, we must learn the lessons from this
crisis to improve the international and national health
systems. We therefore welcome the work that is being
carried out by the Secretary-General's High-level Panel
on the Global Response to Health Crises. It is clear that
we need to achieve three things. First, WHO reform at
the headquarters, regional and country levels is needed
if it is to properly coordinate and lead responses to
humanitarian and health crises. Secondly, we need
more investment in prevention and preparedness so that
national health systems have the early warning triggers
and safe affordable technologies to allow them to respond
quickly and effectively to future outbreaks. Thirdly, we
need swifter rapid-response mechanisms, with stronger
links between the health and humanitarian sectors, so
that they are able to respond to health emergencies in a
coordinated way.

The response in Sierra Leone showed us the
effectiveness of a joint, cross-Government and
multinational approach that allowed us to rapidly design
and deliver an emergency response - what Sierra
Leone's Permanent Representative Vandi Minah calls
more vividly a complete "jigsaw puzzle" of a response.
All of that was done in very closely partnership
throughout with the Government of Sierra Leone, and
only President Koroma's strong leadership made it
possible.

We cannot wipe out the suffering this disease has
inflicted, but we can commit clearly today to reaching
zero. And we must prepare deliberately and effectively
both to prevent and to tackle disease outbreaks in the
future.

