Mr. Owada (Japan): Japan believes that maintaining
the territorial integrity and unity of Afghanistan as a
stable sovereign State is important for the peace and
stability not only of that subcontinent region of Asia, but
also of the broader Asian regions adjoining it. It should
also be noted that the hostilities in Afghanistan are
hampering efforts to tackle such vital problems as the
control of drug trafficking and international terrorism. As
an Asian nation, we in Japan are gravely concerned about
the continuing and worsening armed conflict in that
country, and attach great importance to its early and
peaceful resolution.

It is against this background that Japan has
continued and will continue to support the United
Nations, which occupies the central role in international
efforts toward this end. We particularly support and
greatly appreciate the effort of the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan, led by Mr. Norbert H011, to
achieve the end.

Despite those efforts of the Mission, however, the
situation remains very serious. It should be made clear to
all the parties that an attempt to resolve the conflict by
military means will not bring about durable peace in that
country; rather it will jeopardize the chance of a peace
based on national reconciliation, harm relations with
neighbouring countries and make enduring unity more
difficult.

All factions should be brought to agree to an
immediate ceasefire and begin negotiations on the
establishment of a national unity government.

Neighbouring countries should refrain from
exercising their influence on the factions involved to
exacerbate the situation and instead cooperate in a
constructive manner with the United Nations in its
mediation activities through the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan.

As an Asian nation that should offer its own share
of contributions in our common task of restoring peace in
Afghanistan, Japan is keenly conscious of its
responsibility to contribute to the peace process in
Afghanistan, in keeping with the views I have just
outlined. I wish to mention here, in particular, three areas
where Japan wishes to offer its contribution.

 

First, as I stated in this Council Chamber on 16
October 1996, Japan would be prepared to consider offering
a venue for a meeting between the parties directly involved,
in close cooperation with the United Nations, if and when
such an offer could assist in bringing the parties to the
negotiating table. We in Japan believe that, as an impartial
third party to the conflict in Afghanistan, Japan has a role
to play in complementing the activities of the United
Nations Special Mission, through inducing the parties in
conflict to agree on a ceasefire. Japan is looking forward to
the ripening of an opportunity for such a meeting. Japan
hopes to be able, when the time is ripe, to provide a forum
in which all parties will be able to participate and engage
in direct negotiations.

Secondly, in line with this perspective, Japan is
engaged in assisting the efforts of the Special Mission,
which is endeavouring to promote direct contacts and
dialogue between the four major parties: the Dostum,
Rabbani, Khalili and Taliban factions. Thus, for example,
to those parties which had accepted an invitation -
namely, Dostum, Rabbani and Khalili - an opportunity
was provided recently in Tokyo for useful preliminary
contacts. There Japan explained what it had in mind in the
way of contributing to a settlement of the Afghan conflict
and urged the parties to cooperate with the United Nations
mediation efforts and to start substantive discussions on an
immediate ceasefire and a peaceful settlement. Japan is
considering making a similar demarche for the Taliban as
well.

Thirdly, with regard to assistance to Afghanistan,
humanitarian assistance by international organizations and
non-governmental organizations should continue in order to
expedite the return of refugees to a relatively stable area,
depending upon their situation. In the view of my
delegation, however, what is equally important, if not more
important, will be to start the process of economic
cooperation and national reconstruction in an integrated
way, together with the efforts for achieving political
reconciliation and national unity.

As I also stated last October in this Council Chamber,
we should start examining what the possibilities are for
offering a hand of help and support to the Afghan parties
in their reconstruction and rehabilitation in the context of
our endeavours for a peaceful settlement, without waiting
for the attainment of a final peace. For this purpose, my
country is interested in cooperating with the United
Nations, when the time is judged to be right, in the
promotion of an international conference in which the
problem of post-conflict reconstruction will be examined as
a central theme on the agenda for peace in Afghanistan.
With this possibility in mind, my Government will be
participating in the meeting of the Afghanistan Support
Group, to be held in Geneva on 21 April, which will
provide an opportunity for exploring the possibilities of
such an integrated approach for peace and reconstruction.

An open debate on Afghanistan in the Security
Council can achieve the important purpose of opening up
a new vista for peace, by means of a number of new
ideas focusing the attention of the international
community on this conflict-ridden country and offering
new, innovative approaches to peace in that region. My
delegation hopes that this open debate of the Security
Council will succeed not only in drawing the attention of
the international community to the dire situation in this
often forgotten area of human tragedy, but also in
generating new impetus towards attaining durable peace
in Afghanistan.

