Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having convened
this meeting, which provides a good opportunity for
the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the Council to
take stock of their work over the past two years. In my
case, this means the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737

(2006), concerning the Islamic Republic of Iran, whose
work I have had the privilege to steer as Chair since
1 January 2011.

First of all, with regard to the 1591 Committee, after
two years of work, I can affirm that the implementation
of measures by the Council is a useful instrument
for advancing a political solution for the situation in
Darfur, but there is still a long way to go to meet its
full potential. As Chair of the Committee, I sought to
foment consensus on the interpretation of the measures,
to offer all support possible to the Group of Experts in
supporting that work, and to establish open dialogue
with the various actors involved. During the period in
question, the Committee held 12 informal consultations;
maintained close communication with the United
Nations-African Union Joint Special Representative
for Darfur; responded to requests for information from
Member States with regard to the scope of sanctions;
and adopted an agreement with INTERPOL on
INTERPOL-United Nations Security Council Special
Notices, which entered into force on 20 November. That
agreement will strengthen the application of measures
by Member States.

The principle difficulty we have faced in the past
two years was guaranteeing the access of the Panel
of Experts to the Sudan. A failure to issue visas and
permits to enter Darfur in a timely manner was a
recurrent problem, which both the Committee and the
Security Council worked to resolve. Although there
were improvements over the last year, unacceptable
obstacles have recently begun to reappear. The
Permanent Representative of the Sudan was attentive
to our requests and conveyed the concerns and requests
that I presented on behalf of the Committee to the
authorities of his country.

I believe that it would be advisable to further the
direct dialogue between the Committee and the Sudanese
authorities in order to improve the mutual perception
of the impact that the sanctions regime could have on
the peace process in Darfur and to exchange opinions
on the remaining concerns with regard to the measures
imposed by the Security Council. The visit that the
Committee intends to make to Khartoum and Darfur, to
which the Sudanese Government has assented, will be
an excellent opportunity to expand the communication
channels, improve the understanding of the sanctions
and move towards their full implementation.

Despite the difficult environment in which it must
work, the Group of Experts has been noteworthy as a
reliable source of information for the Committee in
monitoring the implementation of sanctions. In order
for it to do its job, there must be harmonious work,
cooperation and singleness of purpose among its
members, as well as high levels of quality with regard
to the information it supplies. To that end, I appeal to
Member States, in compliance with their responsibilities,
to cooperate with the Group of Experts, to provide it
with timely, accurate and truthful information, and to
answer its requests and facilitate its visits.

I must highlight the cooperation of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) with the work of the Group. I believe that it
must be permanently maintained at every level.

The effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions requires the commitment and full
cooperation of all Member States. The reports on the
implementation of sanctions are vital for the work of
the Committee and its Group of Experts. To date, only
29 national reports have been received. I therefore
invite Members of the Organization to provide available
information on the implementation of the relevant
Council resolutions.

With regard to new listings, I believe that progress
must be made in considering proposals involving
the individuals and entities falling under the criteria
established in Security Council resolutions, particularly
with regard to those who impede the peace process and
those involved in attacks on UNAMID staff.

Lastly, I would urge a greater degree of discussion
with the private sector in order to improve the
understanding of sanctions by the businesses at work
in the Sudan.

Allow me, Mr. President, to refer now to the
activities carried out by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) under my
leadership. With the adoption of resolution 1929 (2010),
on 9 June 2010, a decisive step was taken towards the
full implementation of measures to ensure that Iran's
nuclear programme is destined exclusively for peaceful
ends. The resolution established the Group of Experts
so that, under the guidance of the Committee, but
acting independently, it would assist it in complying
with its mandate. During my two years as Chair, the
practice of holding regular meetings was established,
which provided the possibility of exchanges of view
with the active participation of the Group of Experts.
Those meetings were intended to effectively achieve
the proper implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Committee met eight times.

In order to optimize its work, in July 2011 the
Committee thoroughly revised the guidelines for
carrying out its work. This process was aimed at
redefining its working methods to make them more
effective and establishing clearer and more accurate
procedures. Thanks to the judicious review of its
guidelines, the Committee has improved its level
of dialogue with Member States, inter alia, by
means of the timely receipt of notices on reports of
sanctions violations and matters related to requests for
exemptions. In fulfilling my duties, I submitted eight
quarterly reports in public meetings giving an account
of the developments in the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions pertaining to the
Islamic Republic of Iran.

In July, under the Colombian presidency of the
Security Council and with the support of the Group of
Experts and the Secretariat, a public meeting was held
on the work of the Committee and its Group of Experts.
That provided an good opportunity to interact with
non-Security Council members and to learn first hand
of their opinions on the sanctions committees, the work
the committees do and their effectiveness with regard
to compliance with the respective mandates. I believe
that this practice should be kept up, as it contributes
to the outreach and transparency that Member States
want in the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies.
During the 2011-2012 biennium, the Committee, with
the valuable support of the Secretariat, modernized and
updated its web page to make it more user friendly.

Allow me, Sir, to refer now to the close cooperation
that has prevailed between the Committee and its
Group of Experts over the past two years. There
is no doubt that we have benefitted enormously
from the experience of the Group with regard to the
implementation of sanctions. If the Committee is to
do its work properly, it is vital that this exchange be
maintained and strengthened. The working methods
adopted by the Group have made it possible to ensure
the Group's independence in investigating reported
incidents, to provide information on its findings and
to make recommendations aimed at making Member
States aware of their obligations with regard to the
implementation of Security Council resolutions.

I must say that, both for my country and for me
personally, it was a great pleasure and honour to
have presided over those two Committees that, albeit
different, made it possible for us to understand that,
without the full and firm support of Member States,
those subsidiary bodies would be unable effectively to
carry out their work. We believe that it is imperative
to intensify dialogue and cooperation with all Member
States in order to bolster their ability to effectively
implement the measures adopted by the Council.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the members
of the Committees for their cooperation, active
participation, valuable contributions and enriching
discussions. I also wish to extend thanks to the Group of
Experts for the work they have done in contributing to
compliance with the mandates of the two Committees.
Lastly, I would like to sincerely thank the Secretariat
team for its excellent work and exceptional support to
me in carrying out my work.

