Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
join previous speakers in thanking Ambassador Alvaro
de Soto, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, for his update on the situation in the Middle
East, which reminded us of the many obstacles that
continue to confront the peace process.

During the last briefing to the Council on this
subject, hopes of reaching a Palestinian-Israeli
understanding were expressed after an improved
political climate had developed in the region. The
successful completion of the presidential elections in
January, followed by the Sharm el-Sheikh
understandings in February and the London meeting in
March, provided an opportunity for Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to commit themselves to end
violence, to build trust and to work together towards an
Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and parts of the West
Bank in August. Given that positive momentum, the
international community committed itself to support
the parties in moving the peace process forward.
Emphasis was placed on a full and complete
withdrawal consistent with the road map, marking an
important step towards realizing the vision of two
States living side by side in peace and security.

Recent events on the ground have suddenly
overshadowed those positive gains through unrelenting
violence and counter-violence, resulting in the injuries
or deaths of several innocent people and in the loss of
property. The renewed state of violence is, in our view,
quite alarming. We continue to condemn the suicide
bombing in Netanya and the firing of rockets that
killed several innocent Israeli civilians. We urge that
those events, coming less than one month before
Israel's scheduled pullout, should not be allowed to
undermine the withdrawal, which is an important
element of the peace process.

It is therefore our hope that the withdrawal will
be sustained, coordinated and peaceful. In that regard,
we commend the Palestinian Authority for its prompt
action in preventing the continuation of the attacks
directed against Israel and in insisting on a smooth
Israeli withdrawal. For its part, the Israeli Government
has acted well by rejecting requests for delay in the
withdrawal and by standing firm against opposition to
the disengagement process.

However, we regret the decision to proceed with
the construction of the separation wall in and around
East Jerusalem. That step, together with the accelerated
settlement activity, does not bode well for the peace
process. The continued construction of the wall and the
settlement activity go against earlier understandings
and stand to undermine the true spirit of mutual
confidence that is critical if any substantial progress
towards peace is to be made.

We urge both the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to remain steadfast in their
search for peace and security for their peoples and for
the region. In the past, they have shown that they can
overcome the many challenges that they face. We have
an obligation to encourage and support them. The
setbacks that they encounter must not be allowed to
derail the peace process.

I now turn to the matter of the Blue Line
separating Israel and Lebanon. We are concerned at
reported violations by both sides that have led to injury
and loss of life. We urge the new Lebanese authorities
to strive to exercise greater control over all their
territory and to bring to an end the attacks emanating
from its side. Israel, for its part, should refrain from air
violations of the Blue Line. Neither the two parties nor
any of us must move backward; we must preserve the
gains made so far.

