Mr. Heusgen (Germany): With regard to what you
said at the beginning about everyone speaking for no
more than five minutes, Mr. President, I would not mind
if you brought back the hourglass to help us with that.
Unlike my Russian colleague, I believe that it
is very timely that this issue is back on the agenda,
because we believe that it still represents a threat to
peace and security. Burundi's domestic political crisis
is unresolved, its security situation is volatile and there
are tensions in neighbouring areas. I know that our
friend the Ambassador of Burundi, who believes that
the issue should not be discussed here, also shares that
reluctance to include it on our agenda. But first of all, as
we have heard today, a number of crises, both domestic
and regional, continue. We also heard very clearly how
everyone in the region and from the United Nations is
ready to help. It was very encouraging to hear what
the East African Community, the African Union, the
United Nations, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund are doing.

That international engagement is absolutely
essential to achieving what the country needs, which is
free, fair and transparent elections and the promotion
of the reconciliation process and socioeconomic
development. We heard the figures on the number of
refugees, as well as the implications of climate change.
The refugees must be reintegrated and the participation
of women and young people promoted. In that regard,
I appeal to the Ambassador of Burundi to accept that
support. At the same time, I also encourage those in
the neighbouring region, including the East African
Community and the guarantors of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement, to continue their
engagement and see to it that progress is made.

The fact that former President Kafando was not
received during his last visit to Burundi is very sad. I
listened to my colleague from South Africa who clearly
said that President Kafando is doing critical work
there. I therefore once again urge Burundi to continue
to prepare for the elections. It is very good that initial
steps have been taken in that regard, but we are also
hearing reports that opposition politicians are being
arrested. And according to Burundian law, political
actors living in exile are not allowed to run for election.
We further appeal for independent media - not just the
BBC but others as well - to be allowed to report freely.

With regard to human rights, I listened to our
briefers who talked about the worrying human rights
situation, where they say there are threats to civil
society and civil freedoms. I therefore appeal to the
Ambassador to do everything to allow the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
back into Bujumbura.

On the socioeconomic front, I also want to support
what Ambassador Lauber said about the importance
of supporting the national development plan. The
Peacebuilding Fund is ready to do that. Again, I think
the international community wants to support Burundi.
We are not its enemy but rather its supporter. We want
it to go in the right direction, and for that it needs
elections, socioeconomic development, respect for
human rights and plurality.

