Mr. Kobler (spoke in French): I would first like to
congratulate France on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March. It is
as always an honour to appear before the Council to
present the latest developments in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO).

In the coming days the Council will adopt a
resolution that will give MONUSCO its new mandate. I
thank you, Mr. President, for having given us the means
to fulfil our mission, as I thank you, Sir, for also having
understood and supported us in difficult times.

(spoke in English)

The mandate renewal consultations are a welcome
opportunity to look back on what has been achieved
over the past year, whether MONUSCO is still well
placed to fulfil its mandate and what adjustments could
be made in the year to come to work more efficiently.

First of all, I would like to thank the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and in particular
its Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Tshibanda, with
whom we have always cooperated in an open and frank
spirit. MONUSCO is a temporary guest in his country,
a service provider for the Congo, and at the same time a
firm advocate of the values of the United Nations. In the
presence of Foreign Minister Tshibanda last Saturday,
I had the chance to discuss with President Kabila the
current state of affairs in the country, in particular the
relationship between the Government and MONUSCO.
We agreed on a structured dialogue to discuss issues of
concern.

I will now update the Council on four points. First,
I will discuss the upcoming elections of 2015 and
2016. Secondly, I will brief the Council on the security
situation in the country, including the implementation
of the United Nations human rights due diligence
policy. Thirdly, I will address stabilization efforts and
the restitution of State authority. Fourthly, I will discuss
how to return to a constructive relationship with the
Government by establishing an atmosphere of trust.

My first point is the upcoming elections. I welcome
the publication of the global electoral calendar on
12 February, which shall lead to the holding of
presidential and legislative elections in November
2016. As demonstrations in Kinshasa, Bukavu, Goma
and Lubumbashi in January have shown, the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo care about
the holding of timely elections. These elections will
be a pivotal moment in the history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

If so requested, MONUSCO is ready to support
the elections logistically, technically and with its good
offices. We are determined to support peaceful elections
within the framework of the Constitution. In addition,
the Secretary-General spoke on the constitutionality of
elections at the twenty-fourth African Union summit in
January.

As resolution 2147 (2014) has spelled out, all relevant
parties are responsible for maintaining an environment
conducive to the holding of free, fair, credible,
inclusive, transparent, peaceful and timely elections,
which includes a free and constructive political debate,
freedom of expression, freedom of assembly, equitable
access to media, including State media, safety and
freedom of movement for all candidates as well as for
election observers, journalists, human rights defenders
and actors from civil society, including women. This is
what I mean when I speak of defending the values of the
United Nations.

I am concerned about the arrest of several dozen
civil society actors the other day. Political space for
civil society is a prerequisite for credible elections.

Coming to my second point, security, when the
United Nations Observer Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) arrived in the
country some 15 years ago, the country was socially,
economically and politically shattered. When MONUC
arrived, the country was at civil war. Today, the country
is unified. There is a clear, shared and celebrated
Congolese identity. It is no longer at war, nor is it in
transition. It is a proud nation.

Over this period, the Congolese Government has
striven to restore security to its people. It has succeeded
in freeing much of the territory from the terror of
armed groups. The presence of armed groups is limited
to the eastern provinces of the country today. However,
the overall security situation is still not stable, nor is
whatever stability there is irreversible. Many still live
in fear of rape, of attack, of being robbed of already
meagre possessions. This fear affects nearly every
aspect of daily life in the east - fear to walk to school,
fear to go to the market, fear to tend to the fields.

With more security in more places, the time will
come for MONUSCO to begin its gradual drawdown.
MONUSCO will not stay in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo forever; we look forward to the day when
it can leave the country, with continuing development
support transferred to our colleagues in the United
Nations country team. Yes, the Congo has more security
than before. Yes, it is on the way to stability. However,
more must be done to reduce the threat from armed
groups and violence against civilians to a level that can
be effectively managed by Congolese institutions. More
must also be done to achieve stability by establishing
functional, professional and accountable State
institutions and strengthening democratic practices.
The drawdown should be aligned with progress
in those areas. Any exit by MONUSCO should be
gradual, progressive and tied to specific targets to be
jointly developed by it and the Government. We should
therefore aim to consolidate peace and leave behind a
peaceful Congo on the path to prosperity.

In the area dominated by the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF), the terrorist attacks - torture,
mutilations, beheadings - have been reduced. Recently,
in and around Beni, almost 300 people, including
women and children, even toddlers, were mutilated as
they died in terrorist attacks. As I speak to the Council
now, the ADF rebels, hiding in the jungles ofKamango,
are being pursued by brave soldiers of the Forces armees
de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC),
supported by MONUSCO. They have eaten together,
lived together and fought together to protect Congolese
families. Our combined efforts against the ADF, like
the operations against the Mouvement du 23 mars two
years ago, have forged a bond between the FARDC and
MONUSCO soldiers. Their cooperation was truly an
example of best practices, and demonstrated that when
we are united we are strong. I hope it will remain so in
future.

The greatest threat to peace and security in
the Great Lakes region still remains the Forces
democratiques pour la liberation du Rwanda (FDLR).
That is why the Council mandated MONUSCO to
support the Government in neutralizing it, a mandate
that we should be executing in support of the FARDC.
We should not be divided on it. Our operations were
jointly planned. We worked with the commanding
generals for months in an excellent and constructive
partnership. They were, however, replaced by officers
who had formerly commanded units with a credible
history of human rights violations. We were therefore
compelled to suspend our support to the operations
under their command.
All other fields of operations - against the ADF,
the Forces de resistance patriotiques de l'Ituri and the
FDLR in South Kivu - can continue with our support,
in full accordance with the human rights due-diligence
policy. The decision to suspend support was based
on indisputable values enshrined in the protection of
human rights. We want to support the fight against the
FDLR and also to implement our human rights policy.
We do not want to choose between fighting the FDLR
and upholding human rights. We owe that to the people
of Democratic Republic of the Congo and to ourselves.
Safeguarding human rights is fundamental and cannot
be compromised. We are guided by that clear compass.
And ifI may speak personally, I am proud to work for
the United Nations and its Secretary-General, with his
clear Human Rights up Front policy. I know - and
President Kabila himself has confirmed it to me - that
the Congolese Government shares the same zero-
tolerance policy regarding human-rights violations. I
am confident that it will take appropriate measures to
remedy this unfortunate situation. However, to avoid
any potential misunderstanding, I should say that
MONUSCO is fully committed to fighting the FDLR.
It is also committed to respecting the human rights
due-diligence policy.

There is no purely military solution to the problem of
the FDLR. It must be followed by effective non-military
initiatives, including a well-functioning demobilization
and repatriation process and effective extension of State
authority, if we want to have sustainable solutions. In
that regard, I still cannot be satisfied with progress so
far. Surrendered FDLR elements are still in the camps
of Kanyabayonga, Walungu and Kisangani, where they
maintain an intact and functioning military structure.
A few FDLR combatants have disarmed, yes, but even
their demobilization has not started yet, let alone their
repatriation.

I now turn to my third point, the stabilization and
restitution of State authority. For peace to be sustainable,
we need more than military action. Understanding and
addressing the root causes of the conflict is essential
to disrupting persistent cycles of Violence. I would
like to update the Council on recent developments.
MONUSCO has recently created an natural-resources
crime task force with the United Nations Environment
Programme and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region. In addition to
helping to safeguard the natural wealth of the country
for future generations, the Mission, within the limits
of its mandate, will explore ways to contribute to
addressing the underpinnings of conflict in Congo.
We are no longer dealing only with armed
groups, but also with well-organized criminal gangs.
The exploitation of natural resources in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo is valued at more
than $1 billion per year. Part of it is illegally smuggled
out of the country, and an estimated 98 per cent of
the net profits from the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, mainly gold, charcoal and timber, goes
to transnational organized criminal networks. Rebel
groups retain only 2 per cent of the profits from illegal
smuggling. How many hospitals could be built if illegal
trade became legal? How many kilometres of roadways
rehabilitated? How many teachers paid? The objective
is clear - gold should be turned into taxes, taxes into
schools and schools into a prosperous future.

(spoke in French)

I would like to end with a fourth point, and here
I will also direct my comments to His Excellency
Mr. Raymond Tshibanda, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On
15 February, President Joseph Kabila expressed his
opinions about MONUSCO's actions and results. If
we are to achieve better cooperation, we must create
an atmosphere of trust. We should not forget that
the Government and MONUSCO are on the same
page when it comes to our goals - the well-being of
the people, the end of violence in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and also the
Mission's departure. We are here to serve the people,
and we are therefore also here to provide our services to
the Government. Our willingness to leave the country
is real and unequivocal, and we know the Government
desires it too. MONUSCO's departure must be tied to
results and concrete improvement of the situation on the
ground. Until then, we need to start finding concrete
ways to improve the situation and relations right now.
I therefore propose to the Government that we reset
cooperation on a basis of mutual trust.

Finally, as always, I should commend those of my
colleagues who have recently distinguished themselves.
I would like to pay tribute to all the officers of
MONUSCO and UNICEF's child protection sections.
Every day, hand-in-hand with the FARDC, they free
children from the armed groups' grasp. More than
1,000 were liberated in 2014. In the first three months
of 2015, more than 160 child soldiers have managed to
escape the FDLR and find refuge with MONUSCO.
That is a true success story.

I would like to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to the Security Council for the support it has
always given us.
