Mr. Costa: I am honoured to report again to the
Security Council. In the past few years the Council has
looked at drug trafficking as a threat to peace and
stability in a number of areas already referred to by the
Secretary-General - Afghanistan, West Africa and
Central America, just to mention a few. Today, I will
report on new, worrisome developments concerning
both West and East Africa, as well as the Saharan
landmass generally.

There are indeed reasons to worry. In the past,
Africa, already suffering from other tragedies, never
had a drug problem. Today, under attack from several
sides, the continent is facing a severe and complex
drug problem: not only drug trafficking or production,
but also consumption. Serious consequences in terms
of health, development and security are inevitable, and
I will demonstrate this, aided by a set of maps being
distributed as I speak.

First, on the subject of West Africa, the subregion
is shifting now from cocaine trafficking to
amphetamine manufacturing. West Africa, particularly
Guinea-Bissau, has received a lot of attention from the
Security Council, because of the 50 to 60 tons per year
of cocaine trafficked through the subregion over the
past few years. As I mentioned at a meeting of this
Council in November (see S/PV.6212), the recent
discovery of seven laboratories in Guinea-Conakry is
evidence that West Africa is also becoming a producer
of synthetic drugs - amphetamines - and of crystal
cocaine, refined from pasta basica.

Certainly there is also encouraging news, for
which the Security Council can take credit. Initiatives
by the Economic Community of West African States,
Member States and the United Nations - including the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the
Department of Political Affairs and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) working
together - have attracted attention and resources to
the issue. We have detected a decline of cocaine flows
into West Africa since mid-2008. A donor conference
last week in Vienna attracted financial support. I thank
Austria for hosting that event, which was meant to
fund initiatives originally planned during the
ministerial meeting at Praia in Cape Verde, a meeting
already referred to by the President of this Council a
few minutes ago.
My second point is about East Africa, where we
have detected heroin trafficking flows. This is very

new. Indeed, on the eastern side of the continent, on
the Horn of Africa, 30 to 35 tons of Afghan heroin are
being trafficked into East Africa every year. This is
causing a dramatic increase in drug addiction of the
worse type, namely, heroin injection. It is also
spreading HIV, as I witnessed two weeks ago in the
slums of Nairobi and Mombasa in Kenya. Drug
treatment facilities are badly needed and I urge donors
to help.

Drug trafficking is only one illicit activity in
eastern Africa. Mainly because of the dramatic situation
in Somalia, the region is becoming a free economic
zone for all sorts of trafficking ~ drugs, migrants, guns,
hazardous waste and natural resources - in addition to
having the world's most dangerous waterways because
of piracy. On 24 November, in Nairobi, ministers from
the region issued a political declaration to strengthen the
rule of law and human security. UNODC was pleased to
see its own action plan for the region endorsed by the
ministers, but the resources needed to assist East
African countries now under attack are still unavailable.

My third point is about drug trafficking across the
Sahel, which is a new problem, though perhaps
inevitable. We have now acquired evidence that the
two streams of illicit drugs - heroin into eastern
Africa and cocaine into western Africa - are now
meeting in the Sahara, creating new trafficking routes
across Chad, Niger and Mali. Repercussions in
neighbouring countries - for example, in the Maghreb
countries i are inevitable. I will stress two facts that
are noteworthy. First, as cocaine from the West is being
traded one-on-one with heroin from the East, drugs are
becoming a sort of new currency in the area. Drugs
enrich not only organized crime, as we know. As in the
Andes and in West Asia, terrorists and anti-government
forces in the Sahel are extracting resources from the
drug trade to fund their operations, purchase equipment
and pay foot soldiers.

Secondly, drug trafficking in the region is taking
on a whole new dimension. In the past, trade across the
Sahara was by caravans and camels. Today it is larger
in size, faster at delivery and more high-tech, as
evidenced by the debris of a Boeing 727 found on
2 November in the Gao region of Mali, an area affected
by insurgency and terrorism. It is scary - and I stress
this point - it is scary that this new example of the
links between drugs, crime and terrorism was
discovered by chance, following the plane crash.

09-6381]

What can be done? To conclude, I will say that,
first and foremost, we must strengthen national
capacity. Greater and stronger development is needed
across the region, so as to improve judicial systems and
the rule of law - a point raised by the Secretary-
General. But no State can tackle this transnational
threat on its own. I invite members of the Council to
recognize that shared responsibility is more than a
rhetorical device; it is, and it must be, an operational
concept. Therefore, and secondly, information sharing
must be promoted among affected countries in order to
disrupt trafficking networks. UNODC has brokered
regional intelligence-sharing platforms in Central
Asia - one is to be inaugurated tomorrow - in West
Asia and in the Gulf. Such arrangements are not a
threat to sovereignty; on the contrary, they defend the
sovereignty now appropriated by rather sinister actors.
Thirdly - and to be practical about finding solutions
to the situation - I urge the Council to consider the
creation of a trans-Saharan crime monitoring network,
to improve information, monitor suspicious activity,
exchange evidence, facilitate legal cooperation and
strengthen regional efforts against organized crime.
Such a trans-Saharan crime network would ensure a
first, practical response to a growingly serious
problem. An early warning device of this sort will
especially help the review of situations that truly
warrant investigation without having to rely on
occasional circumstances such as a plane crash or an
accidental drug seizure at sea. Together with our
traditional partners, the Departments I mentioned at the
United Nations and INTERPOL, we would be happy to
assist. At the same time, UNODC shall continue to
report on new developments in the region and
elsewhere - as we have done periodically for the
Security Council and other bodies - in order to
facilitate understanding of the situation on the ground
and, as a result, enable an appropriate response.

