President Tadie: police, courts, customs, transport and
infrastructure, boundaries and Serbian patrimony.

I consider that this dialogue, which was initiated
by my Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and which will be carried forward by my
Special Representative in close consultation with the
authorities in Kosovo and with relevant stakeholders, is
of crucial importance for all of Kosovo's communities.
I look to the Security Council and to the broader
international community to support my Special
Representative's efforts in bringing forward that
dialogue.

As the Security Council is aware, the European
Union has expressed its readiness to perform an
enhanced operational role in Kosovo in the area of the
rule of law, and has put in place measures to do so. I
believe that that enhanced role would be in the
interests of the United Nations and of the international
community as a whole.

I also note the aspiration of people of all
communities in the region to live in closer association
with the European family of nations. As I set out in my
report, the European Union will therefore take on some
increasing operational responsibilities in the areas of
international policing, justice and customs in Kosovo,
within a reconfigured UNMIK, within the mandate
3
established by resolution 1244 (1999), and under an
umbrella headed by my Special Representative.

Nine years since the inception of UNMIK, the
situation in Kosovo has evolved profoundly. Under the
United Nations interim administration, Kosovo has
made significant strides in moving beyond conflict
towards peace, in creating and consolidating democratic
governance institutions and in creating the foundations
for a viable economy. Not everything has been
achieved, but we have come a long way, and we must be
sure that, with these most recent changes in the
situation, we do not lose what has been gained with so
much effort. We must evolve our presence to ensure that
earlier achievements are safeguarded and built upon.

The task will be a difficult one. To lead this new
phase of the mission, I intend to appoint Mr. Lamberto
Zannier of Italy to be my Special Representative. He
will help to carry forward the vision I have presented
in my report and to lead a new phase of dialogue, and
he will be scrupulously balanced in his approach.

The reconfiguration of UNMIK that I have
presented to the Security Council aims at preserving
and consolidating the achievements reached during a
tumultuous period and at creating the foundations for
Kosovo's further progress within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). In doing so, my overriding
objectives are to ensure Kosovo's overall stability, to
protect and promote the interests of all of its
communities and to maintain international peace and
security in Kosovo and the broader region.

I take this opportunity to once again express my
profound appreciation to the members of the Council
and the leaders of the concerned parties for their
valuable support and understanding in the broader
interest of peace and security in the region.

