Mr. Imanaliyev (spoke in Russian): At the outset,
on behalf of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), I would like to express our solidarity and
empathy with the Government and the people of Haiti
with respect to the tragic and unprecedentedly severe
earthquake in that country.
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
address this Security Council meeting. At the same
time, I have the pleasant task of thanking Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for the excellent meeting of
leaders of regional international organizations, which
successfully concluded yesterday. I am certain that
such forums should receive the universal support of
countries and multilateral communities. The list of
participants for future meetings could certainly be
expanded. I believe that it is clear to all that such
models for joint work can promote the building of the
intellectual and information capacities needed to
establish and implement joint projects and programmes
that are fruitful and beneficial to all.

Despite its brief historical and chronological
biography, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization is
clearly experiencing dynamic growth as an effective
international forum established in order to develop fair
and mutually beneficial cooperation among its member
States, which are also united by the desire to ensure
peace, stability and prosperity in the entire Eurasian
space.

The States members of our organization have
defined the following as their urgent core priorities:
ensuring regional security; fighting terrorism,
separatism, extremism, illegal drug and weapons
trafficking and other forms of transnational crime;
assisting in commercial, economic and other forms of
cooperation; and bringing peoples together and
establishing friendship among them.

In that context, today the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization is already playing a considerable role in
maintaining peace, security and stability in the region,
as well as in establishing the necessary favourable
conditions for the sustainable long-term socio-economic,
cultural and humanitarian development of the peoples of
our countries. At the same time it continues to steadily
expand and build on its relations with other
international organizations and agencies, including
those of the United Nations.

The SCO member States will unquestionably
strive to strengthen and develop their organization,
permanently enhancing its authority and significance in
the world, particularly in conditions under which have
emerged such global problems as the world economic
and financial crises, environmental issues, terrorism,
drug crime and others.
Our contribution to normalizing the situation in
Afghanistan is being implemented through the ad hoc
SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group. We expressed our
deep concern over the threat of terrorism, illegal drug
trafficking and organized crime stemming from the
instability in Afghanistan at the special conference
organized in the framework of SCO last year in the
Russian capital, Moscow. Within the international
programme to aid Afghanistan, the SCO member States
are making effective bilateral contributions by
providing economic and humanitarian assistance to that
long-suffering nation, including building roads, energy
facilities, hospitals and schools.

The overall total of free aid provided by Shanghai
Cooperation Organization member States to
Afghanistan amounts to $220 million. It is also well
known that a number of SCO member States have
written off a considerable portion of the external debt
they are owed by Afghanistan.

Since the activities of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization are based on the principles of good-
neighbourliness, mutual benefit, equality, respect for
diversity of cultures and a desire to bring about joint
development, as well as relations with other countries
and international organizations, the SCO is developing
in accordance with the principles of mutual trust,
non-aggression towards all, transparency and openness.
That also means that in the future the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization will be open to establishing
diverse contacts and relations, and subsequent mutually
beneficial cooperation with other interested countries
and international organizations that share our values.

In that context, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization gives importance to partnership with the
United Nations, based on the SCO's recognition of the
vital role played by the United Nations in today's
world, particularly in addressing the aforementioned
global challenges and problems. The Shanghai
Cooperation Organization also believes there is a need
to do everything we can to strengthen this mission of
the United Nations.

In conclusion, I would like to note in particular
the adoption by the General Assembly at its sixty-
fourth session of a resolution on cooperation between
the United Nations and SCO (resolution 64/183). I can
assure the Council that the member States of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization will do their
utmost to ensure practical implementation of the
provisions of that resolution, to strengthen cooperation
with the United Nations in relevant areas, and to
maintain regional peace and stability in accordance
with the aims and principles of the United Nations
Charter.

I believe the adoption of that resolution
constitutes recognition of the growing role of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization in maintaining
peace, strengthening security and stability in the region
and combating terrorism and extremism, as well as in
advancing regional cooperation in such areas as trade,
the economy, energy and transportation.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
invitation to take part in today's discussion.

