Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's important open debate which, in
our View, is extremely timely, as it follows the recent
decision by the African Union Summit in Kigali to
operationalize the African Union Peace Fund and the
successful Italy-Africa Ministerial Conference held
in May in Rome, which launched a new pattern of
dialogue and cooperation with the African continent.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of the European Union and wishes to
add the following remarks in its national capacity.

As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Italy fully supports the new concept of sustaining
peace and the need to invest in the Commission's work
to ensure sustainable funding. This year, we restarted
financing the Peacebuilding Fund and have committed
to increasing our development aid. In the year of
sustainability, the new concept of sustaining peace is
key to long-term, stable and durable peace, particularly
in Africa, a continent still hosting the vast majority
of United Nations peacekeepers and at the centre of
United Nations peacebuilding efforts.

For these reasons, in Rome we proposed a
Sustainability Compact between Italy and Africa, in
which the sustainability of peace and security is the
leading concept, with a View to avoiding conflicts and
relapse into conflicts and to achieving the goal of a
conflict-free Africa. Secondly, the Compact supports
socioeconomic sustainability, with a view to taking
advantage of the immense opportunities the continent
provides. Thirdly, the Compact upholds sustainability
in managing migration, building upon the Migration
Compact that Italy proposed to the European Union
to promote a strategic approach to the issue, working
together with African and European partners.

As an incoming Security Council member, we will
take full advantage of the recommendations contained
in the concept note (S/2016/566, annex) and in the
presidential statement just adopted (S/PRST/2016/12),
working closely on these issues with the Netherlands in
light of the agreement to split the 2017-2018 mandate to
ensure continuity of action. Allow me now to focus on
few points.

First of all, we underline the importance of
ownership, which is a pillar of peacebuilding activities
in Africa and elsewhere. It is achieved by actively
involving all relevant national stakeholders in a
responsible and inclusive way.

Secondly, we would stress partnerships and on the
United Nations acting as an enabler of peace in order to
facilitate the necessary political, economic and financial
support for the implementation of peacebuilding
strategies. In this context, the role of the African Union
and of subregional organizations is crucial. I would also
refer to the PBC country configurations and the visit
by the Chairs to the relevant countries as a concrete
example of working in partnerships towards common
goals.

Thirdly, we would highlight supporting a culture
of prevention and strengthening the capacity of
local actors to play a leading role in mediation. Italy
has consistently supported the African Union as it
strengthens its capacities in this respect. The inclusion
of women, young persons and moderate religious
leaders is essential to building solid ground for long-
standing reconciliation and a common vision for the
future.

Fourthly, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) needs
to be implemented and fine-tuned so that it works
harmoniously with the African Agenda 2063. The two
Agendas are to be considered as integrated agendas
to better secure economic, social and environmental
development against potential relapses into conflict.
Implementing the 2030 Agenda is the best tool at our
disposal to address the root causes of conflicts and
instability by taking full advantage of the link the
Agenda creates between development and peace, human
rights - in particular, gender equality - governance
and accountability. In the light of the integrated
approach proposed by the 2030 Agenda, a reflection is
needed on strengthening the nexus between sustaining
peace and development Via Sustainable Development
Goal 16, which promotes peaceful and stable societies.

Finally, I would emphasize the importance of
capacity- and institution-building, which are key to
sustaining peace. Stable and functioning institutions are
the best way to avoid relapse into conflict as, inter alia,
they provide services that citizens need and they create
the proper environment for business opportunities. In
this context, I wish to recall the training offered by the
Italian Custom Police to customs and border control
officers of several African countries to strengthen their
capacity in such a crucial sector.

