Mr. Mantovani (Italy): First of all, I wish to
thank the Costa Rica presidency for organizing this
comprehensive discussion on Somalia and the briefers
for their inputs. The representatives of Somalia and the
African Union also provided valuable perspectives and
expectations of what this Council can do that must be
fully taken into account.

The security and humanitarian situations continue
to deteriorate in Somalia. The kidnapping of hostages
is a particularly disturbing threat that is currently

08-6107]
affecting several countries, including mine. Italy urges
all Somali parties to cease violence and join the
political process. The real factor that is limiting the
effectiveness of the current peace efforts is the slow
implementation of the Djibouti agreement. The parties
have yet to demonstrate that the cessation of armed
confrontation is producing some results on the ground,
and there is a need to start immediately implementing
the joint force of the Transitional Federal Government
and the Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia, as
well as to initiate talks on the projected unity
Government. We look forward to the next meeting of
the parties in Djibouti this coming Saturday to advance
that process.

It is essential, in our view, that the transitional
federal institutions overcome their differences as a
matter of utmost urgency. Failure to do so will result in
the collapse of more than six years of peace efforts
since the start of the reconciliation conference in
Kenya led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). We welcome IGAD's renewed
efforts to assist the transitional federal institutions in
that endeavour.

The United Nations has a key role to play. The
vigorous and effective leadership of Special
Representative Abdallah is critical to the success of the
peace process, but the United Nations can also actively
sustain the present political dynamic through a number
of other ways: financial aid, technical assistance to the
parties to the Djibouti agreement and support for the
setting up of joint forces.

Coming to the security options, we have taken
note of the efforts of the Secretariat to develop a
multinational force for Somalia. Due to the urgency of
the matter, we think that a clear time frame must be
established, by which either the multinational force
materializes or we move to different options. In that
regard, we have taken note with interest of paragraph
52 of the report (S/2008/709), in which the Secretary-
General states his intention to submit alternative
proposals, and we would request the Secretariat to start
planning now for those proposals as there is no reason
to wait any longer.

We also underscore the need to continue to
provide financial and other support to the African
Union Mission in Somalia. In fact, while we hear one
report after another from the Secretariat, the African
troops have been the only ones taking risks on the

ground, since early 2007. I believe that they deserve
not just the highest appreciation, but tangible support,
as well as a clear perspective for United Nations
re-hatting.

On the issue of piracy off of the coast of Somalia,
my delegation would like to invite Council members to
begin working as soon as possible on the renewal of
the authorization contained in operating paragraph 7 of
resolution 1816 (2008) and perhaps the upcoming
resolution could also provide the opportunity to
address the issue of jurisdiction over apprehended
individuals.

Italy supports the swift action taken by the
international community and is currently providing
command and two units to the NATO naval group
operating in the area. Italy also supports the launch by
the European Union of Operation Atalanta, which has
been mentioned and described by the French
delegation, and we would urge strengthened
coordination among all the various initiatives in place.

