Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Iwould
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for their briefings.
China commends the United Nations aid agencies
for their humanitarian relief efforts in Syria. The
security situation in various parts of Syria, including
Damascus and eastern Ghouta, has escalated recently,
causing significant civilian casualties. We sympathize
profoundly with the suffering of the Syrian people and
condemn all acts of violence against innocent civilians.
The parties concerned should take immediate measures
to de-escalate the tensions in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

The Council's unanimous adoption of resolution
2401 (2018) demonstrates the consensus and unity of
its members on the humanitarian issue in Syria. We
appreciate the positive efforts of the parties concerned.
China welcomed Russia's announcement by Russia that
it will implement the ceasefire measures and assist
with the evacuation of people from conflict areas. We
call on the parties in Syria to put an immediate end to
hostilities in accordance with the resolution, actively
coordinate with United Nations relief efforts and ensure
safe humanitarian corridors in the relevant areas.

A political settlement is the only viable solution
to the Syrian issue. The Syrian National Dialogue
Congress was recently held successfully in Sochi and
has had positive results. Special Envoy de Mistura is
making ongoing efforts to advance the Syrian political
process. The international community should support
the Syrian parties in resuming dialogue and negotiations
under the auspices of United Nations mediation as soon
as possible and in seeking a solution that is acceptable
to all parties through a Syrian-owned and -led political
process. That is the only way to fundamentally ease the
humanitarian situation in Syria and end the suffering of
the Syrian people without delay.

Terrorist organizations are still launching attacks
in Syria, causing significant civilian casualties and
impeding United Nations humanitarian relief efforts.
The international community should strengthen its
cooperation on counter-terrorism, adopt unified
standards and resolutely combat all terrorist
organizations that are designated as such by the
Security Council.

