Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenea for his briefing on the launch by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of a
ballistic missile.

The situation requires thorough clarification and
investigation. The ballistic trajectory of the missile was
confirmed and registered on the Russian rocket-launch
warning system. According to information from the
Minister of Defence of the Russian Federation, based
on an objective and technology-based monitoring of the
situation, it has been established that the parameters
and data regarding the target of the missile were in line
with the tactical criteria of mid-range ballistic missiles.

We are carefully following the development of
the situation on the Korean peninsula and call the
Council's attention to the joint Russian and Chinese
statement about this issue issued in Moscow on 4 July,
immediately following the rocket launch. We consider
this action by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to be inadmissible and to run counter to relevant
Security Council resolutions. Russia and China have
firmly urged the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to strictly comply with the provisions of said
resolutions. We share the serious concern regarding the
evolving situation on and around the Korean peninsula.
The escalation of military and political tensions in
the region, which is fraught with the risk of an armed
conflict, requires the international community to take
collective measures for a peaceful settlement of the
situation through dialogue and consultation.

We reject any statement or action that could lead
to an escalation and hardening of antagonisms, and
call on all interested States to act with restraint, avoid
provocation and warmongering, demonstrate readiness
to engage in dialogue without preconditions, and make
active efforts aimed at de-escalating tensions.

The Russian Federation and the People's Republic
of China have established a joint initiative, based on
the Chinese proposal of a dual-track approach of
promoting parallel progress in denuclearization efforts
and a suspension-for-suspension approach to establish
a peace mechanism on the peninsula, as well as the
Russian phased plan to settle the Korean issue.

We call on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to voluntarily declare a moratorium on the testing
ofnuclear explosive devices and ballistic missiles. At the
same time, the United States and the Republic of Korea
should suspend their large-scale joint military training
exercises. In parallel, the sides could hold talks and
establish general principles for relations, including the
non-use of force, the rejection of aggression, peaceful
coexistence and steps towards the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula with a view to a comprehensive
settlement of all problems, including the missile and
nuclear issues.
All interested parties in the negotiations process
could, through their chosen format, address the peace
and security mechanisms of the Korean peninsuka
and North-East Asia, leading to the normalization of
relations between relevant States. I call upon all States
to support such an initiative, which would offer a true
window of opportunity to resolve the issues on the
Korean peninsula.

We reaffirm our strong commitment to the
international non-proliferation regime and our intention
to see the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and
the comprehensive and full implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions. We express our intention,
together with other interested States, to pursue efforts
to ensure that, through dialogue and consultations, all
existing concerns are addressed in a balanced way. We
call on all sides to comply strictly with the obligations
set forth in the joint statement of 19 September
2005 and to swiftly resume dialogue with a view to
achieving a comprehensive settlement to the issue of
the Korean peninsula.

The option of resorting to military measures to
resolve the problem on the Korean peninsula should
be excluded. We express our support for the northern
and southern sides on the Korean peninsula to engage
in dialogue and consultations, demonstrate good
will towards one another, improve relations, engage
in cooperation towards a peaceful solution and play
their due and responsible roles in de-escalating the
situation on the Korean peninsula and resolving their
pending problems.

We recognize the importance of ensuring
international and regional balance and stability. We
stress that alliances between certain States should
never be established to the detriment of the interests
of third parties. We oppose the military presence of
extra-regional forces in North-East Asia and their
deployment on the pretext of countering the military
and missile programmes of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

The deployment of the Terminal High Altitude
Area Defense system in North-East Asia is a serious
blow to the interests of the strategic security of States
of the region, including Russia and China, and does not
serve the goal of denuclearizing the Korean peninsula
or ensure peace and stability in the region on the basis of
indivisible security. We oppose the deployment of such
systems and call on the relevant sides to swiftly halt and
cancel the deployment process. All necessary measures
should be taken to protect the security interests of the
two countries, as well as to strike a strategic balance in
the region.

It is perfectly clear to us that any attempt to justify
a military solution is inadmissable and could have
unpredictable consequences for the region. Attempts
to strangle North Korea economically are equally
unacceptable, since millions of its people are in great
need of humanitarian assistance. The United Nations
has a role to play in that regard. Humanitarian efforts
must be depoliticized.

In summary, we must all acknowledge that

sanctions will not resolve the issue but merely expedite
a stalemate. Any attempt to resolve the situation by
force would be equally inadmissible. We must take the
security concerns of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea into account. It is important now to set aside the
dangerous logic of confrontation and to seek together a
settlement based on a comprehensive political solution
to the problems of the Korean peninsula, including the
issue ofNorth Korea's missile and nuclear programmes.
In that regard, we believe that China's proposal for
mutual suspension and parallel progress, as well as the
Russian road map for a Korean settlement - including
the gradual establishment of a peace mechanism for
North-East Asia, leading to the denuclearization of the
peninsula - are appropriate starting points for such
talks. We call on all to participate in that work.

