Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita for
her important briefing on the recent developments on
the ground. We noted that there are still clashes and
the loss of life, and we regret that fact. My statement
will focus on three key issues, namely, the security
situation, persisting challenges and support for the
transition in Darfur.

Concerning the first issue, Indonesia is pleased that
the security situation across Darfur outside Jebel Marra
is relatively stable. The continued improvement in the
security situation has enabled the phased withdrawal of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the plan for its eventual exit in
2020, in line with resolution 2429 (2018). My delegation
commends the critical work of UNAMID in Darfur.
Indonesia takes pride in being a part of UNAMID,
and is currently represented by 477 peacekeepers on
the ground. We welcome the progress in reconfiguring
UNAMID, including the inauguration of its new
headquarter in Zalingei in January. UNAMID should
continue to play a crucial role in protecting civilians
and supporting capacity-building in the area of the
rule of law. Indonesia also commends the Sudanese
Government for its efforts to create security in Darfur,
including through the weapons-collection campaign and
promoting the peaceful resolution of intercommunal
conflict. The Sudanese Government should eventually
be able to bear the primary responsibility for
security in Darfur as we proceed with the UNAMID
reconfiguration. Indonesia sees the Security Council's
intention to establish key benchmarks to review its
measures on Darfur as a step in the right direction. I
should like to underline that UNAMID's exit should
not be allowed to create a vacuum that would lead to
further tension and conflict. The needs of the civilian
population should be prioritized.

Secondly, Indonesia remains cognizant of many
persisting challenges. Further efforts are needed to
address the root causes of the conflict, including land
and intercommunal disputes. Intermittent clashes in
Jebel Marra and destabilizing activities by the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction continue to
result in civilian casualties and displacement. We ask
all parties to exercise restraint. There can be no military
solution to conflict in Darfur.

Indonesiajoins others in urging all non-signatories
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, including
Abdul Wahid Nour, to join the peace process. We hope
to see a follow-up to the signing of a pre-negotiation
framework between by the Sudan Liberation Army-
Minni Minawi and the Justice and Equality Movement.

The needs of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
must also be addressed. There must be unfettered
access for the delivery of humanitarian assistance. We
also call on all parties, including the Government of
the Sudan, to create a conducive environment for the
return of IDPs.

The difficult economic situation and the risks
associated with it remain a cause for concern and
underline a strong case for the provision of development
assistance. In that regard, the international community
should continue to assist the Sudan. Peace would be
difficult to achieve without real and tangible economic
development, including improvements in governance,
infrastructure and institutions.

Thirdly, Indonesia sees the need for stronger
support for peacebuilding and development in Darfur.
The sustained engagement of the United Nations and
the international community, based on mutual respect
and national ownership, is key to preventing a relapse
into conflict. Indonesia recognizes the importance of
sustained and predictable financing for peacebuilding
in Darfur, as well as the role of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture as a crucial enabler for
transition. We welcome the proposal to hold a pledging
conference for Darfur to ensure sufficient funds for the
United Nations country team. There is merit in exploring
the potential of South-South and triangular cooperation.

I should like to close by reiterating our long-
standing support for our Sudanese brothers and sisters
in their quest to achieve peace and stability. We have
contributed concretely in that regard through our
peacekeepers. Darfur has come a long way. The onus
is on all of us - the Sudanese Government and the
international community - to consolidate and not
jeopardize what has been achieved thus far. In the end,
the civilian population is the most important aspect.

