Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the African States members of the Security Council,
namely Equatorial Guinea, South Africa and Cote
d'Ivoire, I wish to thank the Peruvian presidency for
convening this briefing on the report of the Secretary-
General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) (S/2019/549).
The African States members of the Council commend
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of UNOWAS, on his
briefing, which once again enlightened the Council
on the profound forces affecting peace, stability and
development in West Africa and the Sahel.

The African States members of the Council note
with great interest the political, economic, security
and humanitarian situation described by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his
subsequent recommendations aimed at providing
diligent and effective responses to the multiple
challenges facing the region. They welcome the
generally stable regional political situation, as evidenced
by the calm post-electoral sociopolitical environments
following the presidential elections held in 2018. In
addition, according to the African Development Bank,
economic trends as a whole show an average forecasted
growth of 3.6 per cent for this year and 2020. We see
those trends as promising and believe that they are part
of the irreversible process of profound change currently
under way in the societies of West Africa and the Sahel,
despite current challenges.

We therefore urge the Head of UNOWAS to pursue
mediation efforts and use his good offices, in close
cooperation with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), in View of the elections
in many countries of the region planned for 2020,
particularly since the cooperation between ECOWAS
and UNOWAS was fully effective in preventing
and managing crises as seen in their successive
interventions in Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Burkina Faso
and the Gambia. We also urge UNOWAS to work to
strengthen national and regional capacities for conflict
resilience and to support the consolidation ofdemocracy
and good governance, in order to foster environments
conducive to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). At the same time, we are particularly
encouraged by the efforts to improve gender parity in
the region, thanks to the adoption of relevant legislation
that we hope will increase the number of women
in leadership roles and strengthen their effective
participation in decision-making processes.

Despite encouraging governance trends, we
remain concerned about the security threats posed
by non-State actors, particularly terrorist groups,
whose actions appear to be part of larger designs to
create a foothold for an Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant province in the region. The concerns raised
by these aspirations, which are at odds with the
values underpinning our States, are compounded by a
constantly deteriorating humanitarian situation and the
exacerbation of community violence. Indeed, terrorist
groups are unfortunately increasingly profiting from
intercommunal violence and conflicts between herders
and farmers that are born from the management of
natural resources, such as water and farmland. In this
regard, it is urgent to develop measures for resolving
intercommunal violence and conflicts between farmers
and herders, which constitute a growing threat to
security in West Africa and the Sahel and extend to
Central Africa. We welcome the commitment of the
States of the region to unifying and better coordinating
their efforts, as well as the holding on 14 September
of an extraordinary summit of the Heads of State of
ECOWAS to discuss security issues and consider a
broad coalition beyond their region to combat terrorism
in the Sahel.

In a regional sociopolitical context marked by
persistent security challenges, we remain convinced
that UNOWAS remains a relevant institutional tool, the
actions of which are perfectly in line with the range of
regional efforts for fighting insecurity and instability
and seeking durable solutions to the underlying
causes. In view of the next strategic review, which we
support, we stress that UNOWAS's highly political
role as a tool for preventive diplomacy should be kept
in mind. UNOWAS must remain a mediation and
conflict-prevention tool, including through supporting
subregional organizations and advocating major issues
such as sustainable development.

In the light of UNOWAS'S achievements, the array
of current challenges it faces and its key role in managing
the transitions that are necessary following the closure
of certain missions, it is important that it benefit
from the additional resources required to implement
its mandate. We must also ensure that its actions are
streamlined and consistent with those of other United
Nations operations, as part of an integrated approach,
which would further enhance the Office's effectiveness.

In addition, the transregional dimension of threats
to peace and security requires a strategic interaction
between UNOWAS and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa to address cross-border
issues as part of a coordinated and holistic approach.
We also welcome the collaboration of UNOWAS
with the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Fund in supporting national and cross-
border programmes aimed at mitigating tensions
related to the effects of climate change and conflicts
related to transhumance, preventing Violent extremism
and empowering youth and women in peacebuilding
processes and conflict-prevention mechanisms.

The African States members of the Council believe
that the current security responses must be accompanied
by development strategies aimed at addressing the root
causes of conflict and meeting the pressing social
needs of populations. We therefore welcome the
establishment of the United Nations Support Plan for
the Sahel, the aim of which is to intensify and better
coordinate support for the States of the region in their
efforts aimed at achieving the goals ofthe 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, in order to achieve shared
prosperity and a secure environment in the Sahel, in
line with the African Union's vision of silencing the
guns on the African continent.

In conclusion, the African States members of the
Council reiterate their support for the Head of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
We urge him to continue his mediation efforts and good
offices and to mobilize the resources that are essential
for achieving the SDGs in West Africa and the Sahel.
Equatorial Guinea, South Africa and cote d'Ivoire
truly hope that the forthcoming strategic review will
further strengthen UNOWAS, so that it can continue to
be an effective tool for preventive diplomacy to advance
peace, security and development in West Africa and
the Sahel.

