Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like to take this opportunity, Sir, to warmly welcome
the holding of this open debate and to say how much
we appreciate the outstanding manner in which you
have been presiding over the Council. This meeting is
another opportunity for us to consider ways to combat
subregional and cross-border problems in West Africa
in order to restore long-term security and stability to
the region.

The partnership for the maintenance of peace and
security has yielded some results, particularly in Sierra
Leone and in Liberia. Nevertheless, there are still
major challenges to be met in order to consolidate
peace in Guinea-Bissau; restore unity and peace in
Cote d'Ivoire; and preserve the rule of law so as to be
able to thwart attempted coups d'etat, such as the
dastardly attack perpetrated in my country against
President Lansana Conte on 19 January last.

In that context - in which national, regional and
international action is more important than ever in
order to prevent the gains made from being
undermined and to give impetus to the major economic
and democratic reforms that are under way - in-depth
consideration of the complex issue that is on the
agenda of this meeting is very timely.

My delegation has already stated the views of my
Government on the most effective ways to combat the
use of child soldiers and to promote disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for ex-
combatants. Now we would like to touch on ways and
means to adopt a clear and coordinated approach aimed
at finding lasting solutions to the problems of the
proliferation of light weapons and of mercenaries, and
to develop integrated strategies for the development of
West Africa.

The seriousness and scope of the thorny question
of light weapons is made clear in reports stating that
about 500 million light weapons are circulating freely
in the world, of which 30 million are in Africa and 8
million in West Africa. The reports state that 60 per
cent of those weapons are in the possession of
civilians, and, unfortunately, that they kill some
500,000 people annually, of which 80 per cent are
women and children.

That very grim picture is a confirmation of the
fact that in Africa light weapons are not only the
weapons of choice, but weapons of mass destruction as
well. They are affordable, easy to handle and easy to
obtain, and this explains in part why everyone has
them. In addition, my delegation believes that it is the
failure to harmonize national policies in keeping with
the spirit of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) moratorium and the absence of a
legally binding instrument that have led to the
proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms.

We hope that the replacement of the Programme
for Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development by the ECOWAS Small Arms Control
Programme will contribute effectively to strengthening
the capacities of national commissions. The Small
Arms Unit established by ECOWAS, as the lead
organization, should be given special attention by the
donor community.

My country is convinced that the adoption by the
West African States of a standardized end-user
certificate and the establishment of an information-
exchange mechanism, as recommended by resolution
1467 (2003) of 18 March 2003, adopted under the
Guinean presidency of the Security Council, would
help to trace small arms and to identify those
responsible for their illicit trafficking.

Guinea fully supports the idea of a legal
instrument for the marking and tracing of light
weapons, as put forward by the Open-ended Working
Group on marking and tracing illicit small arms and
light weapons, and we hope that it will be adopted at
the group's third session in June 2005.

As stated in the report, the heads of State of the
Mano River Union, drawing on their common
experience, have called for the creation of effective
mechanisms for consultation and control, notably on
ways to deal with mercenaries. My delegation would
stress that differences of View on this subject should
not divert our attention away from the need to
resolutely combat the problem and to eradicate it. The
situation that has prevailed in West Africa for several
years now is a challenge to us all.

Need I recall also that the high unemployment
rate among young people and the failure to reintegrate
former combatants in the long term pose an additional
threat and exacerbate the problem of mercenaries in
our region. That is why we suggest the inclusion, in the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions in West Africa, of
the principle of full respect for the relevant decisions
taken by the African Union in combating the problem
of mercenaries.

The steps taken at various levels in response to
the appeals made by the Security Council to strengthen
cooperation among United Nations bodies and their
various partners and to promote a consistent approach
to conflict prevention and to the consolidation of peace
in West Africa do not yet fully meet the expectations of
the Member States. This approach can be successful
only if it is action-oriented and based on results in the
field, with full cooperation on the part of the
beneficiaries.

In that respect, the Government of Guinea deems
totally inappropriate and has already rejected the
decision taken by the International Contact Group for
Liberia at its seventh working session, held on
17 September 2004, to expand its mandate and scope to
include the other countries in the Mano River Union,
as well as Guinea-Bissau and Cote d'Ivoire.

We wish to reiterate once again the position of
principle of the Government of Guinea, which was
conveyed to the Security Council in 2003 during
private consultations and which was also conveyed to
the September 2004 ECOWAS ministerial meeting.
That position has also been confirmed in writing to the
parties concerned. That position states that, on the one
hand, Guinea, unlike Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-
Bissau and Cote d'Ivoire, is not a country in conflict or
emerging from conflict; and that our domestic situation
in no way constitutes a threat to peace and security in
the subregion and, accordingly, is not described as such
on the agenda of the Security Council.

In other words, extending the mandate of the
Contact Group for Liberia to Guinea, which was not
possible in 2003, cannot be justified in 2005.

However, my delegation would like to say that
the Republic of Guinea will continue to work tirelessly
to restore peace in the West African subregion. That is
a consistent element of our foreign policy.

That is why Guinea is striving with resolve to
reactivate the Mano River Union. That was made clear
on 20 May 2004 following the Conakry summit of the
heads of State of the Union, which included the
presidents of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire and of the
Republic of Mali. Guinea has also made that clear by
adopting an instrument on 2 September 2004 during
the bilateral meeting between Guinea and Sierra Leone,
held at the highest level, that enabled Guinea
peacefully to resolve, in a fraternal context, the border
dispute between Guinea and Sierra Leone, relating to
the village of Yanga. Guinea has thus set an example of
promoting trust, peace and stability with our
neighbours.

Moreover, paragraph 39 of the report notes the
launching in October 2004 of a new initiative, known
as "Integrated strategies for sensitive border areas in
West Africa", in order to address problems in those
areas. It also notes that the initiative focuses on four
clusters of countries, including Guinea, and that the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) is
planning a follow-up meeting this year.

My country welcomes that good news and would
appreciate it if the strategy or plan for the revival of
our Forestiere area could be communicated to us so
that we could play an active part, which is essential for
the success of the endeavour. We hope that the meeting
set for this year on sensitive border areas, with our
various partners, will be successful.

Turning to the issue of security, Guinea
encourages the partners to continue their efforts to
increase the capacities of the West African subregion in
assessing and addressing the threats it faces. We urge
the United Nations to strengthen cooperation among its
political, humanitarian and economic missions in the
subregion, stressing, in particular, the joint use of
logistics and resources, including border patrols. We
strongly support the report's recommendation on
harmonizing appeals for necessary humanitarian
assistance to countries in crisis and to neighbouring
States affected by those crises.

In conclusion, allow me to welcome the fact that
the United Nations is making a greater contribution to
the restoration of peace and security in West Africa.
Allow me also to reaffirm the unswerving commitment
of the Government and the people of Guinea to work
together with all our partners to promote the emergence
of a new Africa, freer than ever before from the stigma
of war, poverty and destitution.

