Mr. Sahovie (Yugoslavia): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting. This discussion is
indeed timely in the light of the processes that are
taking place in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the
region as a whole. The comprehensive briefings that
we have just heard from High Representative Lord
Ashdown and from Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Klein eloquently described and
analysed these processes. We thank them for their
statements.

Cooperation with neighbouring countries is a
priority of Yugoslavia's foreign policy. Furthering
regional stability is another major objective of ours. In
many respects, Bosnia and Herzegovina is the key to
the stability of our region. Within both these contexts,
bilateral and regional, we attach particular significance
to the development of good relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In the past two years, our endeavours to
normalize relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina have
been evident. We have updated the Council on the
progress achieved on several occasions. Hence, I will
not go into details now. However, I would like to point
out that this upward trend in our relations has
continued over recent months. A number of bilateral
agreements have been signed, including a free trade
agreement. These agreements, together with the non-
visa regime that exists between the two countries, are
aimed at ensuring the free flow of people and goods.
Three agreements that should be finalized soon,
including one on dual citizenship, have the same
objective. On the broader political level, we would like
to emphasize the importance of the trilateral meeting in
July this year of the Presidents of Croatia and
Yugoslavia with the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The basis for this active cooperation is, of course,
the Dayton/Paris Agreement. The Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, as a signatory and guarantor of this
Agreement, remains committed to its full implementation.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is on the way out. My
Government would like to express its appreciation for
the significant contribution of UNMIBH to stabilizing
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and thereby
contributing to the stability of the region as a whole.
We are confident that the European Union Police
Mission, which will begin operations soon, will play an
equally constructive role. My country also welcomes
the continuing efforts of Lord Ashdown in accelerating
the process of institution-building in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that this course of action is
the best way to enable the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take responsibility for their country
into their own hands through their elected
representatives.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Yugoslavia is looking forward to working with the new
Government towards furthering our good-neighbourly
relations. Also, rather than asking questions, I would
like to convey to Lord Ashdown that my Government
is ready to cooperate with him, as he deems
appropriate, in his efforts to further stabilize Bosnia
and Herzegovina through the ambitious reforms that he
outlined today.

