Ms. Power (United States of America): We have
gotten used to living in an upside-down world with
respect to Ukraine. Russia speaks of peace and then
fuels conflict. Russia signs agreements and then does
everything within its power to undermine them. Russia
champions the sovereignty of nations and then acts as if
its neighbours' borders do not exist.

Yet even for those of us growing accustomed to living
in an upside-down world, the idea that Russia - which
manufactured and continues to escalate the violence
in Ukraine - has submitted a resolution today calling
for the conflict's peaceful solution is ironic, to say the
least. It is bitterly ironic, given that the Council has
dedicated some 30 meetings to calling on Russia to stop
escalating the very same conflict, and given the human
consequences that are growing daily.

Even as Russia put forward resolution 2202 (2015),

separatists that Russia has trained and armed and whom
it fights alongside are laying ruthless and deadly siege
to the Ukrainian-held city of Debaltseve, approximately
30 to 40 kilometres beyond lines established by the
September Minsk agreements. Throughout the day, we
have heard conflicting reports as to whether Debaltseve
has fallen. According to press reports, the so-called
road of life leading out ofDebaltseve has become a road
of death, littered with the bodies of Ukrainian soldiers.
At the same time that the Council is calling for the
ceasefire that was supposed to take effect at midnight
on Saturday, Russia is backing an all-out assault.

We do not know how many civilians are left
in Debaltseve because Russia and the separatists
it supports have refused to guarantee the safety of
impartial monitors from the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, who have been trying for
days to enter the area - a commitment that, in this
upside-down world, Russia and the separatists made on
12 February at Minsk. But we know from credible press
reports that thousands of civilians in Debaltseve and
neighbouring villages have been sheltering from heavy
shelling in dank basements, often without running
water, food, electricity or basic medical supplies. We
know that many of the civilians left, who are enduring
the terror of this relentless assault, are the elderly and
small children - people who could not evacuate on
their own.

Even with such limited information, we know with
certainty that at the same time that Russia signs on to yet
another agreement committing itself to de-escalation
and peace, forces that Russia trains, equips and joins
on the battlefield have only escalated this fighting,
grabbing more territory and killing the Ukrainian
soldiers who stand in their way. We are caught in a
deadly feedback loop. International leaders engage
in rigorous, exhaustive negotiations to get Russia to
commit to peace - in Geneva, in Normandy, in Minsk
in September, in Berlin in February, again in Minsk on
12 February when the implementations were signed,
and now in New York - yet Russia's commitments
have no bearing on the actions of its soldiers and the
separatists they back on the ground.

The United States has maintained the same position
across 30 meetings of the Security Council with respect
to Ukraine. Let me reiterate that position. We are for
peace in Ukraine. We are for Ukraine's sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and unity. We are
for ending the violence in eastern Ukraine that has
taken more than 5,600 lives since last April and already
displaced approximately 1 million people. We are for all
of the signatories to the agreements signed in Minsk in
September 2014, particularly Russia and the separatists
they back, fulfilling the commitments that they have
made, and we are for the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements of 5 and
19 September, and the package of measures endorsed
last week by the leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany
and France.

To be clear, the 12 February implementation
package is a road map to fulfilling the commitments
made by the same signatories in the September Minsk
agreements. President Hollande, President Poroshenko,
Chancellor Merkel and President Putin each made
that clear when they endorsed the implementation
package on 12 February and issued their joint
declaration, in which they "remained committed to the
implementation of the Minsk agreements". The Minsk
agreements in the title - plural - refer to those signed
on 5 and 19 September by the same signatories, while
the measures for implementation in the title made clear
that the 12 February package was designed to begin
carrying out the September agreements and not to
supplant them, as Russia has now begun to argue.

The United States rejects any interpretation of
resolution 2202 (2015) that would abrogate the parties'
earlier commitments. All parties must implement all
of the commitments made in the September Minsk
agreements. The implementation steps agreed upon
in the 12 February package include a comprehensive
ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy weapons from the
September line of contact, the release of all hostages
and the eventual restoration of Ukraine's territorial
sovereignty and control of its international border.

Too often debates in the Council occur in a
vacuum, removed from the real world. In the real world
a man named Aleksey Kravchenko, a 73-year-old in the
Ukrainian-held town of Svitlodarsk, near Debaltseve,
recently told a reporter that he had spent nights huddled
together with his grandchildren in a bomb shelter on
his property as shelling continued throughout the night.
Aleksey told the reporter that his grandchildren said
to him in the shelter "Grandpa, I don't want to die
young." He said, "I held my grandchildren and they
were shaking, and I looked in their eyes and they were
afraid". "With the 12 February agreement, now we are
hoping", he also said. The fighting, unfortunately, has
in fact increased dramatically near Aleksey's home. But
we call on Russia to translate hope into real action, to
translate hope into real results - and to do so urgently.

Today's Council meeting is an effort to throw
the Council's weight behind an agreement already
jeopardized by statements by the separatists dismissing
the full ceasefire, by their continued attacks on
Debaltseve and by their refusal, together with Russia's,
to allow access to the Special Monitoring Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. We look to Russia, which manufactured and
fuelled this conflict, to leave the upside-down world it
has created and to honour the resolution it introduced
today in support of efforts to end it.

