Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): Yesterday morning, our Russian colleagues told us here in this Chamber that the Astana format is working (see S/PV.8734). The same afternoon, however, we witnessed another attack against Turkish troops in Idlib, where at least 33 Turkish soldiers lost their lives. I offer my deepest condolences to our good colleague Feridun Hadi Sinirlioglu, the Government of Turkey and the families of the victims. These forces were in the area as part of a de-escalation agreement from May 2018, which was an effort that emerged from the Astana format. With yesterday's attack, it has now completely lost its meaning. Our thoughts are with Turkish families today, as they have so long been with Syrians in Idlib and elsewhere, who have suffered from an intense bombardment since the beginning of the offensive three months ago. There is no justification for the ongoing military campaign of the Syrian regime, backed by Russian armed forces and airplanes. Together with the European Union (EU) and most other members of the Security Council, we demand an immediate cessation of hostilities in Idlib. Fighting terrorism by waging terror against a civilian population must stop. Granting unimpeded humanitarian access to millions in need remains a priority for us in the next weeks and months. As alternative ways to ensure peace and stability in Syria have failed, this is now the moment when the Security Council needs to act. Unfortunately, the resolutions calling for a nationwide ceasefire have so far been blocked. In the light of what has happened, we urge Russia to reconsider its position and allow a chance for a humanitarian truce. Estonia and the EU remain determined in their calls on Damascus to abide by international humanitarian law and provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). Finally, in the light of an ongoing attack, we repeat here our determination to ensure accountability in Syria. As our British colleagues have put it on multiple occasions, those who have committed crimes will be held accountable not only collectively, but also personally. Initiatives such as the General Assembly's International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to assist in the investigation and prosecution of persons responsible for the most serious crimes under International Law committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, the Human Rights Council Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic and the Secretary-General's board of inquiry will all help us to collect evidence and uncover truth.
