Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as
well as Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.

We thank the Security Council for unanimously
adopting resolution 2384 (2017), renewing the mandate
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea
in Bosnia and Herzegovina for one year. Ijoin other
speakers in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko back to the Council and in assuring him of the
European Union's continued support. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and thank him for his statement and his kind words
about European Union support.

The year 2016 was an important one for the EU
perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Following the
submission of the membership application by Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the EU Council decided to ask the
Commission's opinion regarding the membership
application. This decision followed the commitment and
readiness of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take difficult
political decisions in order to deliver on the country's
EU integration path, including by ensuring further
meaningful progress in the implementation of the reform
agenda - an ambitious set of socioeconomic, rule of
law and public administration reforms. Together with
our international partners, including the international
financial institutions, we provided clear incentives to
move forward with the necessary reforms aimed at
progressively tackling the structural challenges that
hold back the country's development. This year was
thus expected to be marked by a continuous momentum
in the reform process.

However, a year later, the EU regrets that divisive
rhetoric rooted in the past and an early preoccupation
with upcoming elections have, for most of 2017, slowed
down the pace of reforms and affected the political
climate. The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
at all levels of governance, including in both of the
country's entities, need to translate commitments into
concrete reforms in order to move the country forward
on its EU integration path.

The initial implementation of the reform agenda
has provided the first steps of structural adjustments
to the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but much
remains to be done. Delays in the signature of the
Transport Community Treaty - belatedly signed last
September - and continuing uncertainty around the
adoption of excise legislation, to name only two issues,
have undermined the possibility for the country to
receive further international financial assistance.

Still a year away from the general elections, the
European Union continues to urge the authorities
to step up the implementation of comprehensive
reforms in an inclusive manner, to the benefit of all
citizens. Additionally, the European Union calls on
the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina to step up
efforts regarding the functioning and the independence
of the judiciary, the fight against corruption and
organized crime, and the fight against terrorism and the
prevention of radicalisation.

Political authorities ought in this respect to
refrain from undermining the judiciary of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and from commenting on sensitive
judicial proceedings, for electoral purposes. It is their
responsibility to create a dispassionate environment
in which the judiciary can adjudicate effectively and
independently. In turn, the highest judicial authorities
of the country have to uphold appropriate standards
of integrity and independence. The EU also reiterates
our calls on all levels of governance in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to ensure the effectiveness of the
coordination mechanism, including for the purpose of
ensuring harmonized and consolidated answers to the
Commission's opinion questionnaire. In this respect,
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to continue the work
done to answer the questionnaire.

As mentioned, the general elections are 12 months
away. While acknowledging that the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina lists Bosniaks, Croats and
Serbs as constituent peoples, along with others, the
European Union reiterates that the principles of equality
of all citizens and non-discrimination shall be fully
warranted. The European Union underlines that no
legislative or political steps should be taken that would
make the implementation of the Sejdic-Finci ruling and
related rulings more challenging.

In addition to the outstanding recommendations
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights (ODIHR) to further improve the electoral
framework, the European Union expects Bosnia and
Herzegovina to address, within the necessary deadlines,
the December 2016 ruling of the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina concerning specific electoral
provisions on the Federation House of Peoples. The
European Union considers that electoral reforms
should be approached in a spirit of consensus and
dialogue as an important matter, thereby also calling on
Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement OSCE-ODIHR
recommendations in order to move the country towards
European standards, improving democratic processes
for future elections.

The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a single, united and sovereign country.
The European Union will continue to use all available
instruments to support Bosnia and Herzegovina's
stability and progress. While the overall security
situation has remained relatively calm and stable,
stability has not been fully entrenched. The European
Union welcomes the continued presence of EUFOR's
Operation Althea, which retains the capability to
contribute to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities'
deterrence capacity if the situation so requires. In this
regard, as part of the overall EU strategy for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the European Union confirms
its readiness to continue at this stage the executive
military role of Operation Althea to support Bosnia
and Herzegovina's authorities in maintaining a safe
and secure environment, under a renewed United
Nations mandate.

The European Union has invited the High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
to present a strategic review before the end of the year,
as a basis for internal discussions within the EU on
options for the future of the Operation, also bearing
in mind Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress in its EU
integration process and taking into account the security
situation on the ground.

As the country's stability continues to strengthen
and further progress is achieved in reforms and on
the EU path, the European Union looks forward to
continuing, in the appropriate forum, the discussion
with the international community on the possible
reconfiguration of the international presence. In this
regard, the European Union calls on the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to pursue the reform agenda
and to increase its efforts to meet the outstanding
objectives and the conditions for the future closure of
the Office of the High Representative.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is aiming to advance on its
Euro-Atlantic integration, and, hopefully, all obstacles
will soon be removed in this regard, which would be an
important development for the stability and security of
the entire region.

In conclusion, over the two decades during which the
Council has been discussing the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we have witnessed substantial progress in
the country in all fields: stability, democracy, security,
economic development and EU integration. However,
the significant emigration that continues to affect the
country and undermine its future is a reminder that
citizens demand more changes to improve their daily
lives. While it is important to concentrate on the future,
we urge the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina also
to actively promote reconciliation.

The EU integration process offers an avenue for
tackling the deep-rooted structural challenges affecting
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but it is for its political
leadership to engage with this process and to deliver on
the necessary reforms.

