Mr. Sidorov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation is gravely
concerned by the situation that has arisen in recent days
in and around Croatia. Large-scale military operations by
the Croatian army to seize Sectors North and South have
overnight brought to naught the efforts of the international
community, first and foremost those of the Security
Council, the countries of the Contact Group and the
international mediators, Mr. Stoltenberg and Mr. Bildt, in
their continued attempts to find a political solution. The
military actions of the Croatian army have brought the

 
situation in the former Yugoslavia closer to the brink of a
major war in the Balkans - and this at a time when there
are real prospects for progress at the negotiating table.

We must note that what has taken hold in Zagreb is a
stance of integrating Serb-populated regions by force, which
has unfortunately been indirectly encouraged from the
capitals of a number of major countries. We clearly see a
situation in which the principle of a just solution is being
sacrificed to a philosophy of fait accompli. We believe that
this approach will have harmful consequences both for the
settlement of the Yugoslav crisis and, in a broader sense,
for the role to be played by the United Nations in
maintaining and restoring international peace and security.
One result of this policy which has now emerged is the
mass exodus of the Serb population of Krajina, which has
lived in this region for hundreds of years. The refugee
situation can be called nothing less than a humanitarian
catastrophe. Of special concern are reports of flagrant
violations by Croatian armed forces of the norms of
international humanitarian law, incidents of firing on
convoys of refugees in Bosnian territory, and the use of
cluster bombs.

In attacking Krajina, the Croatian side has not only
violated many Security Council resolutions, but has also
carried out a series of deliberate attacks on United Nations
forces, which have involved loss of live. There are cases of
using personnel of the United Nations Confidence
Restoration Operation in Croatia (UNCRO) as human
shields in the conduct of military operations, which has
been sternly condemned by the Security Council.

The gravity of the current situation requires the
adoption of urgent measures. We therefore took an active
part in the preparation of the draft resolution before the
Council today, which includes a number of provisions
intended to prevent further deterioration of the situation. Of
special importance in our view is the draft resolution's
demand that the Government of the Republic of Croatia
cease immediately all hostilities and comply with all
relevant Council resolutions, including resolution
994 (1995), and that it respect fully the rights of the local
Serb population.

The threats to use military means with respect to
eastern Slavonia underscore the urgency of the Council's
appeal to the countries, especially to the Government of
Croatia, to exercise maximum restraint.

International humanitarian organizations should be
guaranteed unhampered access to the relevant regions as
well as to Serbian military personnel being detained by
the Croatian Government forces. Those who commit
violations of international humanitarian law should be
held individually responsible in respect of such acts.

No less important is the demand by the Security
Council that Croatia respect the status of United Nations
personnel, put an end to attacks on it and punish those
who are guilty of such attacks.

The draft resolution notes with concern reports of
violations of resolution 713 (1991). We have a very solid
basis for noting this. The tragic events in Croatia have
once again reaffirmed that the fact that violations of the
arms embargo go unpunished tempt the parties to the
conflict to try to solve disputes not around the negotiating
table but by force of arms. In this connection, the need to
adopt additional measures to ensure effective compliance
with Security Council resolution 713 (1991) is becoming
more acute.

Yet another clear conclusion is that the United
Nations peace-keeping operations in Croatia must
continue in order to prevent a complete humanitarian
catastrophe and to ensure objective international
observation of the actions of the Croatian authorities with
regard to the Serbian population that has come under its
control. In this regard, any violations of international
humanitarian law, from wherever they come, require the
adoption of effective and impartial measures, including by
the Security Council.

The situation in Croatia must remain under the close
scrutiny of the Security Council, which, as the draft
resolution points out, will be prepared to consider further
measures to achieve compliance with all the provisions of
the draft resolution. There are such measures that the
Security Council can take, and this should be remembered
by those who believe that the Council's decisions are not
binding on them.

We think that the most important step we can take
now is to return to the negotiation process. Understanding
the need to counter the logic of violence with swift and
decisive action, Russia has taken an initiative to settle the
conflict, by proposing a meeting of the Serbian and
Croatian leaders, Mr. Milosevic and Mr. Tudjman,
respectively, in Moscow. Regrettably, we must note that
in Croatia the initial positive reaction to this initiative has
been abandoned, and they have proved to be unprepared
to begin a direct peaceful dialogue. We are convinced that
the need for a lasting peace, also in the interests of the

 

people of Croatia, will soon lead the leadership in Zagreb
to the negotiating table. The Russian proposal remains
valid.
As a result of a dialogue on 10 August between the
President of the Russian Federation, Boris Nicolayevich
Yeltsin, and President Milosevic in Moscow, the
commitment to Belgrade to a political settlement of the
entire Yugoslav crisis and to a solution of the problem of
Bosnia on the basis of the peace plan and the ending of
military hostilities everywhere was reaffirmed. We believe
that Belgrade's constructive policy should be met by an
adequate reaction on the part of the international
community.

Finally, we need to take a decision to relieve
Yugoslavia of the burden of sanctions. This would open the
way to the beginning of a process of mutual recognition of
the States located on the territory of the former Yugoslavia.

The Russian President has proposed, in the light of the
prevailing situation, that we take the following actions:

- The adoption of extreme measures to prevent a
humanitarian catastrophe, to ensure for all refugees the
unhindered return to their home, guaranteeing their safety.
There must be free access to humanitarian assistance.
Representatives of the Organization of Security and
Cooperation in Europe and other international organizations
must be granted the access required to monitor the
observance of the rights of the entire population of Croatia,
in full accordance with international rules. Of course, these
requirements apply also to all other regions in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia which have become battlefields.

- The safety of the United Nations peace-keepers
must be ensured. This is an absolute imperative.

- An end to hostilities in the entire territory of
Yugoslavia must be achieved. If that is not done, no
political decisions can be achieved.

- An end must be put to delays in the
implementation of the peace plan proposed by the
international community, which constitutes a real alternative
to an escalation of violence in Bosnia.

For this purpose, the Russian President has renewed a
proposal for a meeting of the heads of key countries, with
the participation of the parties to the conflict, the leaders of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Croatia, and Bosnia
and Herzegovina. An important stage in the preparation for
such a meeting could be a direct dialogue by the three
leaders: Mr. Milosevic, Mr. Tudjman and
Mr. Izetbegovic, Russia is prepared to organize such a
dialogue also.
Hostilities in the area of the former Yugoslavia, be
it in Croatia or in Bosnia, cannot be resolved militarily or
by force. We are convinced not only that it is still
possible to settle them peacefully, but that there is no
other way. Russia is firmly determined to promote such
a settlement.

