Mr. Krzywosadzki (Poland): Poland aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer
of the European Union and that to be delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. I would like
to add a few comments in my national capacity.

First, I would like to thank the Malaysian
presidency for convening this timely and important
debate. It has been 20 years since the publication of the
Graca Machel report (see A/59/306), which triggered
the international community's actions to address the
rights and needs of children in armed conflict. A lot
has been done since then, but in many parts of the world
tens of thousands of children continue to be deprived
of their basic rights and a happy childhood because of
ongoing armed conflicts.

In that context, Poland is deeply concerned about
the increase in violence against educational facilities,
students and teachers during armed conflicts. We
welcome and support initiatives aimed at putting an
end to the use of schools and universities for military
purposes. The Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools
and Universities from Military Use during Armed
Conflict, which were finalized in December 2014 under
the leadership of Norway and Argentina, are a good
example in that regard. To confirm our commitment to
effective implementation the Guidelines, Poland signed
the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration. We believe that
this initiative constitutes an important step towards
the protection and promotion of the rights of the child,
especially in conflict situations.

Poland is deeply concerned by the outrageous
phenomenon of child recruitment by armed forces
or armed groups. In that regard, we recognize the
importance of such efforts as the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign. We also appreciate the decision of
the Government of the Sudan to sign the action plan to
protect children from violations in armed conflict. We
take note of the commitments made by the Governments
identified by the Secretary-General in his recent report
(S/2016/360) on the recruitment of children, as well
as the notable progress achieved in Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Myanmar.

As a country that initiated the negotiations for
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Poland
has actively contributed to the implementation of
its objectives since its adoption in 1989. Recently, to
reaffirm our dedication to those issues, Poland joined
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
We pledge to actively engage in the work of that
important body.
Let me conclude by stating the simple truth that
children do not start wars, but wars affect children's
lives forever. It is the moral obligation of the entire
international community, including the United Nations,
Member States and civil society, to spare no effort to
better protect all children from the effects of violence
caused by adults.

