Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, please allow me to express my
condolences to the Government and the people of
Bangladesh with regard to the peacekeepers who were
killed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. My
condolences go also to the families of the victims.

The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence at
today's public meeting of His Excellency Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-
Leste, and thanks the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2005/99) on the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET). Our thanks go also to
Mr. Hasegawa, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, for his briefing.

We are pleased to see that over the past several
months, the overall situation of Timor-Leste has
remained stable. Local elections have been
successfully held in two districts and some important
pieces of legislation are in the pipeline. All of this
demonstrates that political and legal institutions are
being built and strengthened, and that the country's
capacity for governance is continually improving.

Moreover, Timor-Leste remains committed to the
development of good relations and cooperation with its
neighbours and is determined to properly settle the
outstanding issues in the interest of the lasting stability
of the region, as well as in its own long-term interests.
Such political wisdom and strategic vision are
commendable. On this occasion, we wish to
congratulate the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste on the encouraging progress achieved and to
express our appreciation to UNMISET for the positive
role it has played.

On the other hand, as pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report, Timor-Leste still faces
serious challenges on many fronts, especially in such
areas as State administration, the development of a
national police force, democratic governance and
human rights safeguards. There is still a need for
international assistance and support. The leaders of
Timor-Leste have made the relevant requests to the
members of the Council, and China fully understands
those requests.

It was with United Nations support that Timor-
Leste achieved its independence and embarked on the
path of peaceful nation-building five years ago with the
generous support of the United Nations and the
international community as a whole. The people and
the Government of Timor-Leste has exerted strenuous
effort to achieve the results that we witness today,
which are described by all as a United Nations success
story in Timor-Leste.

However, as the youngest and least developed
nation in Asia, Timor-Leste is like a toddler who may
still falter after taking an encouraging first step. We
should not only help it to stand firmly on its own legs,
but should also accompany it for some time in the
journey ahead. We all know that United Nations
support for Timor-Leste will come to an end some day,
but we sincerely hope that the Timor-Leste success
story will last forever. Therefore, we call on the
Security Council to learn from past experience and
give serious consideration to the requests of Timor-
Leste and to the proposal of the Secretary-General, and
to promptly reach consensus before 20 May of this
year regarding continued United Nations support for
Timor-Leste so as to ensure the lasting development
and stability of that country.

