Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
I should like first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting, which will, I am sure,
enable us to have a constructive exchange of views on
the important issue under consideration today. I should
also like to express my great appreciation to
Ambassador Chowdhury for his considerable work in
guiding the sanctions Committee concerning Sierra
Leone.

My delegation joins previous speakers in
thanking the Panel of Experts, established pursuant to
resolution 1306 (2000) to study the issue ofthe trade in
diamonds and arms in connection with Sierra Leone,
for its report.

I should also like to pay tribute to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for its
initiative to investigate the illicit trade in and
exploitation of diamonds from Sierra Leone. The
outcome of the investigation undertaken by
ECOWAS - which, we must remember, is in the best
position to identify the various aspects of this complex
problem and to suggest the most appropriate measures
to take in keeping with the specific context of the
subregion - should be duly taken into consideration
by the Security Council.

Having carefully considered the report of the
Panel of Experts before us today, my delegation would
like to make several observations and comments. First,
we believe that understanding the problem of the illicit
trade in diamonds requires a comprehensive and expert
approach encompassing, in a verifiable manner, the
entire chain of actors involved. We believe, therefore,
that in order to be truly effective and fair, it is not
enough to analyse merely the individual links in the
chain, but, rather, the chain as a whole.

Such an approach should aim to tighten control
over the product itself - the diamonds - through
concerted and coordinated international action. In this
connection, we support the recommendations of the
Panel of Experts concerning the need to set up a
generalized system of certification and to create a
mechanism within the United Nations Secretariat
which could continuously monitor the implementation
of the sanctions and embargoes imposed by the
Council.

Secondly, with regard to the trade in arms, the
approach necessary to control the flow of weapons in
conflict areas should not be selective. We share the
opinion of the Panel of Experts that responsibility for
the massive flood of weapons into West Africa lies
with producing countries as well as those that trans-
ship and use them. I should like in this connection to
underscore my delegation's support for the
recommendation of the Government of Burkina Faso,
which has been endorsed by the Panel of Experts, that
the Security Council supervise a mechanism to monitor
all weapons imports into the territory of Burkina Faso
and the use of such weapons for a period ofthree years.

Thirdly, the approach that the Security Council
should take with regard to the problem of the illicit
trade in diamonds and arms in connection with Sierra
Leone should be preventive and progressive in nature,
based on dialogue and a clear and agreed strategy
capable of producing concrete and rapid results while
avoiding, insofar as possible, adding to the suffering of
the civilian population, which is already exhausted
from other humanitarian, social and economic
problems. Furthermore, the measures to be taken by the
Council should involve only the target concern: the
illegal trade in diamonds and arms. Extending
sanctions to other areas and activities might cause new
difficulties, in particular for the people in the countries
concerned, who are already suffering from the impact
of armed conflicts in the region. Any sanctions
imposed by the Security Council should be tailored to
specific objectives; they should have a time limit and
contain automatic provisions for their lifting.

In conclusion, I should like to underscore the
importance for the Security Council of paying
particular attention to the need to ensure that ECOWAS
initiatives are not placed in jeopardy. The success of
the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)
interposition mission along the common borders of
Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea - which the Council
has supported and which should be deployed from 28
February - must be assured, and the Council must
accord priority in its deliberations to the follow-up to
certain recommendations of the Panel of Experts.

In this connection, we welcome the decision
taken by the ECOWAS Ministers for Foreign Affairs to
visit New York in the near future in order to meet with
the members of the Security Council. We are convinced
that their visit will provide an opportunity for a fruitful
exchange of views between the members of the
Council and the ECOWAS delegation, led by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, on the various
aspects of the situation prevailing in the region. We
believe also that the visit will lead to the consolidation
of the comprehensive and multidimensional approach
established by the Council to manage this situation in
order to lay the groundwork for lasting peace and
stability, not only in Sierra Leone, but in the entire
subregion of West Africa.

