Mr. De Palacio Espafia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at the outset to align myself with the
statement made by the representative of Slovenia on
behalf of the presidency of the European Union. I also
thank the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno most sincerely for the presentation
of the report.

Spain is grateful for the opportunity afforded to it
its delegation to participate in this open debate, which
allows me to reiterate Spain's commitment -
especially following the recent elections in my country,
through which the electorate's trust in our Government
was affirmed - to a secure, stable, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan that is free from the threat of
terrorism and living in peace and close cooperation
with its neighbours.

Spain believes that the international community
should continue to focus its efforts on the fundamental
goal of consolidating a sustainable political system that
generates sufficient consensus among the Afghan
people and is able on its own to ensure the country's
security.

We support the Secretary-General's appointment
of Mr. Kai Eide as his new Special Representative for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I convey to
Mr. Eide my sincere congratulations and the support of
our Government, so that he can contribute to
strengthening the political leadership of the United
Nations and the coordination among all the
international actors in Afghanistan and with the Afghan
Government itself.
As it always has, Spain believes that the United
Nations must continue to play a central role in the
process of stabilizing and rebuilding Afghanistan. In
order to do that, we must further increase UNAMA's
coverage and presence so that it can carry out its
functions throughout the territory of Afghanistan. In
that regard, we support the efforts that could be made
together with the international community in providing
advice on controlling the production of narcotics.

In order to be effective, we must continue to
follow a comprehensive approach that, while not
undermining the important aspect of security, is
increasingly focused on the political and civilian
dimensions of Afghanistan's reconstruction - namely,
promoting good governance, the rule of law, human
rights and social and economic development, as well as
ensuring that the Afghan Government gradually
assumes its responsibilities.

I should now like to dwell on that point in order
to reiterate the European Union's appeal for the
restoration of the de facto moratorium on the death
penalty and the suspension of the future imposition of
capital punishment in Afghanistan.

We are pleased to note that the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy is about to be adopted,
which should serve as the framework of reference for
ensuring that international assistance responds to the
priorities established by the Afghan Government.
Among those priorities, it is our View that the
Afghanization of the security forces - the army and
the police - should have priority attention. Likewise,
efforts should be stepped up to extend the Afghan
Government's authority throughout the whole of its
territory by strengthening provincial and local
institutions and training and building the capacity of
public officials and civil servants, thereby taking
decisive steps towards improving good governance at
the local level and combating corruption.

We believe that the international conference to be
held in Paris should undertake an analysis of what has
been achieved to date in political terms and not be just
another donor conference. That should make it possible
to provide the comprehensive approach to which I have
referred while reaffirming the leadership of the United
Nations and encouraging the Afghan Government to
assume its responsibilities. The Paris conference
should also lead to decisive steps towards
strengthening international coordination in setting
priorities for the implementation of the Afghanistan
Compact.

Spain supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to renew UNAMA's mandate for
another 12 months under the current terms. There will
be time ahead to consider whether there is a need for

changes to the mandate. In order to do that, the new
Special Representative will have to assess the situation
on the ground. In that connection, it will be especially
important to support the upcoming elections - upon
which the credibility of the system will depend - and
to expand coordination with the International Security
Assistance Force.

