Mr. Lillie: I, too, would like to pay tribute to the
humanitarians who have been lost in Syria - nearly
1,200 of them, as the representative of South Africa
mentioned in his remarks, which we appreciate.

With regard to the areas of Syria that we have
discussed here today, I sometimes wonder why health-
care workers stay in Syria. They stay to care for those
who have been injured and maimed, and to help bury
those who have died. They are unselfish, they are
heroic and they are true humanitarians. In fact, one of
the most dangerous jobs in Syria is to be a health-care
worker. One of the most dangerous places to be in Syria
today is at a health facility.

As has been stated here today, since the end oprril
there have been 30 attacks on health facilities, mobile
health clinics and ambulances. The Syrian American
Medical Society alone has lost over 50 ofits colleagues.
This week, my colleagues and fellow non- governmental
organizations have been reviewing a duty of care
policy - what to do about our colleagues who have
been maimed and who have died, and how we care for
their families. I have worked in humanitarian assistance
for decades in Darfur, South Sudan, Iraq, Afghanistan
and in many other places, for both governmental and
non-governmental organizations, and I have never put
so much care into such a policy - we have not had to.

Some of my colleagues would want to condemn or
to call out names, but we cannot so long as we stay
true to humanitarian standards. And it is not easy.
Of the nine de-conflicted facilities attacked since
late April, eight were from air strikes. While there
are many air forces operating in Syria, the only ones
conducting operations in that part of north-western
Syria are Russia's and Syria's. It was Russia that, for
years, pushed to de-conflict. We were told to provide
coordinates and that they would make sure that those
coordinates were not targeted.

This organ and its investigative entities must hold
accountable those who have attacked civilians and
medical facilities or the people suffering in Syria will
lose the remaining thread of hope that the international
community cares. We owe it to the 1,200 humanitarians
who have perished in the conflict and the 2,200
individuals - women, children, civilians - who
the Syrian American Medical Society has seen in its
medical facilities injured from the conflict since the
end of April.
We have heard many good words here today and I
can only ask that we put those words into action before
more civilian lives are lost.

