Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
should congratulate you, Sir, for your election to the
presidency this month, and also extend felicitations and
congratulations to China for their successful
stewardship of this body last month. My delegation
wishes to thank the delegation of the Republic of the
Congo for organizing this open debate on a topic of
particular importance to us.

The primary responsibility of the Security
Council is not only the maintenance of international
peace and security, but also to promote the peace that it
seeks to maintain. Promoting the establishment of
peace involves, in essence, the prevention of the
conditions and causes of conflict. Compared to the
multitudes of initiatives and undertakings to resolve

07-4920]
conflicts by both the United Nations and regional
organizations, initiatives to prevent conflicts in the past
sixty years have been relatively few and far apart.
There has been focus on conflict resolution, but not
equal focus on prevention. The strategies for conflict
resolution have, therefore, remained underdeveloped.

The 2005 World Summit established the
Peacebuilding Commission, which seeks to prevent
relapses into conflict in post-conflict situations. This is
commendable and necessary, given the many
recurrences of conflict after successful and costly
peacekeeping missions. Peacebuilding is prevention in
the second instance. We should equally pay similar
attention in the first instance to conflict prevention in
order to contain simmering conflict situations from
reaching a critical mass and breaking into violent
conflicts.

It is probably time for the Security Council and
the Secretary-General to launch an initiative similar to
the Peacebuilding Commission, one fully dedicated to
developing a comprehensive strategy for conflict
prevention in partnership with regional organizations.
There are already various inter-governmental and non-
governmental initiatives aimed at conflict prevention,
but they are fragmented and under-resourced. A
comprehensive conflict prevention strategy would
complete the three pillars of the peace and security
architecture of the United Nations consisting of
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding.

My country has practical experience of the
negative impact of conflicts. Tanzania is located within
a region that has a long history of many deadly
conflicts. The United Nations has been very helpful to
us in our efforts to resolve the conflicts in the Great
Lakes region. The United Nations contribution has
been particularly useful in the organization of the two
International Conferences on the Great Lakes Region.
The first took place in Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania, in
2004 and the second in Nairobi in 2006. The
conferences grew out of the need to have a
comprehensive regionally designed process and
strategy that encompasses all aspects from peace
prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustained
development. As an outcome of the conferences, the
region was finally able to sign the Pact on Security,
Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region.
The regional pact bears elements of all the three pillars
of the peace and security architecture.

07-4920]

An executive secretariat has now been established
with the objective of coordinating and implementing
the Pact. It is expected that, upon its ratification, full
implementation of the projects listed in the regional
programme of action will begin. In the meantime, plans
are underway, in consultation with the African
Development Bank, on how to render operational the
Special Fund for Reconstruction and Development of
the Great Lakes region. As of now, the secretariat has
managed to secure political and diplomatic support
from regional and subregional groupings and
international partners such as the United Nations
system, the African Union, the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), the East African
Community, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the Group of Friends of the
Great Lakes Region.

We need to devise a practical and effective
strategy that can address the root causes and
underlying conditions of conflicts in a comprehensive
manner. This underlines the importance of having a
holistic approach to prevention, one that addresses the
linkages between development and security and
recognizes the nexus between the two. Let us build an
effective global partnership between States and
institutions that can work in unison to prevent and
resolve violent conflicts.

The close linkages between security, development
and human rights have revealed the imperative of an
integrated approach to conflict prevention, resolution
and peacebuilding. It is therefore important to examine
how best to promote peace and the sustained rule of
law in post-conflict societies.

The establishment of the permanent International
Criminal Court (ICC) was a crucial step. It provides
legal measures for dealing with the suspects of
international crimes and thus assists in combating the
culture of impunity. For the first time in history, the
ICC has provided the international community with an
institution that addresses the most heinous international
crimes and thus ensures that the gravest international
crimes do not go unpunished. Its mandate to try and to
sentence the highest and the mightiest can be
considered a deterrent to potential tyrants and the
prevention of man- or woman-made crises in the world.

The relevance of peacebuilding, for example,
rests on the fact that lasting peace in a country torn by
violence cannot be achieved unless and until the
destroyed infrastructure is reconstructed. Therefore,
any discussion on conflict prevention would not be
complete without a discussion on institutional and
resource challenges in post-conflict peacebuilding with
a view to strengthening coherence and consistency of
the Security Council's actions. It is in this regard that
we have supported and actively contributed to the
creation of the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as
the Peacebuilding Support Office within the
Secretariat. We shall give the same kind of support to
any initiatives by this Council or by the Secretary-
General in the area of conflict prevention.

The challenge here is how to build an effective
partnership between the United Nations system and
other actors for a well-coordinated role in conflict
prevention. United Nations partnership with the
African Union and African subregional arrangements
such as the Great Lakes region, the Economic
Community of West African Nations (ECOWAS),
IGAD and SADC has been quite exemplary in the
areas of peacemaking and peacekeeping. We are happy
that this important collaboration has now been
extended to the area of post-conflict peacebuilding as
well.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to recognize
the special attention that the United Nations is paying
to African conflicts. We are particularly appreciative of
the growing partnerships with the African Union in
conflict resolution, peacekeeping and now
peacebuilding. However, we have to display the same
spirit and greater commitment to conflict prevention.

We want to thank you, once again, for providing
us this opportunity to participate in this important
debate.

