The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Egypt.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-
Brook Zerihoun, for his important briefing on this vital
aspect of the work of the Security Council.

As stipulated in Article 41, Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations grants the Security
Council the mandate to take various measures to
confront threats to international peace and security
without the use of force. Despite the use of the word
"sanctions" to describe such measures, the Charter does
not make any reference to that term. The term has been
widely used in Security Council resolutions that impose
such measures. The Council has a great responsibility
to clarify that concept, which is a commonly used term,
and its punitive connotations. The measures stipulated
in the Charter seek to maintain or restore international
peace and security, not to punish any party.

The Council has made considerable progress in
developing the concept of sanctions, moving from
comprehensive to smarter and more effective measures,
while benefiting from the knowledge accumulated from
previous experiences. Because of that, we have been
able to mitigate the unintended negative repercussions
of the sanctions, especially on civilians and States that
are not party to conflicts. We have also been able to limit
the measures to parties that are a threat to international
peace and security. These improvements have helped
to make the measures more effective and improve the
likelihood that they will achieve the desired result.

While this progress is commendable, it is not
enough. The uniqueness of every new threat to
international peace and stability means that we have to
adopt sanctions regimes that are tailored to particular
situations and suited to a threat's particular nature,
treating each on a case-by-case basis. That does
not mean, however, that we should not make use of
previous experiences of sanctions regimes and lessons
learned from their implementation. Maintaining an
identical approach and a narrow perspective while
considering sanctions on a case-by-case basis will
not help us improve them unless we also make them
complementary with other, more comprehensive and
inclusive mechanisms that seek to study all the means
that can potentially improve this important tool in both
style and substance.

Finding appropriate mechanisms for dialogue;
monitoring, assessing and incorporating lessons
learned from previous sanctions regimes; and taking
the views of every involved party into consideration
are therefore elements that the Council should not
undermine, underestimate or ignore, considering all the
means to achieve it.

The Arria-Formula meeting organized by Egypt
last month, entitled "Enhancing the design process of
United Nations sanctions regimes: perspectives from
all stakeholders", presented a genuine opportunity to
listen to the views of three African countries on the
impact of sanctions on efforts aimed at stabilization.
Wide participation by Council members and the broader
United Nations membership showed the depth of the
interest in this issue and the importance of studying
and analysing previous experience, which can help us
improve the design of our sanctions regimes. Ensuring
that this tool is just and fair will help to guarantee its
effectiveness, while any abuse of it could undermine its
credibility with the international community and lead
to repercussions that could aggravate crises rather than
help to settle them.

We should also help Member States understand
the diverse nature of sanctions regimes and build their
technical capacity to implement sanctions measures
properly. Egypt is ready to contribute to that important
effort. In that regard, I would like to thank the
Secretariat for taking part in the first round table held
to raise awareness of the sanctions regimes, which we
hosted in Cairo on 12 and 13 July with the participation
of Egypt's national coordinating committee on United
Nations sanctions. We believe that such cooperation
is a model that deserves support and look forward to
expanding it, including at the regional level.

I have listened carefully to members' statements
today and noted their differences of opinion and
position. However, I also noted their agreement on the
importance of developing United Nations sanctions
regimes. The Council has a collective responsibility to
translate those positions into action that demonstrates
our seriousness and good intentions, sending a clear
message to all members of the United Nations and the
international community that the Council is present on
this issue and aware of the importance of this vital tool
and the need to develop it properly. The Council's role
is not complete if it is not accompanied by a genuine
partnership with all Member States and stakeholders,
creating the channels and mechanisms that will enable
it to listen to stakeholders' views, which constitute an
important tool for helping it achieve its goal of improving
current and future sanctions regimes. This would also
enable the Council to hold periodic dialogues on the
issue and take any measures that might be necessary.

In that regard, Egypt looks forward to cooperating
with Member States during its presidency ofthe Council
and to pursuing our collective efforts to translate our
positions and the positive statements we have heard
today into political will and practical measures. Those
positions, and our collective will, will help us to agree
on practical procedures and effective mechanisms that
will enable the Council to further develop its sanctions
regimes so as to achieve their objective as a tool for
restoring peace and security while avoiding any negative
repercussions or deviations from its desired objectives,
rectifying them according to each individual case.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at11.50 a.m.
