Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): We
should like to thank you, Sir, for presiding over our
work and for the fresh opportunity that your country
has afforded the Council to debate the issue of new
challenges to international peace and security. I
welcome the participation in our discussions of Their
Excellencies the Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil and Colombia.

We wish also to thank the briefers -
Mr. Fedotov, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC); High
Commissioner Antonio Guterres; Director-General
Margaret Chan; and the Secretary-General - for their
contributions to this debate.
In recent years the Council has held several
debates that enabled it to take stock of these new
challenges to international peace and security. As a
result, it was able to identify the factors that intensify
such challenges and the real risks arising from them.
Those challenges include an increase in international
drug trafficking and a resurgence of transnational
organized crime, which contribute to the
destabilization of States and the undermining of post-
conflict reconstruction efforts.

The proliferation and illegal circulation of small
arms and light weapons heighten this threat,
intensifying insecurity for the civilian population.
These weapons have become a principal instrument in
conflicts, worsening their impact and prolonging them.

There are two other challenges of concern to us.
The first is the increasingly evident relationship
between the HIV/AIDS pandemic and sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict situations. We would recall
that the President of the Gabonese Republic chaired the
Council meeting (see S/PV.6547) leading to the
adoption of resolution 1983 (2011) on this issue.

Gabon is also concerned at the potential
implications of climate change for international
stability and security in the economic, social and
environmental areas as well as for movements of
refugees and persons displaced both within and beyond
the borders of their country. Gabon is hopeful that the
United Nations Climate Change Conference, to be held
in Durban, will provide an opportunity to make
headway on the issue of the impact of climate change.

In the face of these challenges, we are all in
agreement that we need a comprehensive, agreed
approach that is based on the multidimensional and
interdependent character of the new threats. It is
important that the United Nations address these issues
in an open manner, and in that respect the Council must
take a forward-looking approach.

In that connection, Gabon made its contribution
to the work of the Council by holding, during its two
presidencies of the Council, in March 2010 and June
2011, two debates and a briefing on, respectively, the
illegal circulation of small arms and light weapons in
Central Africa, the impact of the HIV/AIDS pandemic
on peace and security, as I mentioned earlier, and the
issue of trafficking in drugs and transnational
organized crime. France, Germany and Burkina Faso
also placed particular emphasis on these challenges

during their presidency of the Council in previous
years.

Given the concerns that we have just voiced, it is
important that the Secretary-General continue to keep
the Council informed about developments relating to
these new challenges and make recommendations on
the best ways of addressing them. The Council must
also have its own tools for dealing with these new
challenges. In that context, Gabon supports the
establishment of an ad hoc working group charged with
looking at the interdependence of those challenges and
make concrete recommendations in order to provide
the Council with better guidance in those areas.

The Security Council must explore new avenues
aimed at improving its cooperation with the United
Nations agencies, programmes and funds that deal with
such matters, as well as with regional and subregional
organizations. These two aspects of cooperation are
major underpinnings of the Council's central role in the
process of the prevention and long-term resolution of
conflicts.

In closing, let me say that the maintenance of
international peace and security is an immense task
that the Council cannot shoulder alone. The new global
geopolitical context requires the creation of new
synergies in the areas of cooperation and solidarity so
as to provide a comprehensive response to the
emergence of these new threats to international peace
and security.

