Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): 1 would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this timely
and relevant meeting. I should also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
detailed briefing, which provides a context for this
important discussion of new trends in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

This open debate comes at a crucial juncture for
our Organization. Since 1948, when the United Nations
pioneered its peacekeeping operations, the world has
witnessed transformative events and massive changes
in the global geopolitical landscape. Traditional
threats continue, but of course there are now new and
developing ones, including non-State actors with real
capabilities for asymmetrical offences. The operational
area has likewise evolved considerably, presenting
a political milieu that is increasingly complex and
complicated. Given these and many other challenges,
our United Nations peacekeeping operations continue
to face increasing constraints, particularly with regard
to resources.

These realities should not deter us from the great
task and duty of this Organization, which is to maintain
international peace and security. The Philippines has
ably demonstrated its commitment to contributing to
that task. What we have done so far is very modest,
but our determination is certainly much bigger. With
real and present danger to the safety and security of
Filipino peacekeepers, my Government has continued
to honour its international peacekeeping commitment
in a testament to the unwavering resolve of my nation
and people to hold the line of peace where it matters.

It is certainly incumbent on us all to act with
responsibility and to do our part to ensure the success
of peacekeeping missions. While the challenges
confronting those missions may change, several elements
must remain constant and must be enhanced - for
instance, the setting of clear and achievable mandates;
the provision of human resources and logistical support;
a commitment to the safety and security of peacekeepers;
the demonstration by stakeholders of the political will
necessary for respect for the mandates, commitments
and deals of peacekeeping missions and of all others
relating to peacekeepers' freedom of movement; and
responsive and timely policy recommendations from
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

That said, we must be forward-looking and
strategically oriented to ensure that peacekeeping
missions remain steady and able to anticipate and to
respond to new and emerging challenges and identifiable
trends. The concept note (S/2014/384, annex) raises
interesting points for the Philippines, and we would
like to provide the following comments.

Our first remark is that the Philippines notes
the observation made that mandates for robust
peacekeeping operations point to the need to assess
their effectiveness and impact on the image of the
Organization. Likewise, it is important to seriously
consider the impact of such kinds ofmandates on United
Nations personnel, including the humanitarian and
civilian staff working on the ground in peacekeeping
operations. The Philippines belongs to the top three
nations with international civilian staff in United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions.

The Philippines expresses its concern over the
observation that there may be a possible increase in
the casualty rate of troops as a result of their direct
participation in hostilities in situations where threats
arise from non-governmental armed groups. That
underscores the need to build the self-defence capability
of peacekeepers, consistent with the recommendations
contained in the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (A/68/19). The Philippines
looks forward to the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of that report.

Secondly, the Philippines maintains that the use
of modern technology must uphold the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
namely, respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Member States, and must comply with
the fundamental principles of peacekeeping. The use
of modern technology for the situational awareness of
peacekeeping missions is recognized. However, it must
be stressed that the control and confidentiality of the
information collected are issues that must be addressed.

On the need for peacekeeping missions to have
the necessary resources, the model of the temporary
transfer of personnel and equipment between missions
in case of gaps is duly noted. While its effectiveness has
been demonstrated in several cases, missions must be
provided with the wherewithal to address very serious
security challenges. In the same manner, it must also
be stressed that the practice of temporarily transferring
personnel and equipment within a mission in the event
of gaps must be minimized. Philippine peacekeepers
have had to deal with that scenario in the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for an extended period.

Our third point is that it must also be stressed that
partnership and coordination among troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), police-contributing countries
(PCCs), the Council and the Secretariat, as well as
the relevant stakeholders, are vital to ensuring the
successful implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
However, while it is welcome and extremely useful that
such new ideas exist to bring us closer to what we truly
want to achieve in peacekeeping operations, there are
currently issues facing us that must be addressed and
for which durable and timely solutions must be found.
Otherwise, there is the danger that those new ideas will
come to nothing.

First, pandemics and diseases constitute emerging
threats. Additional studies to enhance the ability
of peacekeeping missions to address them would
be most welcome. Secondly, care must be taken to
ensure that missions, through effective standard
operating procedures, do not leave behind a footprint
that negatively affects the environment and the local
population. Thirdly, commitments and agreements
must lead to concrete provision. We now have the
results of the survey conducted pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 67/261 on the deficit between the
current United Nations reimbursement rate to TCCs
and PCCs and the high financial costs incurred by those
countries. A decision that increases the standard rate of
reimbursement to TCCs and PCCs must soon be adopted
to ensure the success of peacekeeping missions.

Finally, we would also like to express our alignment
with the statement on this topic to be delivered by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

