Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this very important
open debate and for seeking to bring a comprehensive
perspective to the situation in Somalia. Let me also
thank the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing. I would also like to thank Prime Minister
Mohamed of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) for his remarks and Special Representatives
Mahiga and Diarra for their participation today.

On behalf of the United States, let me express my
deepest condolences for those killed and wounded in
the recent fighting in Somalia against Al-Shabaab and
its allies. In the current offensive, peacekeepers from
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
Somali national security forces have shown
professionalism, dedication and courage. We owe them
our gratitude. I commend the resolve and commitment
of the troop-contributing Governments of Burundi and
Uganda. The international community needs to do
more to support the troop, equipment and resource
needs ofAMISOM.

The situation in Somalia, as we have heard this
morning, remains alarming. The Somali population
face a dire humanitarian situation. We are gravely
concerned about the approximately 2.4 million Somalis
in urgent need of humanitarian assistance, most of
them living in areas held by Al-Shabaab - areas where
humanitarian space is shrinking. More than a year ago
the World Food Programme (WFP) was forced to
suspend its programmes in Shabaab-held territory due
to threats and demands against its staff. Al-Shabaab has
expelled several non-governmental organizations and
United Nations agencies.

The inability to deliver humanitarian assistance
under deteriorating conditions has meant that
significantly more Somalis are seeking refuge and aid
in neighbouring countries. My Government commends
the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the WFP, UNICEF, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and others as
they continue to provide services under difficult
conditions to the internally displaced and to Somali
refugees in Kenya, Djibouti, Yemen and Ethiopia,
whose Governments we thank for their hospitality.

11-2583]
We are deeply concerned by the continued threats
to peace and security posed by radical extremists,
criminals and other spoilers in Somalia. Instability and
lack of economic opportunity continue to fuel piracy
off the coast of Somalia, which threatens not only the
Somali people and seafarers but the stability of the
region as a whole. Piracy off the coast of Somalia is
seriously hindering the delivery of vital humanitarian
aid to the region, international trade through the Indian
Ocean and the welfare of seafarers passing through the
waters off the coast. Last month, as has been noted,
four Americans tragically lost their lives while being
held hostage by Somali pirates.

The level of violence being used by pirates is
escalating and their range of operations is broadening.
Those are troubling trends, and the international
community, including this Council, must do more to
address this flatly unacceptable situation not only by
stepping up prevention efforts and enhancing judicial
accountability, but also by going after those who
finance, plan and organize piracy activities. In this
regard, the United States recently hosted an ad hoc
meeting of interested members of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia to further explore
what the international community can do to go after
those who unlawfully profit from those despicable
activities. We strongly urge the international
community to support those efforts.

The United States commends the efforts of the
twenty countries, including many members of this
Council, that have built a multinational naval patrol to
conduct counter-piracy operations and safeguard
vessels. Additionally, while we consider options to
ensure that pirates face judicial consequences, we hope
that the international community will continue to
support and enhance prosecution-related programmes
already under way. We welcome the contributions
made by the United Nations and the Contact Group.
We hope that the international community, including
the Security Council, will work to ensure that the
various initiatives that are being proposed complement
each other.

As we move forward, incarceration capacity
should be a key focus of both this Council and the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. As
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal
Issues, Jack Lang, made clear in his comprehensive
report to the Council (S/2011/30, annex), this will still
be an issue no matter which prosecution mechanism we
pursue.

The obstacles to a stable Somalia cannot be
underestimated. Under the dual-track approach, the
United States continues to support the Djibouti peace
process and the Transitional Federal Government even
as we support other local and regional entities in
Somalia that seek peace, reject terrorism and are
willing to work with the TFG. We are increasingly
concerned about the incessant political infighting and
the lack of progress on governance reform, basic
services for the Somali people and a functional
political coalition that can govern and stabilize
Somalia at large.

We expect the TFG to take advantage of advances
by AMISOM. to make progress towards achieving its
transitional tasks and expanding outreach throughout
Somalia, a critical objective in our view. We also call
on the TFG to immediately take steps to improve its
financial institutions and procedures. We are looking
for greater accounting of assistance funds provided by
the international community and from revenue sources
such as the port of Mogadishu. In this regard, the
United States has provided financial advisers to the
Ministry of Finance to assist with revenue
accountability. We call for the TFG to substantively
improve its governance and security efforts and to
provide a sustained demonstration of commitment
towards that end.

Finally, the United States does not support the
unilateral three-year extension of the Transitional
Federal Parliament. Similarly, we oppose any assertion
that the current TFG should simply be extended past
August 2011, absent a clear Somali road map for how
the TFG would make the transition into a
representative Government within a defined time frame.

For credible progress to be made, we believe that
the TFG and Parliament must enter into serious
discussions with regional partners, Special
Representative Mahiga and key supporters in the
international community to identify a sensible, realistic
way forward. I would especially like to note our
appreciation for Special Representative Mahiga's
continued work and leadership in this regard. The
outcome of this process must advance the goal of
building a comprehensive political solution and a
strategy for reconciliation and lasting peace.
