Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to thank
Mr. Arnault for his concluding remarks, which, in our
view, put in balance the situation that exists in
Afghanistan today. We agree that there is an effort on
the part of the extremists to disrupt the elections;
obviously, there are various reasons for that. There is
no question that the extremists do not as yet enjoy
popular support in Afghanistan, including in the south
or the south-east of the country.

However, we would like to make one point. In
our view, it is not primarily cross-border infiltration
that is resulting in the extremist violence in
Afghanistan, including in the south and the south-east.
If one were to review the location of the 30 or 35
incidents directed against election workers over the
past two months or so, I think one would be able to
pinpoint that, apart from four, five or six incidents,
most of them have taken place well inside Afghan
territory, at least 100 miles from the border with
Pakistan. The five or six incidents in the border
regions- at least those reported - have been in
places such as Nangarhar and Zabul, close to Pakistan's
borders.

When you request or seek cooperation from
Pakistan to enhance its actions to stop infiltration, two
questions arise.

First, I believe that what we are doing is
extraordinary. The effort we have deployed, with the
political costs that Pakistan has incurred by marching
its troops into territories where even our British friends
did not venture for 150 years, is, I think, remarkable.
We have gone in and dealt with the tribes; we have
gone in with peace, with construction, with schools and
hospitals, in order to win those tribes over to our way
of thinking. But we have encountered resistance, as
members are aware, and our operations are under way;
many of our soldiers have died. The question is, what
more does the United Nations expect us to do? When
that call is made upon us, what more is expected from
Pakistan in this context that we are not already doing?
That is the question.

We feel very strongly that we are doing
everything we can. We have taken many political risks
and have suffered many military casualties, and to call
upon Pakistan to do even more is unfair. We can
become more effective in our actions, but that requires
a building up of our technical and other capacities. I
believe that our friends at the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and our allies are
well aware of what those requirements are. We have
not received those requirements, despite repeated
requests. That adds to our sense of frustration when we
are asked to do more.

Secondly, cross-border action is not only the
responsibility of Pakistan; even more, it is the
responsibility of Afghanistan and of the international
forces that are in Afghanistan. Pakistan has deployed
75,000 troops on the border. We would like to know
what the number on the other side is. Is it larger? Have
the actions taken on the other side of the border been
more extensive than those enumerated with regard to
what Pakistan has done on our side of the border? Are
they more of a commitment? The International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) has agreed to enhance its
forces by a few thousand. Is that the response that is
required from the international community? And, if the
international community asks us to do more, should it
not do more itself? If the United Nations asks us to do
more, should it not ask ISAF at least to match our
efforts on the other side of the border?

Those are real and practical issues. Therefore, I
must say that my Government is very sensitive to any
assertion that we could do more than we are doing
without the help of the international community.

