Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for
his briefing and commend him on his recent mediation
efforts. We support his continued efforts, under
resolution 2254 (2015), to facilitate a political solution
to the Syrian issue.
Today I wish to focus on three points about how to
promote the political process.

First, promoting the political process is the only way
forward to solve the Syrian problem. The establishment
of a representative constitutional committee that is
accepted by all parties is the most realistic channel for
the launch of a political process in Syria. In April, the
Syrian parties reached an understanding in the twelfth
round of the Astana talks on the decision-making
mechanisms of the constitutional committee and its
rules of procedure.

At the same time, in terms of the establishment
of the committee, there are a few outstanding issues.
China supports Special Envoy Pedersen's efforts in
this regard to continue mediation and maintain close
communication with all parties. We also support the
continued role of the Astana process.

Secondly, a sustainable political process requires a
secure and stable external environment. China supports
strengthened cooperation between Russia and Turkey
with the aim of continuing the implementation of their
memorandum of understanding on Idlib. The scourge
of terrorism poses a major threat to the political
process and could lead to irreversible consequences
for the process and the future of the country. The
international community should, in accordance with
the relevant Council resolutions and international law,
harmonize its standards and crack down resolutely on
all terrorist groups.

Thirdly, the future and destiny of Syria ultimately
lie in the hands of the Syrian people. In promoting
a political solution, we should abide by the Syrian-
led, Syrian-owned principle, and the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria must be
fully respected.

China is ready to work with the Security Council
to enhance our support for the efforts of the United
Nations to facilitate gradual progress in the Syrian
political process.

