Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar, Ambassador U Than Swe,
for his statement.

China places high value on the Secretary-
General's visit to Myanmar in early July. We greatly
appreciate the efforts he has made since he assumed his
post to promote the democratic process and national
reconciliation in Myanmar. We believe that his visit
was very valuable and brought great influence to bear.
China appreciates the high-level reception accorded to
the Secretary-General by Myanmar and is encouraged
by the determination expressed by Myanmar to
promote the democratic process and actively cooperate
with the United Nations.

We note that some media and certain countries
are not happy with the fact that the Secretary-General
did not meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. In our View,
the Secretary-General met with many people during his
visit; whether or not he met with Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi should not be used as a criterion to measure the
success ofhis visit.

Daw Aung San Suu Kyi was unfortunately
involved in a legal proceeding. In order to maintain
impartiality in the judicial process, the Myanmar side
did not make the arrangements for the Secretary-
General to meet with her, which is totally
understandable. The United Nations should respect the
jurisdiction of its Member States.

We have time and again stressed that the
Secretary-General's good offices are a process and that
his visit was part of the good offices mandate. During
his visit, the Secretary-General had in-depth dialogues
with the top leaders of Myanmar, directly conveyed to
them the concern of the international community on the
question of Myanmar, and enhanced mutual trust with
that country. That will play an important role in
encouraging the Myanmar side to maintain the current
momentum and promote the democratic process
according to the established plan.

The Secretary-General also had extensive contacts
with the civil society of Myanmar and exerted a
positive influence on its members. All of these
developments fully indicate that the visit of the
Secretary-General is of positive and important
significance.

In recent years, the Secretary-General has
actively conducted good offices in Myanmar, as
mandated by the General Assembly. His unremitting
efforts and the positive outcome achieved thereby
deserve an objective and fair assessment by the
international community. Up to 2006, when
Mr. Gambari made his first visit to the country at the
request of the Secretary-General, Myanmar had taken
14 years to complete the first step of the seven-step
road map. Next year, however, it will finish the fifth
step by holding the first general elections in 20 years.
These achievements would not have been possible
without the Secretary-General's good offices and
Myanmar's own efforts.

Taking into account Myanmar's historical
evolution and the political reality in the country, the
aforementioned progress was no easy gain. It is unfair
to turn a blind eye to the progress that Myanmar has
made or to continuously focus on picking at its
Government. The international community should
make a balanced assessment of the efforts Myanmar
has made, lend its Government more encouragement
and assistance, and treat it with less arrogance and
prejudice.

As an Asian country and Myanmar's close
neighbour, China fully understands the difficulties
facing the people and the Government of Myanmar.
Myanmar is plagued by a myriad of problems, not just
one problem concerning a single individual. As a least
developed country, while Myanmar is self-sufficient
agriculturally, the majority of its people have yet to
share the dividends of industrialization. The biggest
problem for Myanmar is therefore development.

As Myanmar is a multi-ethnic nation, national
reconciliation faces a serious challenge there, with
armed groups inside its territory yet to sign peace
agreements with the Government. The greatest
challenge for Myanmar is therefore achieving national
unity and social stability.

As both an old country with a long history of
civilization and a new one that emerged from the
Second World War after shaking off colonial rule,
Myanmar's democratic process and system of
governance are faced with many problems. Like many
other developing countries, Myanmar's problems can
only be gradually addressed in the process of its
economic and social development.

It is obvious that Myanmar's problems cannot be
solved exclusively through Western-style problem-
solving. We hope that the Government of Myanmar
will implement the seven-step road map of its
democratic process with due seriousness and make full
preparations for the general elections scheduled next
year. We hope that the Government of Myanmar will
engage in steady reform and lead its people towards
greater economic achievements. We also hope that the
international community will make an objective and
fair assessment of its multifaceted problems and lend a
helping hand to Myanmar. It is also our hope that the
countries concerned will lift their sanctions against
Myanmar so as to provide the people of that country
with a fair and enabling environment for its economic
development.

China supports Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Mr. Gambari in their continued good offices. It is
our sincere hope that the Secretary-General's good
offices will help Myanmar to achieve domestic
stability and national reconciliation, and that the
United Nations will play a constructive role in helping
the country to address its economic, social,
humanitarian and human rights issues. China has been
and will be helping the Government of Myanmar in its
efforts to address its problems in a responsible and
constructive manner, but we believe that events inside
Myanmar are the internal affairs of Myanmar itself and
should be handled by its own Government and people
through consultations.

The situation in Myanmar poses no threat to
international or regional peace or security. China has
explicitly opposed the inclusion of the question of
Myanmar on the Security Council's agenda, and we are
against the policy of isolating and sanctioning
Myanmar. China's position on this matter remains
unchanged.

As Myanmar's friendly neighbour, China will
always provide assistance to the people and the
Government of that country within its capabilities. We
hope that the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and other countries of the region will
work together to help Myanmar address its difficulties.

