Mr. Motoc (Romania): 1 would first like to thank
the Presidents of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Judge Meron
and Judge Mose, and Prosecutors Carla Del Ponte and
Hassan Bubacar Jallow, for their highly informative
presentations. We appreciate the thorough written
reports submitted to us on issues of continuing interest
to the Security Council and to this delegation.

I am also honoured to acknowledge with
appreciation the presence in the Council of the Foreign
Minister of Croatia, Mr. Miomir Zuzul, and of the
Minister of Public Administration and Local Self-
Government of Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Zoran
Loncar.
I take this opportunity to extend my delegation's
warmest congratulations to Judge Meron and to the
other candidates who have been recently either elected
or re-elected to the high office of ICTY judge. We trust
that the outcome of these latest elections will be
beneficial in meeting the terms of the completion
strategy.

Since many of the aspects related to the activities
of the two Tribunals under scrutiny today were taken
up by this delegation at the June 29 open briefing, I
will confine myself to some brief additional comments.

I wish first to make a remark of a general nature
on the work of the ICTY and its Prosecutor. Romania
looks forward to the day when all concerned countries
of the western Balkans will have cleared up the
remaining issues related to their cooperation with The
Hague-based jurisdiction. They must be able not only
to shut the door with respect to past wounds but also to
take full advantage of existing prospects for their
participation in the European and Euro-Atlantic
integrative endeavour. As a country of the wider
region, Romania will do its utmost to bring those
prospects within closer reach.

Secondly, the re-election of 12 of the 14 judges
serving on the ICTY, positive as it may be, will not by
itself solve all the problems related to the
implementation of the completion strategy. Several
other factors come into play in that respect: full
cooperation by all relevant countries, strict observance
of the seniority criterion, the transfer of cases
involving medium- and low-level accused to national
jurisdictions, ensuring the availability of the necessary
financial resources, and so on.

Thirdly, cooperation - especially in the form of
arresting and handing over the principal fugitives,
facilitating access to evidence and granting immunity
waivers to enable witnesses to provide statements or
testify before the Tribunal - is by far the most
important element in that equation. We therefore
strongly encourage all States that still need to meet
their obligations in that respect to do their utmost in
that regard. Nonetheless, a survey of the reasons
behind insufficient or unsatisfactory cooperation by
certain States would undoubtedly reveal a number of
factors affecting their capacity to do so, which should
also be taken into account.

Fourthly, we have noted the institution of judicial
proceedings, five years after the end of the conflict in
Kosovo, in what appears to constitute the first case
brought against alleged perpetrators from that
province. Yet it appears from the report submitted by
the ICTY that none of the three individuals involved in
that case is at the decision-making level. It might be
useful to get some indications from the ICTY as to the
main lines of approach that are intended to be taken in
that area. Our consistent stand in that regard remains
that all those suspected of having committed crimes
within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal should be
brought to justice, as that would significantly
contribute to an even greater level of acceptance of
ICTY decisions.

Fifthly, we reiterate our view that, while an
increased number of guilty pleas entered by those
accused at both Tribunals would undoubtedly facilitate
compliance with the terms of the completion strategies,
efforts to reach that objective should not compromise
internationally recognized principles of due process
and fairness or the rights of either the accused or the
Victims.

Sixthly, we note with concern the information
provided in the report by the ICTR to the effect that 17
indictees and 16 suspects are still at large. In many of
those cases, there is no reasonable expectation that the
persons in question will ever be apprehended and
brought to justice.

We are also concerned at the fact that, according
to some assessments by humanitarian non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), the ICTR has
thus far focussed mostly, if not exclusively, on persons
belonging to only one party to the 1994 conflict,
although a Commission of Experts established by the
Security Council concluded that individuals on both
sides had perpetrated serious breaches of international
humanitarian law and crimes against humanity. It
would be useful to learn more about how the ICTR
intends to deal in future with those issues and to find
out What approach is envisaged by the Tribunal in that
respect.

Finally, I would like to pick up on an idea that
was put forward by the representative of the Republic
of Korea during the debate on this subject in the
General Assembly and to express our support for the
proposal concerning the establishment of a mechanism
for consultations among all judicial bodies put in place
with United Nations assistance. Sharing experiences
and information on the activities of all those courts
might prove highly useful in efforts to avoid the
fragmentation of jurisprudence on emerging
international criminal law.

