Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I thank the Secretary-
General; Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of
the African Union Commission; and Director Fatimata
Toure for their insightful briefings this morning and
their determination to strengthen peacekeeping. I
would also like to express my gratitude to the Kingdom
of the Netherlands for convening this critical debate.

We have convened in this Chamber countless times,
and after each meeting the feeling that remains is always
the same - will this be the meeting that changes our
course regarding peacekeeping operations? Given the
interest across the United Nations membership that we
have seen in today's debate - and I was impressed to
see that I am the seventieth speaker - I believe that this
particular meeting and debate will make a difference.

Peacekeeping has been to date the most effective
United Nations contribution to peace and security.
There is, however, room for improvement. There have
been numerous reviews and reports, including on
ways to improve peacekeeping operations. I think that
today we can all agree that, quite honestly, we know
exactly what needs to be done by every peacekeeping
stakeholder to make this improvement a reality. So why
are the improvements that we are all calling for not
happening faster than we see today? We also believe that
we need the political commitments that are expressed
in this very Chamber to transcend beyond these halls
and materialize on the ground and in capitals.

Rwanda continues to play a critical role in
peacekeeping and, as one of the top five troop- and
police-contributing countries, with an unwavering
commitment to the protections of civilians, today we
will speak from that point of view. I would like to make
eight brief points:
First, we need a unified understanding of the
protection of civilians. This is an absolute prerequisite
for the way forward. Having differing interpretations
of the protection of civilians is dangerous, and we have
witnessed its lethal consequences for civilians and
peacekeepers alike. September will mark the nineteenth
anniversary of the first mission with a protection of
civilians mandate. We have had 19 years to debate its
substance, so Rwanda really believes that it is time to
agree on what the protection of civilians is, and move
forward in a concerted manner.

The protection of civilians in United Nations
peacekeeping is defined as using

"all necessary means, up to and including the use
of deadly force, aimed at preventing or responding
to threats of physical violence against civilians,
within capabilities and areas of operations, and
without prejudice to the responsibility of the
host Government".

The Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians
provide further guidance on this and, as a country with
peacekeepers, we apply them. We are happy to say that
when they are applied, as we do, they are lifesaving.

Second, we need to bolster our support for the
indispensable role police play in peacekeeping. We
turn to our police officers when we seek the trust of
local populations. We turn to them again when we seek
to strengthen a country's rule of law. We turn to them
when we seek long-term peace and stability that ward
off a relapse into violent conflict. We therefore need to
support them accordingly.

Third - and we understand that this is a tall
order - the Secretariat should deploy only troops that
are willing to robustly implement mission mandates
and to be held accountable, both in the field and to
their mission leaderships. When there is a failure to
protect civilians, then we need accountability to apply.
Accountability is very clear. Accountability does not
lie only with the troops. It lies with the entire chain
of command. But we need accountability to start being
applied seriously if we are to improve peacekeeping
operations. That will ensure that we have the best Blue
Helmets serving on the ground. This is key, both for
the operational and tactical success of peacekeeping
missions and for the reputation of the United Nations
and the legacy it strives to leave behind. This is a
collective reputation.

Fourth, we need to deploy more female
peacekeepers. We have heard this point made a number
of times this morning. We also emphasize this point,
and we agree fully with those who made it earlier.
Evidence shows that women increase the effectiveness
of missions with a protection of civilians mandate, in
particular the protection of women and children, who
are more vulnerable to violence in situations ofconflict.
The victims of sexual and gender-based violence and
sexual exploitation and abuse also find it much easier
to interact with female peacekeepers.

Fifth, we need the right capabilities and equipment
to meet the challenges we face on the ground. That is
an endeavour that cannot fall short of adapting to new
technologies that modernize our ways.

Sixth, we need the right capabilities to provide our
peacekeeping missions with reliable and accurate data,
particularly in situational awareness, to inform all our
operations. For this to happen, again, we know what
to do. We know that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
regional organizations and the field missions need to
work much more closely together and exchange critical
information in a timely manner. This is not just a
matter of knowing what happens; it is the potential to
significantly minimize threats, reduce casualties and
keep our peacekeepers from serving blindly in the field.

Seventh, we need to deepen, institutionalize and
operationalize our partnership with the African Union.
We have been discussing this partnership for a few
years now. Last year, we saw an important improvement
through the framework that was entered into by the
Secretary-General. We know what to do. We need now
to institutionalize and operationalize this framework.

Lastly, we must remove the bureaucratic barriers
that further bury us in age-old ways that hamper
our ability to be nimble and flexible. The Secretary-
General's efforts to reform the peace and security pillar
target many of these pitfalls. Let us support him in this
pursuit. Rwanda supports his efforts and will be more
than happy to work with any other Member that would
like to see improvements in peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, I would just like to say in a sobering
manner: Let us stop talking about peacekeeping in an
abstract manner. Peacekeeping is operational; it saves
and protects real lives. We speak from our experience
of a peacekeeping failure, but we also speak today
from our experience of the success of peacekeeping
operations. We have seen both sides of peacekeeping.
So let us instead talk about what is and is not working
on the ground. Let us talk about the specific effects
it has on the women, children and men where armed
conflicts are taking place. Let us talk about what we can
do in each mission to minimize the violence towards
civilians and protect them, and to minimize violence
against our own peacekeepers.

