Mr. Diamonds (Namibia): I wish to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your country's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I thank you, Sir, most sincerely for organizing
this debate on the important topic of the situation in
the Middle East, in particular in Palestine. I would
also like to take this opportunity to thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator for their comprehensive
briefings this morning.

Furthermore, my delegation aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Security Council has recently heard about the
increasingly dire situation in the Middle East, especially
about the occupation of the Palestinian territories. The
situation in Syria causes general apprehension that,
owing to the ongoing fighting, the humanitarian needs
in Aleppo and other parts of Syria are devastating. The
situation in Yemen grows more difficult by the day and
it is becoming increasingly impossible to keep track of
who is attacking whom. Furthermore, a major attack
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in Mosul,
in northern Iraq, is under way and analysts are raising
serious concerns regarding the consequences for the
region.

Last week, at the Arria Formula meeting called
by some members of the Security Council, we heard
that the situation in Palestine is worsening, as the
Israeli Government insists on continuing its settlement
programmes. There is no way to sugar-coat the realities
of apartheid, as practiced by the Israeli Government.

We commend the French Government for its
initiative aimed at mobilizing international support
for Palestinian-Israeli peace and for convening the
Israel peace conference. We commend and encourage
the efforts by Egypt, the Russian Federation and the
Quartet in moving forward with the peace efforts.
Namibia also hopes that the renewed efforts in the Arab
Peace Initiative will yield positive results. That vision of
hope drives activities, such as the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, on 26 November,
and the declaration of 2017 as the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People.

In the face of a truly dire conflict situation in
the Middle East,we call on Israel to reassess its
aggressive stance towards the Palestinians to end their
ongoing punitive destruction of Palestinian homes and
infrastructure and to seize their illegal construction
of settlements on the occupied territory. Namibia is
concerned about the ongoing reports about Palestinian
security detainees and prisoners, including children
held in Israeli prisons. We are equally concerned that
the Israeli Parliament, on 3 August 2016, approved the
youth bill allowing the Israeli authorities to imprison
Palestinian children as young as 12 years of age if
convicted of terrorism against Israeli civilians or
military personnel. Reports of the widespread and
systematic torture of Palestinian detainees by the
security services in the occupied West Bank are also an
issue of concern.

Namibia therefore calls for Israel's complete
and unconditional withdrawal from the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. We urge
the international community to facilitate the creation of
a Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders. We also
call on both sides to work for the restoration of calm
and to return to the table of negotiation and dialogue
with a view to achieving a two-State solution.

In the same vein, Namibia continues to support
the people of Palestine in their quest to achieve their
inalienable right to self-determination, justice, freedom
and independence. Namibia stands with the people
of Palestine in their determined efforts in pursuit
of these principles through political, diplomatic and
non-violent means. We further look forward to the end
of this occupation of close to 50 years and to seeing the
Palestinian people exercising their inalienable rights to
self-determination and their quest for nationhood.

In conclusion, the one-State solution that Israel is
seeking to impose on the international community is a
road map that will lead to nowhere. We hope that Israel
will soon wake up to this realization.

