Mr. Seck (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian people, I would like at the outset to pay
tribute to the professionalism with which the delegation
of Kazakhstan has conducted the work of the Security
Council this month, and to welcome this open debate,
which allows us to discuss the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine.

I reiterate the deep concern of the members of the
Committee over recent developments on the ground that
continue to undermine hopes for a peaceful settlement
to the question of Palestine. Certainly, the almost
unanimous support of the members of the Security
Council in December for draft resolution S/2017/1060,
on Jerusalem, and the General Assembly's subsequent
adoption of resolution ES-10/19 on 21 December 2017,
at the tenth emergency special session, demonstrated
the already obvious, unwavering commitment of the
international community to a peaceful solution to
this dispute. That resolution declared null and void
any decision or action intended to alter Jerusalem's
character, status or demographic composition and
called on all States to refrain for the time being from
establishing diplomatic missions in the holy city. The
Committee is convinced that, pursuant to the relevant
United Nations resolutions and the long-standing
international consensus, that Jerusalem remains a
final-status issue to be resolved through negotiations.

The Committee is also concerned that Israel, as
the occupying Power, has recently adopted measures
imposing changes to the status quo on the ground.
Those measures include the adoption of a law earlier
this month by the Israeli Parliament that would
prevent any future Israeli Government to cede any
part of Jerusalem, including East Jerusalem, to an
independent Palestinian State in the framework of
negotiations. Furthermore, the central committee of the
ruling majoritarian party in Israel recently adopted a
resolution calling for the imposition of Israeli law on all
settlements in the West Bank, de facto annexing them.
If that resolution were to become law, it would close the
door to a negotiated solution and constitute a violation
of successive Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2017). In addition to being illegal
under international law, those decisions undermine the
two-State solution and, in that respect, must be rejected
by the international community.

It is incumbent on the international community,
especially our Council, to assume its responsibility to
uphold the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and independence as a sovereign
and viable State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
As the Committee remains resolutely committed to
a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine,
it condemns all forms of violence and incitement to
hatred and extremism, regardless of the perpetrators
or motives. For that reason, the Committee invites
the international community to pursue its long-
standing efforts to support, inter alia, inter-Palestinian
reconciliation, guarantee the financial viability of
Palestinian institutions and strengthen Palestinian
capacity-building to prepare them to manage an
independent State, freed from the occupation.

In that connection, the Committee calls on
Members, in accordance with the relevant General
Assembly resolutions, to strengthen support and
assistance to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, whose
humanitarian and development work is indispensable to
millions of Palestinian refugees. As key pillars, those
institutions bring hope and stability to the Palestinian
people, especially the young, in a region that is
experiencing severe convulsions.

As the Committee continuously repeats, there is no
alternative to the two-State solution, the international
community must continue and scale up its action with
all stakeholders so that the people Palestinian people,
like all other peoples, including the Israeli people,
can enjoy an independent and sovereign State within
viable and internationally recognized borders, living in
peace and security alongside its neighbours, including
the State of Israel. In that spirit, the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People will continue to deliver on its mandate to achieve
those ends.

