Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I, too, wish to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kai Eide, for his briefing to the Council
today. We greatly appreciate his personal commitment,
which he has shown again today, and the leadership
that he provides at the head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would
also like to welcome the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, to this table.

We align ourselves with the statement that will be
made later in this debate by the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union. Let me also say that we support the
recommendation to extend UNAMA's mandate for a
further 12 months with a view to fully implementing its
mandate in all its aspects.

For Afghanistan, the elections to be held in
August are a very important - indeed, essential -
step in the democratic process of State-building. For
the first time, Afghan authorities have the primary
responsibility for organizing the elections. We
welcome the successful completion of the voter
registration process; it will be of critical importance to
ensuring a fair, transparent and credible election
process, and UNAMA's assistance will play a very
important role in that.

The ongoing reform efforts in the area of
governance are also very relevant, and we are grateful
to the Special Representative for drawing our attention
to some of these very positive developments today. The
reform of the Ministry of Interior and of the
Afghanistan National Police could have a positive
effect on a number of serious challenges to security on
the ground, including the creation of a positive security
environment for the elections, respect for the rule of
law, the fight against corruption, and counter-narcotics
efforts. Austria is currently examining the possibility of
contributing to the police cooperation and demining
activities of the United Nations.

Another important development mentioned in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/135) and by
the Special Representative is the decrease in poppy
cultivation. We wish to commend the Afghan
authorities and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) for that achievement, which needs to
be further consolidated. We also welcome the
intensification of the activities of the International
Security Assistance Force in the fight against the
illegal processing and trafficking of drugs. Opium
production in Afghanistan remains a challenge, and it
is clear that is linked to the security situation and to the
corruption phenomenon. It is of particular importance
to ensure the sustainability of alternative livelihoods.
Furthermore, the regional dimension of drug
production and trade needs to be tackled. This is being
addressed, inter alia, under UNODC's "rainbow
strategy" - a programme that my Government supports.

Regional cooperation is crucial to the
stabilization of Afghanistan. All of Afghanistan's
neighbours need to be included in this process. We
welcome the new positive trend in economic and
political cooperation, in particular the renewed
relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan, and
encourage UNAMA to provide further support to
regional cooperation, in accordance with its mandate.

We share the concerns expressed about the
deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan and the
intensification of the conflict, in some areas at least.
The impact of the conflict on civilians is of particular
concern. Anti-Government elements pose the greatest
threat to the civilian population in Afghanistan. The
situation of civilians is made worse by attacks on non-
governmental organizations and humanitarian workers.
We are also extremely worried about recent attacks on
schools. The prevention of attacks on children - in
particular, putting an end to the targeting of girls -
has to be a top priority. The ongoing recruitment of
children by the Taliban and the use of children as
suicide bombers are also of great concern and need to
be stopped.

We welcome the serious efforts undertaken by
pro-Government forces during past months to reduce
the impact of their operations on civilians and the
enhanced cooperation with the Afghan Government in
that regard. We hope that these efforts will be effective
in reducing civilian casualties. Further efforts to
minimize civilian casualties would be of critical
relevance.

We value the work of the human rights unit of
UNAMA and believe that the Mission's mandate to
monitor the situation of civilians, to coordinate efforts
to ensure their protection and to assist in the full
implementation of human rights is an important aspect
of UNAMA's work. Equally important is the
strengthening of national institutions, in particular the
judiciary, and full support for the work of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission. Special
attention has to be given to the issue of human rights in
the administration of justice, including the
improvement of conditions in detention.

In recent months, as has been mentioned today,
there has been an increase in violence against women,
including against women working for the police,
provincial councils and local government. This trend is
clearly worrying in the light of the forthcoming
elections. We are convinced that women's rights have
to be a priority in Afghanistan, and thus also in the
protection mandate of UNAMA.

In conclusion, let me assure the Council of
Austria's full support for the commitments made in
Paris in June 2008. We need to work together to enable
UNAMA to perform its critical task of coordinating
international civilian activities in Afghanistan in an
effective manner. I must say that what the Special
Representative had to say on that subject today was
particularly impressive; it is clear that coordination is
particularly important. At a time when overall financial
developments make international contributions even
more difficult, coordination becomes ever more
important.

We also need to enhance Afghan ownership by
way of capacity-building and by complementing the
efforts of the people of Afghanistan themselves,
because one thing is certainly clear: whatever the
international community undertakes has to be done in
very close cooperation with - and for - Afghanistan
and the people of Afghanistan.

