Mr. Chambas: I would like to thank the Council
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the situation in Darfur. The Council has before it the
Secretary-General's most recent report on African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) (S/2014/515), which includes a summary
of recent developments in Darfur and an update on
measures undertaken by the mission to implement
the strategic priorities, as requested by the Council in
resolution 2148 (2014).

While fighting between Government forces and
armed movements has decreased considerably during
the reporting period as compared to the previous
one, intermittent inter-communal violence continued,
mainly with renewed fighting among tribes competing
for resources. Insecurity, acts of criminality and
movement restrictions by Government forces, armed
movements and militia groups pose a challenge to
mandate implementation for UNAMID and impede the
activities of humanitarian agencies, as well as being a
threat to the safety and security of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel.

Since our last report there has been a relative easing
in the fighting between Government forces and armed
movements. The operations of the Rapid Support Force
(RSF) have been significantly reduced in Darfur and
attacks by the armed movements have been sporadic.
The Sudan Liberation Movement led by Abdul Wahid
Al-Nur and Minni Minawi attacked Government
positions in Rockero town in Central Darfur on
28 April, and Arowsharow and Gosminno villages in
West Darfur on 22 May, respectively. On 26 June the
Sudan Liberation Movement led by Minni Minawi
and Ali Karbino clashed with Government forces in
the Goba area near Kutum, in North Darfur, during
which Ali Kabino was killed. The Sudan Liberation
Movement led by Abdul Wahid Al-Nur also attacked
Government positions in G010 on 14 July. However,
those armed movements have largely withdrawn from
their strongholds in various locations in North and
South Darfur.

The upsurge in intra and inter-communal violence
continues in many parts of Darfur. The most significant
tribal clashes involved the Ma'alia and Southern Rizeigat
in East Darfur, the Ma'alia and Hamar on the border
area between East Darfur and Western Kordofan, the
Northern Rizeigat and Beni Hussein in North Darfur,
and the Salamat and Misseriya in Central Darfur.

Eleven years into the conflict in Darfur, the
humanitarian situation remains very dire. The number
of people estimated to have been displaced by conflicts
in Darfur since the beginning of 2014 has increased
from 250,000 in the previous reporting period to over
385,000, alongside the more than 2 million long-term
internally displaced persons (IDP). With close to 30 per
cent of Darfur's population displaced from their lands
or homes and scattered in IDP camps and IDP-like
conditions in many parts of Darfur, the imperative of a
political solution to underpin the humanitarian efforts
cannot be over emphasized.

Notwithstanding, the challenging operational
environment, UNAMID continues to undertake
measures to implement its strategic priorities, as well
as remaining focused on strengthening the streamlining
of its operations to enhance mandate implementation
in accordance with the strategic priorities set out in
resolution 2148 (2014). The protection of civilians
remains the core mandate of UNAMID and continues
to form the main focus of our strategic and operational
decisions. UNAMID military and police components
form central pillars for the implementation of the
UNAMID strategy for the protection of civilians,
particularly as it relates to the physical protection
of vulnerable communities. The Force Commander
and Police Commissioner have been working hard to
implement measures aimed at improving UNAMID's
force disposition, robustness and the recalibration of
the strategy to protect civilians.

We have witnessed an improvement in troop
and police robustness and response. Recent attacks
on UNAMID patrols were successfully repelled by
UNAMID. On 24 May, we lost a peacekeeper who was
killed when UNAMID intervened to protect civilians
in Kabkabiya. Three other colleagues were injured in
that incident. However, UNAMID inflicted significant
casualties on the side of the attackers. Although even
one death paid to implement the mission's mandate is
one too many, I must say that the immediate and decisive
manner in which his fellow peacekeepers responded
to the attack is a testimony to the positive impact of
the mission's efforts to address the preventive and
pre-emptive posture of our troops. UNAMID's casualty
rate for the first half of 2014 dropped dramatically as
compared with 2013. It is currently at the same level as
other United Nations peacekeeping missions for 2014.

Allow me to extend our sincere condolences to the
distinguished representative of Rwanda for the loss of
the Rwandan peacekeeper killed during the Kabkabiya
attack. The soldier paid the ultimate price in the service
of peace in Darfur. Our hearts go out to his family and
to the Rwandan people for that sacrifice.

In addition to the technical, logistical and
programmatic support that the mission provided to
Government, local and traditional institutions to raise
awareness and improve the protective environment,
the mission also provided technical support to local
reconciliation initiatives in the Rezeigat and the
Nawaiba conflict in Central Darfur in April, the
conflict between the Ma'alia and southern Rezeigat
in East Darfur, and the conflict between the northern
Rezeigat and Beni Hussein in northern Darfur. Those
are instances where UNAMID support helped to
prevent, mitigate or minimize the potentially high toll
of fatalities as a result of violent tribal clashes on the
civilian population. In those cases, the Government also
intervened decisively to pacify the situation, including
through deploying its forces to mitigate continuing
clashes between the tribes. I should also mention the
continued role of Chad, which has deployedjoint forces
along its western border, especially in the Um Dukhan
area.

Similarly, the mission continues to work in
partnership with the United Nations country team
to provide physical protection and facilitation of
humanitarian assistance to civilians who seek refuge
around its team sites when under threat of attack.
Recently, well-coordinated crisis management,
involving all components of UNAMID, the United
Nations country teams and other stakeholders, have
enabled the mission to handle crises, such as that of
the March attack on the Khor Abeche camp for IDPs,
where the camp was attacked and burned down but
UNAMID was able to protect the IDPs. More recently,
the efforts of UNAMID and the United Nations country
team to stabilize the situation in and around Saraf
Umra after inter-ethnic violence led to the successful
return of over 60,000 people to their places of origin.
Through coordinated efforts like those, UNAMID and
the country team are working together to ensure the
integration of humanitarian support into the physical
protection framework.

Restrictions of movement on UNAMID decreased
considerably during the reporting period. UNAMID
land movements were restricted on 21 occasions, as
compared with 72 restrictions during the previous
reporting period. We attribute that to a three-track
approach, focused on revised standard operating
procedures by the military and police regarding
the conduct of convoys when facing roadblocks or
restrictions; monthly UNAMID notes verbales to the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs; regular consultations
with senior officials of the Ministry; code cables to
Headquarters detailing all restrictions of access; and
sustained dialogue with our counterparts at the State,
federal and local levels. All of that has contributed to the
decreased access restrictions that we have witnessed.
Of course, we hope that this will continue to be a trend
into the future.

Some progress was made in the implementation of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. Since I last
briefed the Council, the Darfur Internal Dialogue and
Consultation Implementation Committee was formally
launched in El Fasher on 26 May. The 17-member
Implementation Committee was established to lead the
process and ensure local ownership, inclusiveness and
transparency.

The process is estimated to cost $7 million,
which is expected to be funded through voluntary
contributions to a trust fund managed by the United
Nations Development Programme. Of that amount, the
State of Qatar has pledged $1.7 million as seed money.
The Government of Qatar also confirmed its pledge of
$88 million to finance the Darfur Development Strategy
foundational and short-term projects as well as releasing
$10 million out of the $88 million to the United Nations
Darfur Fund as of 27 April, during the meeting of the
Executive Board of the Darfur Development Strategy,
which was held in El Fasher in May. Similarly, efforts
to address the root causes of the conflict in Darfur will
require funding. I hereby also wish to renew my appeal
through the Council for Member States to support these
efforts by contributing to the United Nations Darfur
Reconstruction and Development Fund.

On security arrangements, the Darfur Ceasefire
Commission made progress with the Justice and
Equality Movement-Sudan, committing to commence
a troop-verification exercise. A battalion of the
Movement's combatants, mainly from Tine and Kornoi
in North Darfur, arrived in El Fasher in the first week
of June to prepare for the verification process. As for
the integration of the combatants of the Liberation
and Justice Movement into the Sudan National Armed
Forces and the Sudan Police Force, reception camps in
South Darfur have been prepared by the Government.
The Government has also earmarked the required
funding for integration activities into its 2014 budget.

Regarding my mediation efforts towards direct
negotiations between the Government of the Sudan
and non-signatory armed movements, I intensified
coordination with the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to the Sudan and South Sudan to
synchronize our mediation efforts in line with the
request set out in resolution 2148 (2014). We agreed to
explore organizing a preparatory meeting as soon as
possible that would involve the representatives of the
armed movements and the Government of the Sudan at
a mutually convenient venue. The meeting is expected
to explore ways of addressing the humanitarian and
security situation in Darfur, deliberate on how the
parties can bridge their differences, and make progress
towards a comprehensive settlement of the Darfur
conflict and the possibility of a unified mediation
framework.

The second phase, the streamlining exercise for
UNAMID, is being undertaken in close coordination
with Headquarters and the United Nations country
team. We will soon be welcoming in Darfur a combined
team from the United Nations and the African Union to
begin the third phase, focused on mission support, the
security sector and the Khartoum liaison office.
Finally, it seems to me that the challenge for the
international community remains how best to impress
upon all the parties involved in the Darfur conflict that
a military solution and the status quo are untenable.
To that end, there is broad and general consensus that
the proposed national dialogue initiative by President
Al-Bashir represents an opportunity to resolve the
crisis and other crises in the Sudan.

All the parties, including all regional and
international institutions that I have engaged with,
welcome President Al-Bashir's proposal for a national
dialogue. Ofcourse, there are questions on the details of
the process. I urge the Council to play a more proactive
role in supporting the holding of a successful dialogue
in the Sudan. The Sudanese parties should be assisted
to create the much-needed enabling environment for a
genuine and inclusive dialogue and to recognize that the
process could be a unique opportunity for sustainable
resolution of all the conflicts afflicting the Sudan.

For my part, I will continue to impress on the armed
movements, in coordination with the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel, the need for them to
engage in and be part of the national dialogue process,
without any preconditions. I will also continue to urge
the Government of the Sudan to engage directly with
the armed movements to agree security arrangements
to ensure their participation in the national dialogue.
The process should be utilized by all participants,
Government and opposition alike and including
the armed opposition, as an opportunity to raise all
concerns, to make proposals and discuss initiatives that
could be used to determine the future of a stable and
democratic Sudan.

