Mrs. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Bolivia for having convened today's
open debate and through you, Ambassador Llorentty
Soliz, I congratulate your entire team on its excellent
work in presiding over the Security Council.

Cuba supports the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Our country shares the legitimate concerns of
the international community about the threat posed
by weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons. Limiting international efforts to the horizontal
non-proliferation of such weapons is insufficient. The
only effective way to stop the acquisition and use of
nuclear weapons, including by terrorists, is through the
prohibition and total elimination of such weapons in
a transparent, verifiable and irreversible manner. Our
country does not possess, nor does it intend to possess,
weapons of mass destruction, and it has adopted a
series of measures to guarantee strict compliance
with the commitments and obligations it undertook as
a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
the Biological Weapons Convention, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Treaty of
Tlatelolco, and as a member State of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.

Cuba participates actively in ongoing negotiations
at the General Assembly on a treaty to prohibit nuclear
weapons, leading towards their total elimination.
We support the adoption, entry into force and
implementation of such an international instrument.
Similarly, we will continue to advocate the adoption,
as soon as possible, of a broad-based convention that
encompasses the elimination of nuclear weapons within
a specific time frame and under strict international
verification. We reiterate the need to start negotiations,
without delay, on a legally binding protocol that would
effectively, comprehensively and equitably strengthen
the Biological Weapons Convention. The meeting ofthe
States parties to that Convention to be held in December
should include among its priorities the adoption of a
clear mandate for resuming the negotiating process in
that regard.

In a year in which we commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
as one of the first signatories and a State party to
the Convention, Cuba reiterates its firm rejection of
the use of chemical weapons by anyone under any
circumstances. We reject, and call for the immediate
elimination of, those unilateral measures designed
to prohibit or limit the legitimate right of States to
access and use nuclear energy, biological agents and
chemicals for peaceful purposes, as well as the relevant
technologies and know-how.

In the light of the danger posed by the existence
of weapons of mass destruction and their possible use,
cooperation on the part of the international community
must be strengthened.

The fight against terrorism must be based on the
effective implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in strict compliance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

The efforts of the Security Council cannotundermine
the existing multilateral treaties on weapons of mass
destruction, the international organizations established
in that regard, or the role of the General Assembly.

