Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on
peacekeeping operations.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union earlier today.
I would like to make the following comments in my
national capacity.
Peacekeeping is at the heart of United Nations
efforts to increase security and to sustain peace in many
parts of the world. It plays a critical role in the face of
multiplying threats and conflicts, both traditional and
asymmetrical in nature. Yet the increased number of
casualties among peacekeepers, with the 56 fatalities
in 2017 being the highest number since 1994, is a
sobering reminder that the United Nations and troop-
and police-contributing countries need to transform the
system in order to face the current realities.

As the Cruz report highlights, the shift has to be
system-wide, encompassing leadership, accountability,
operational behaviour, the use of force, training,
intelligence and more. The safety of United Nations
personnel and the mission is a necessary prerequisite
for the political success of any peacekeeping mission,
particularly in high-risk settings. Mobilizing our efforts
to that end should be our utmost priority.

Along with the increased focus on the military
component of missions, it is vital to focus on the
political contexts and the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. It is clear that peacekeeping missions alone
cannot bring about lasting peace without political
solutions and support on the ground. Peacekeeping
missions should have the core objective of contributing
to the creation of conditions for an inclusive political
process aimed at national dialogue and reconciliation.

The mandates and capacities to implement those
mandates should be clearly defined. Mandates should
be realistic, context-tailored and flexible and, within
them, tasks need to be prioritized, sequenced and
adjusted over periods of time.

In that context, let me recall Georgia's experience
with regard to peace operations. While Georgia never
enjoyed a peacekeeping operation with a full-fledged
mandate, from 1993 the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) played a crucial role in
achieving security. However, in 2009, UNOMIG was
discontinued due to the veto of a permanent member
of the Council, thereby creating a very dangerous
precedent in the history of the United Nations.

The forceful termination of the UNOMIG mandate,
preceded by the cessation of the mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
created a total vacuum of international presence in the
occupied regions of Georgia and turned them into black
holes for human rights and "one of the most inaccessible
places on Earth", as observed by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The Russian occupation has turned Georgia's
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions into territories in
which there is no accountability for murder and torture,
as demonstrated by the brutal death of an internally
displaced Georgian civilian, Archil Tatunashvili,
which took place on 22 February. His body, however,
was released by occupying forces only a few days
ago so that he could be given a proper burial. An
investigation by forensic experts showed clear evidence
of torture. That situation speaks to the urgent need for
creating international security arrangements on the
ground as provided and mandated by the 12 August
2008 European Union-mediated ceasefire agreement
between the Russian Federation and Georgia. Progress,
or even a meaningful discussion on that issue, remains
elusive, while in the Council we face the reality that
the primacy of politics does not allow for the creation
of much-needed peacekeeping mandates in conflict-
affected territories in which the host country is deprived
of its ability to exercise jurisdiction.

The 2016 landmark twin resolutions on sustaining
peace - resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262 - provide us with a foundation for
our work, and the Secretary-General's reform agenda
provides us with an opportunity to institute changes at
the United Nations. We commend the Secretary-General
on efforts already under way and the recommendations
presented in his report on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace (S/2018/43). Streamlining the system, with
structural reforms and delegating responsibilities
through a holistic, cross-pillar approach affords the
Organization an opportunity to improve its delivery of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

Lastly, we call for strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
to ensure sustainable peace, justice, respect for human
rights and development. We believe that regular
consultations and coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations, such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
are indispensable to converging strategies to secure
sustainable peace on the ground.

