Mrs. Chartsuwan (Thailand): On behalf of
the delegation of Thailand, I would like to express
our sincere condolences to the peoples and the
Governments of Egypt and Iraq for the recent senseless
terrorist attacks.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).

At the outset, I wish to congratulate the Arab
Republic of Egypt on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May. We
commend the initiative of the Egyptian presidency to
hold this important open debate on the issue before
us and thank the briefers for their insights. We also
welcome the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/6 today, reaffirming the Council's
collective determination to fight terrorism.

Terrorism is an urgent global concern. Terrorist
activities are no longer concentrated in a single
geographical region, but transcend borders and
continents. We are unified in the firm belief that
terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, is totally
unjustifiable. It cannot and should not be associated
with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group. As experience has shown, terrorism does not
discriminate among its victims, and its impact is felt
by people from all walks of life. That is why ASEAN
has consistently joined the international community
in condemning acts of terrorism in various parts of
the world.

We believe that the experiences and approaches
of our region can contribute to the global efforts in
addressing that problem. Interfaith dialogue and the
values of tolerance, mutual understanding, respect for
diversity and inclusivity, as embodied in the Langkawi
Declaration on the Global Movement of Moderates,
adopted last year at the twenty-sixth ASEAN Summit,
have played a significant role in sustaining peaceful
coexistence among the cultures and religions in our
diverse region.

As youth play an important role in building stable,
secure and prosperous societies, it is imperative to
raise awareness among young people of the risk of
radicalization. We believe that education is an effective
means to prevent our youth from falling prey to the
extremist narratives and unfounded ideologies of
terrorism. ASEAN countries continue to cooperate on
the new ASEAN Work Plan on Education 2016-2020
in order to strengthen access to and the quality of our
education systems so as to ensure an inclusive society.
Moreover, education leading to decent employment
will address grievances and lessen the perceived sense
of disenfranchisement on the part of the groups most
vulnerable to terrorism ideologies.

The ASEAN Convention on Counter Terrorism
has served as a framework for regional efforts since
2011. We therefore advocate the finalization of such a
legal framework at the international level and call on
countries to actively work together to finalize a draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.

Special attention has also been accorded to
addressing the rise in radicalization and violent
extremism. Recent key initiatives in the region include
the East Asia Summit Symposium on Religious
Rehabilitation and Social Reintegration in April 2015,
the Special ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on the Rise of
Radicalization and Violent Extremism in October 2015
and the International Conference on Deradicalization
and Countering Violent Extremism in January this
year. Those initiatives emphasized the comprehensive
approach required to tackle the factors leading
to radicalization and terrorist activities, address
the rehabilitation and reintegration of individuals
influenced by terrorist narratives and strengthen
regional cooperation on the issue.

ASEAN has also worked with several countries
to enhance capacities with a view to developing
effective counter-terrorism and violent extremism
measures. That includes the convening of workshops
and seminars on issues such as criminal justice,
deradicalization and disengagement, media and
counter-radicalization and the role of youth. Trainings
for law-enforcement officials is also on the agenda. For
example, the ASEAN Defence Ministers' Meeting-Plus
Maritime Security and Counter-Terrorism Exercise is
being held now in Brunei Darussalam and Singapore,
involving forces from all ASEAN countries and several
dialogue partners.

At the international level, while recognizing the
primary responsibility of States to tackle violent
extremism conducive to terrorism, the United Nations
must be involved and take a coherent and multisectoral
approach. That message was clearly echoed during
the recent Geneva Conference on Preventing Violent
Extremism, co-hosted by the United Nations and the
Government of Switzerland on 7-8 April this year. In
addition, we take note of the Secretary-General's Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674). I
am confident that further deliberations in June at the
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy will provide much needed inputs into the
international efforts against terrorism today, including
elements to counter narratives and ideologies.

We must put in place effective measures to prevent
the abusive use of the Internet and to harness the
constructive role of the social media in countering
the dissemination of terrorist propaganda and violent
ideologies. All measures should be conducted cautiously
so as to prevent their infringement of the freedom
of expression. We must continue to address terrorism's
root causes, in parallel with intensive efforts to counter
it at all levels. Conditions such as poverty, the lack
of education, a weakened rule of law, prolonged and
unresolved conflicts, and political and social exclusion
can foster desperation and grievances that could lead to
violence and terrorist acts.

ASEAN fully supports the international efforts
to combat terrorism, including the full and effective
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Every terrorist act serves as a stark
reminder of our need to remain vigilant and resolute
in our fight against terrorism, which no longer consists
solely of a battle against terrorist acts but involves a
battle of ideas.

