Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you again for convening this debate this morning, Mr.
President, and allow me to thank Ambassador Baso
Sangqu, Deputy Permanent Representative of South
Africa, for his briefing on behalf of Ambassador
Kumalo, head of the Security Council field mission to
Timor-Leste. I would also like to commend my
colleagues who participated in that mission for their
fine efforts.

The Security Council mission had a significant
impact in reaffirming the commitment of the

international community, and especially of the United
Nations, to promoting stability in Timor-Leste and
providing assistance to the Timorese people in order to
consolidate peace, democracy and the rule of law. The
mission was successful in carrying out its mandate in
accordance with its terms of reference, as reflected in
the positive reactions in Timor-Leste at the
governmental and popular levels. Furthermore, in the
context of the reaffirmation of international support for
Timor-Leste, the Secretary-General is scheduled to pay
a visit to Dili tomorrow to complement the Security
Council mission.

The achievement of national reconciliation and
the resolution of differences among the political
leaders must be on the list of priorities in Timor-Leste,
so as to maintain national unity and political stability.
Promoting security and enhancing the effectiveness
and professionalism of the security sector should also
be among the priorities in Timor-Leste, especially as
tensions and incidents threatening security continue to
take place from time to time, and since improving the
security environment would contribute significantly to
resolving the problem of internally displaced persons,
who still make up a large proportion of the country's
population.

Cooperation between the national police and the
police of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) must be enhanced. In order to
establish an atmosphere of security and reconciliation,
accountability is necessary, particularly in connection
with the events of 1999 and 2006, while maintaining a
balance between the requirements of national
reconciliation and fair accountability. Consequently,
national reconciliation and security improvement will
have a great impact on ending ambiguity as well as on
enhancing people's trust in the country's institutions.

In addition to political and security concerns,
Timor-Leste continues to face major issues that should
be addressed, including development and combating
poverty, both of which contribute to instability. The
country also needs to strengthen the judicial sector as a
key element in achieving the rule of law.

According to the recent report of UNMIT on
human rights, the Timorese people enjoy a wide range
of human rights and are firmly committed to peace,
democracy and free elections. That is encouraging and
a cause for optimism in spite of the challenges faced by
the country, both in terms of the security situation and
of upholding justice and accountability. In order to
maintain trust and confidence in the field of human
rights, it will be necessary to enhance transparency to
address the issue of impunity and to improve
transparency and accountability.

We look forward to the new Government, headed
by Mr. Gusmao, striving actively to lay the foundations
of democracy in the country and implementing priority
programmes aimed at enhancing security and
improving the living conditions of the people.
However, as the Security Council mission notes in its
report, the Government will need the support of
bilateral and multilateral partners to achieve its goals.
Continued support to that country by the international
community and international donors remains
indispensable at this stage, in order to assist the
Timorese people to proceed on the path of
strengthening the foundations of democracy, the
consolidation of peace, reconstruction, recovery and
prosperity in their country and to take their deserved
place among the family of nations. They must be
assisted to achieve self-reliance.

UNMIT has played a major role in providing
assistance to meet the challenges still facing that young
country. For that reason, we agree with the Council
mission that the role of UNMIT continues to be
indispensable and that the Council should renew the
mission's mandate next February.

