Mr. Mladenov: Two weeks ago, the Secretary-
General addressed the Security Council on the crisis in
the Middle East and the threats to international peace
and security (see S/PV.8231). He spoke of a region that
is plagued by sectarian divisions, by imploding States
and exploding extremist groups; a region in which
anger and frustration quickly turn to terror, violence
and radicalism; a region where the battle between
moderation and radicalism is the battle for the future
of millions of people. What happens in the Middle
East today has immediate implications for the rest of
the world.

Outside interference is transforming domestic
conflicts into regional wars. In Syria, we see
confrontations between several national armies, their
proxies, various armed opposition groups, militias,
foreign fighters and multiple terrorist organizations.
Humanitarian crises are escalating and spreading
across borders. In Yemen, we are witnessing the worst
humanitarian disaster of our time. Old wounds continue
to bleed and deepen as we speak, risking the outbreak of
another war. The Palestinian-Israeli conflict continues
with no prospect of a political resolution, and Gaza is
about to explode. Gross violations of international law,
including human rights law and humanitarian law, have
become the hallmark of the region.

Today, the risk of miscalculation grows, increasing
the danger of a wider conflagration as violence spills
across borders. In that highly charged and dangerous
environment, whether in Syria, Yemen or Gaza, one word
becomes critical. It is de-escalation - de-escalation
of the dangerous military buildup; de-escalation of
the inflammatory and provocative political rhetoric.
Everyone in the Middle East needs to step back from
the brink. There is no military solution to the conflicts
of the region.

Amid these complex conditions, my counterparts
in the region and I regularly emphasize in our briefings
to the Council the rapidly shifting regional dynamics.
The United Nations is working tirelessly to prevent
further deterioration, while supporting national
political processes region-wide. We in the field need
the international community to continue supporting
multilateral mechanisms promoting security, stability
and development in the region. We see the need for
more multilateralism that blends humanitarian and
development interventions with preventive diplomacy
and crisis management.
As stated by the Secretary-General, the changing
nature of conflict means that prevention should be at
the centre of our efforts. It is most certainly needed
when dealing with the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Although the urgency of the grave situations in Syria,
Yemen and elsewhere has understandably focused
international attention, Palestine remains a central
part of the regional quagmire. Until the occupation
ends and a two-State solution is achieved through
meaningful negotiations based on relevant United
Nations resolutions, the conflict will remain one of
the key drivers of extremism and a persistent threat to
regional stability.

Gaza is coming apart as we speak. It is coming
apart under the pressure of an explosive combination
of negative humanitarian, security and political factors.
If another conflict between Hamas and Israel were
to erupt, it would have devastating consequences for
Palestinians in Gaza. It could undermine the relative
stability of the West Bank and have repercussions for
Israel and the region. I say this with a heavy heart and
in the hope that all ofus will do our utmost, in the spirit
of preventive diplomacy.

For the past four weeks, tens of thousands of
Palestinians in Gaza have converged on the border
with Israel in the context of the Great March of Return
protests. Demonstrations are expected to continue and
culminate around 15 May, and could spread to the
West Bank and beyond. Since 30 March, during these
demonstrations 35 Palestinians have been killed and
a large number have been injured by Israeli security
forces. No Israeli casualties have been reported.

There has also been an increasing number of
dangerous incidents at the fence, including the planting
of improvised explosive devices - at least one of which
detonated - the throwing of Molotov cocktails and
attempts to breach the fence. Israel has accused Hamas,
Islamic Jihad and other militants of using the protests,
women, children and the elderly as a cover to infiltrate
Israel and to commit terrorist attacks. As these protests
continue, tension and the potential for serious incidents
and further casualties will increase.

I have engaged in an intense effort with all sides
to reduce the risks of friction and welcome efforts,
particularly those of Egypt and others, to the same
effect. Israel must calibrate its use of force and
minimize the use of live fire. Lethal force should be
used only as a last resort. Hamas and the leaders of
the demonstrations must keep protestors away from
the Gaza fence and prevent all violent actions and
provocations. The Secretary-General has been vocal in
reiterating these messages and calling for restraint, and
has repeatedly called for all incidents to be investigated.

Children, who should be particularly protected, are
at grave risk. Sadly, to date we have witnessed at least
four who have been shot dead by Israeli live fire. I take
this opportunity to reiterate in the strongest possible
terms that civilians, particularly children, must not
be intentionally put in danger or targeted in any way.
Everyone must ensure that civilians are able to exercise
their right to demonstrate peacefully. I welcome recent
reports that the Israel Defense Forces have established
a team to examine the use of force during the current
protests, including all incidents of fatal shooting, and
reiterate the importance of conducting an independent
investigation for results to be credible.

In other incidents, two Hamas militants were shot
dead on 30 March in an exchange of fire near Gaza's
fence, and five rockets and mortars were fired towards
Israel in the past month. On 12 April, one person was
killed by an Israeli air strike after a group ofPalestinian
militants targeted an Israeli aircraft with machine gun
fire. At least three additional militants were killed by
the Israeli security forces in separate incidents. On
15 April, Israel announced that it had sealed the fifth
Hamas tunnel in the past six months leading from Gaza
into its territory. The Israeli security forces also foiled
an attempt in the West Bank to smuggle 10 pipe bombs
that were reportedly intended for an attack on Israel's
Independence Day.

As I have said repeatedly, all militant activity in
Gaza, including the digging of tunnels and the firing of
rockets, must cease. It threatens the lives of Israelis and
Palestinians alike, increases the risk ofa new escalation
of hostilities, undermines calls for lifting the closures,
and ultimately damages the prospects for peace. I call
on all Member States to join the United Nations in
condemning such actions.

On top of the security risks escalating in Gaza, the
humanitarian situation continues to rapidly deteriorate.
Starting in March 2017 and without prior notice, the
Palestinian Authority reduced the salary benefits of
thousands of public sector employees in the Strip
by over 30 per cent. One year later, in March 2018
it suspended the payment of salaries to some 20,000
civil servants in Gaza. The impact of this decision
has been devastating. Gaza's already faltering public
service will move further towards a total collapse.
Hospitals and clinics, schools, water and wastewater
treatment facilities, garbage collection, transportation
and other critical services will be critically impacted.
I have engaged with the Palestinian Authority on the
destructive impact of such decisions, which pressure
ordinary families that are already struggling to make
ends meet. That is why I call on the Palestinian
Government to resume the payment of public-sector
salaries in Gaza without delay.

We must immediately deal with the humanitarian
crisis that is unfolding. Israel must relax movement
and access restrictions on Gaza to enable the economy
to recover, with due consideration for its legitimate
security concerns. In this context, I take note of the
decision to increase the fishing zone from six to nine
nautical miles, and urge that the zone be extended
further and on a permanent basis. I also note our
continuing engagement with Israel and the Palestinian
Authority on the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism.

I want to assure the Council that the United Nations
is working intensely with partners to prioritize energy
and water initiatives discussed in the format of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians, as well as in
our donor meetings in Cairo and Washington, DC. The
long-term goal of increasing energy supply must be
pursued, alongside immediate and short-term projects
in the Gaza Strip.

Compounding the deteriorating humanitarian and
security situation in Gaza are the stalled efforts to restore
Palestinian Authority control over the Strip. Despite the
best efforts of Egypt, the implementation of the Cairo
agreement has come to a halt. I urge all Palestinian
factions to engage with Egypt and redouble their efforts
to enable the legitimate Palestinian Government to
be fully empowered in Gaza. The combination of the
security, development and humanitarian deterioration
that we are seeing Gaza, coupled with the political
impasse, makes the Strip a powder-keg.

Notwithstanding the tragic developments in the
rest of the region, we must do everything possible to
prevent another war in Gaza. It is imperative that the
international community and the Security Council
support the efforts of the United Nations and key
stakeholders to address the security, humanitarian and
political challenges that I have outlined. The tragic
events in Gaza have reinforced the growing risks
of implosion and explosion, with potentially grave
consequences elsewhere in the region. Palestine refugee
camps in the occupied Palestinian territory, Lebanon,
Jordan and Syria are highly vulnerable.
In this context, the situation of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) is particularly worrying. Even
with the welcome pledges of some $100 million last
month in Rome, the recent $50-million pledged by Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, respectively, and
the $10-million contribution just announced by Japan,
UNRWA operations are funded only into the summer.

Shutting down or reducing services at this critical
time would further destabilize the region. The ability
of half a million Palestinian refugee students across
the Middle East to start the new school year, must be
protected. Just in Gaza, UNRWA serves as a lifeline for
more than 1 million people - half the population - who
are at risk of losing access to health services, education
and food. Without those services, we should anticipate
a dramatic increase in social unrest, poverty, hunger
and psychosocial problems, not only in Gaza but across
the region. I again appeal to Member States to ensure
funding for UNRWA.

Turning briefly to the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, there have been no settlement
plans approved or tenders issued in the reporting period.
However, settlement construction and the demolition of
Palestinian-owned structures in Area C have continued.
The United Nations considers all settlement activities
illegal under international law and an obstacle to peace.

According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, in Area C of the West Bank
35 structures were demolished, including a school in
the Hebron community of Khirbet Zanuta. The only
school of the Al-Muntar Bedouin community is also at
risk of being demolished. Meanwhile, attacks against
Palestinians and the vandalism of property are also
increasing. On 13 April a mosque in the West Bank
was badly damaged in another apparent hate crime and
arson attack.

Turning to Lebanon, allow me to note that
preparations for the first parliamentary elections in
nearly a decade continue on track. In Lebanon, the
United Nations engages with stakeholders in order
to ensure that credible and inclusive elections will
be followed by the swift formation of a Government.
That is important in order to safeguard the country's
stability and to sustain the positive momentum of the
recent Rome II and CEDRE conferences. The Office
of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon
remains engaged with regional stakeholders to defuse
tensions and to prevent the risk of conflict spilling over,
including into Lebanon.
The situation in southern Lebanon and along the
Blue Line remains calm but tense. South of the Blue
Line, Israel proceeded with construction in several
locations outside the Lebanese reservation areas.
On 8 and 12 April, tension increased, with Lebanese
demonstrations north of the Blue Line in the vicinity of
the works. The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
has maintained close liaison with the parties, including
at the tripartite level, to prevent misunderstandings
and miscalculations.

I would like to conclude with some brief reflections
on the situation in Gaza, the peace process and the
regional impact. What is happening in Gaza today
is an injustice that no man, woman or child should
have to endure. The deplorable living conditions, the
consequences of the continued suffocating closures and
the control of Hamas and the increasing risk that Gaza
could trigger a new conflict are building up. People
should not be destined to spend their lives surrounded
by borders that they are forbidden to cross or waters
that they are forbidden to navigate. They should
not be destined to live under the control of Hamas,
which invests in military activities at the expense of
the population.

I firmly believe that there is a way out. The
challenges are political and man-made and therefore
resolvable if all sides firmly commit to supporting
practical solutions that can be implemented quickly,
effectively and sustainably.

However, Gaza is only part of the story. We
must also step up our efforts to support the parties in
advancing a sustainable Israeli-Palestinian peace on the
basis of the two-State solution. The prospects for peace
are slipping further and further away, emboldening
extremists and deepening polarization and mistrust on
all sides. With tensions mounting across the region, the
lack of progress should worry us all. The fires of the
Middle East continue to expand and shift. The Israeli-
Palestinian conflict remains a perpetual source of
oxygen for militants and radicals across the region.

Establishing a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the conflict would eliminate a chronic
source of instability and violence from the region. The
United Nations will continue to make every effort in
the pursuit of that objective.

