Mr. Ugalde (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, Costa Rica would like to thank you and
your delegation for convening this debate on the
protection of civilians and for your initiative that has
led to the adoption of this new resolution (resolution 1894 (2009)) . We would also like to acknowledge the
presence of the Secretary-General, the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights and
thank them for their presentations. I would also like to
greet the distinguished ministers present here.
During its membership in the Security Council,
Costa Rica has participated in the renewal of the
comprehensive protection framework. In the past two
years, we have contributed to the adoption of
resolutions on children in armed conflict (resolution 1882 (2009)), sexual violence (resolution 1820

(2008)), women and peace and security (resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009)), and also to the update
of the aide-memoire. Today, we close the cycle by
bringing this framework up to date through the
adoption of the new resolution on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (resolution 1894 (2009)). In
addition, Costa Rica has promoted the strengthening of
protection mandates in several peacekeeping missions
and has participated in the group of experts on the
protection of civilians since its inception.

During the past 10 years, the protection of
civilians has been recognized as a fundamental
component of the United Nations mandate and as a
central element for the legitimacy and credibility of
peacekeeping operations. Despite the progress
achieved so far, considerable problems remain,
particularly in the areas of accountability and
compliance with international law.

Costa Rica believes that the Security Council
must ensure the protection of civilian populations and
strongly and decisively respond to grave violations by
using all available resources. The obligations to protect
civilians apply to all situations and must be held to the
same standards in all parts of the world, regardless of
any political consideration.

Another important aspect of this mandate is
accountability. The Council has the responsibility of
closely monitoring situations where international
standards are repeatedly violated. We believe that the
Council has the obligation to obtain timely and detailed
information, promote investigations when necessary,
and ensure timely assistance to victims. We must work
resolutely towards achieving agreements that guarantee
victims' access to justice, including by referring
situations to the International Criminal Court, bearing
in mind its subsidiary role, when national authorities
lack the capacity or political will to fulfil their
obligations. The Council must implement actions to
strengthen the security sector in all its missions,
particularly those authorities charged with providing
transitional justice, which is an indispensable tool for
consolidating peace, recovering stability, combating
impunity and ensuring respect for human rights.
The protection of civilians is a comprehensive
and multidimensional concept and is the primary
responsibility of States. Nevertheless, given the nature
of today's conflicts, in order to achieve its objectives,
this concept requires strategic partnerships among
States, the United Nations, regional organizations, non-
governmental organizations and the affected
populations themselves.

Efforts to integrate the establishment and renewal
of mandates, mission planning, deployment and
evaluation have not been sufficient so far to
mainstream the protection of civilians as a cross-
cutting pillar in the work of peacekeeping operations
and the achievement of their objectives. In order to
achieve effectiveness in the protection of civilians, it is
necessary to work towards greater integration of efforts
in peacekeeping operations and improve coordination
between political, military and humanitarian actors.

The Security Council, mission personnel,
humanitarian actors and the civilian population should
clearly know what is expected of a mission, as well as
their roles and responsibilities. The Council must be
specifically aware of the resources that are needed for
the effective implementation of its mandates. There
must be a strategy for each mission that includes all of
the mission's components. In order to fulfil their tasks,
peacekeepers must have clear guidelines and proper
training that derives from a general operational
concept. In addition, to improve security, it is
necessary to enhance interaction and promote a better
flow of information among missions, humanitarian
actors and local populations.

For its part, the Secretariat must systematically
include in its country-specific reports relevant data and
recommendations to protect the civilian population,
reduce risks and threats and information on
humanitarian access constraints.

In summary, stronger leadership and
responsibility is necessary to ensure greater coherence,
unity of purpose and a common vision, as well as to
link the protection of civilians to the success of the
political solution to any conflict.

I would like to make a brief statement on behalf
of the Human Security Network, comprised of Austria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland and Thailand, and
South Africa as an observer member:
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the first
Security Council resolution containing specific
provisions for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (resolution 1265 (1999)) and is also the tenth
anniversary of our Network. We would like to express
our satisfaction with a conclusion of the process that
has led to the adoption of the new resolution
(resolution 1894 (2009)).

We would like congratulate Austria for achieving
this outcome. We are delighted with the progress of the
Security Council has made in the thematic discussions
and the positive developments in this area. We would
like to reiterate our conviction that it is still necessary
to work on five challenges listed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/277) . We believe that it is
important to include the human security perspective in
order to guarantee not only the physical protection but
also the human dignity of civilians affected by armed
conflict.

