Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Paragraph 9 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document recognizes that development, peace and
security and human rights are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. The living conditions of the world's
population may be affected significantly unless urgent
measures of mitigation and adaptation to climate
change are adopted. Agriculture and food production
could change and pose a great risk for political and
social stability. Densely populated geographic areas
could be flooded due to a rise in sea level, forcing
massive displacement of large segments of the
population. Extreme weather phenomena could cause
severe floods and droughts, causing loss of life and
damage to the health and property of the population.
The hydrologic cycle and, consequently, the
availability of drinking water could also be negatively
affected.

The emission of greenhouse gases, which has
been growing since the industrial revolution and which
is generated principally by the use of fossil fuels, is
directly connected to the development and spread of
unsustainable production and consumption patterns, the
modification of which requires a change in lifestyles,
as was agreed in the 1992 Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development.

Neither contributions to the current levels of carbon
emissions nor the level of risk from climate change are
equally shared among countries. The Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change has clearly warned that the
harmful effects of climate change would be more
intense in developing countries - precisely those that
have lower per capita levels of carbon dioxide
emissions and fewer resources to face the consequences
of climate change. Those who have contributed the least
to the current climate change are the ones who will
suffer its consequences most severely.

Security Council resolution 1625 (2005)
reaffirmed the need to adopt a broad strategy of
conflict prevention that addresses the root causes of
armed conflict and political and social crises in a
comprehensive manner, including by promoting, inter
alia, sustainable development and poverty eradication.
These issues should not be analysed in an isolated way,
but rather in their interrelation. The competence to
substantively address the issues of climate change,
energy, agriculture, the supply of drinking water and
the habitat of endangered populations undoubtedly
belongs within our Organization: to the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
United Nations Environment Programme, the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme, the
Commission on Sustainable Development, the regional
economic commissions, the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and specialized
agencies such as the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Health
Organization, the World Meteorological Organization,
the World Bank and the regional development banks,
among others.

Adequate and fluid cooperation, within the terms
established by the Charter, among the various organs,
the programmes and specialized agencies of the
Organization is necessary to face situations that could
potentially affect security and whose origin lies in the
extreme consequences of climate change. In our View,
this must not lead, under any circumstances, to the
question of climate change being incorporated into the
agenda of the Security Council.

The recent report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change has mobilized world public
opinion, and has brought new topicality to the subject,
especially for countries that have systematically failed
to recognize that the increase in the concentration of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere generates climate
change. Nonetheless, this recognition - and even the
Council's attention to the subject - may be arriving too
late, when years of patterns of energy production and
consumption, especially in developed countries, have
caused significant damage in the natural balance of our
climate system and when we see the consequences of
these actions coming menacingly close.

There are actions that the international
community could take to mitigate the phenomenon -
as much as still possible - and to effectively help
adapt to the consequences of a process that, since it is
already under way, cannot be halted or neutralized, and
thus restored to the previous situation. Such actions
can be found in the commitments undertaken for
international cooperation to provide assistance to
developing countries so that they can meet the needs of
adaptation to climate change.

In both the 1992 Rio Declaration and the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change of
the same year, the international community adopted the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
under which industrialized countries would commit
themselves to leading the mitigation actions and thus
take on the great responsibility to avert the most
pessimistic predictions of the impact of climate change
on peace and security.

The patterns of production and consumption,
especially of per capita energy, in those countries
determine the alarming current level of carbon
emissions in the atmosphere. Those countries, which
have contributed in great measure to the grave situation
of the climate system, are the ones that possess the best
and more abundant material and technical resources to
face the consequences of climate change.

