Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): There can be no
doubt that weapons of mass destruction are a threat to
international peace and security. They are a legitimate
subject for consideration by the Council and we
welcome its attention to the issues involved.

We support the draft rcsolution's aim of
controlling the horizontal proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors. None of us wants
to see terrorists get their hands on these weapons or on
materials that would allow their construction. It is
unfortunate that, to date, there has not been sufficient
will to see the existing multilateral disarmament and
non-proliferation regimes sufficiently strengthened,
with the result that the Council is now being asked to
step forward to fill a gap, with the required urgency.

However, the draft resolution will not succeed in
its aim without the support and acceptance of Member
States. Such acceptance requires the Council to dispel
any impression of negotiations behind closed doors or
that a small group of States is drafting laws for the
broader membership without the opportunity for all
Member States to express their views. That is why New
Zealand has joined other States in requesting this open
debate.

Before I make some specific points on the draft
resolution, I want to reaffirm New Zealand's strong
view that it is no substitute for the development of
strong and effective multilateral disarmament
instruments.

We see the draft resolution as part of a wider
debate that covers disarmament and proliferation of all
types, both horizontal and vertical. In our view, the
only way to guarantee that weapons of mass
destruction do not fall into the hands of others is to
eliminate them totally through a transparent and
verifiable process of disarmament. We therefore
underline our strong support for the reference in the
second draft preambular paragraph to the presidential
statement adopted by heads of State and Government
on 31 January 1992, including the express reference to
the need for all Member States to fulfil their
obligations in relation to arms control and
disarmament.

Secondly, we place importance on the fact that
the draft resolution would also impose restraints on
those States that have deliberately chosen to stand
outside the major disarmament and non-proliferation
treaties to which most States, including my own, have
committed themselves. This is a major gap that the
draft resolution can begin to fill.

Thirdly, if this draft resolution is to have value, it
must be more than simply a political statement. By
placing the draft resolution under Chapter VII,
members of the Council are sending a clear signal of
the importance they place on the obligations it
contains. We share the Council's view of the
importance of these obligations. The bottom line is that
if the Council is going to attempt to plug this gap, it
must be plugged tightly. Anything less would
undermine the credibility of the Council's actions and
the fight against non-proliferation itself by providing a
false sense that the problem has been solved.

Fourthly, in New Zealand's view, this draft
resolution represents a critical stopgap measure rather
than an optimal solution. These are complex issues,
and they must be addressed comprehensively and
effectively. It is very hard to set up the necessary
comprehensive framework for verification and
compliance under a Security Council resolution. We
believe that it is now urgent to start work on
multilateral treaty commitments to address these
issues.

Fifthly, we note that the Council intends to
monitor closely the implementation of the draft
resolution and to create a committee of all members of
the Council for that purpose. We expect that the
committee will draw on expertise from the existing
multilateral regimes to guide its work and to give
greater clarity to Member States as to how best to
implement the general requirements of the resolution in
practice. We note, however, that the committee is to
operate for a period of no more than six months. We
look forward to further elaboration of how it is
proposed to monitor implementation after that period,
and what assistance in implementation might be made
available to Member States that need it. We welcome
the Council's clarification that any action in respect of
States that the Council judges not to have met the
requirements of the resolution will be discussed and
that any decisions will be taken by the Council as a
whole.

Finally, it is important that issues of process and
substance do not become confused. It is no secret that
there is some disquiet within and without the Council
over the process by which this draft resolution is being
produced. However, those qualms must not be allowed
to distract States, including members of the Council,
from the importance of the issues being addressed in
the draft resolution and the need for all Member States
to take all possible measures to prevent non-State
actors gaining access to weapons of mass destruction.

It is our hope that this draft resolution, which
addresses a gap in global security, will at the same time
provide a catalyst to reenergize our other work on
multilateral disarmament and arms control.

