Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to say what a pleasure it is to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I wish
you every success in guiding the work of the Council
during this critical period.

I would also like to thank your predecessor, Mr.
Gunter Pleuger, Permanent Representative of Germany,
for his commendable efforts as President of the Council
last month.

The Council is meeting today to continue its
consideration of developments in the crisis between
Iraq and the United Nations. This is the third occasion
on which such an open meeting has been convened at
short notice in response to a request by the chairman of
the Non-Aligned Movement. The Council's
responsiveness demonstrates its concern for
transparency in its working methods and its interest in
enabling all members to participate in debates on
decision-making matters relating to international peace
and security.

Today's debate is being held at a particularly
severe and sensitive time for the Gulf region as a result
of the intransigent policies of the Iraqi Government,
which has not fulfilled its obligations under relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
687 (1991), 1284 (1999) and 1441 (2002), thereby
creating the acute tension that now prevails within the
international community. The Iraqi Government alone
bears full responsibility for the suffering of the
brotherly Iraqi people over the difficult past 12 years.
The Iraqi people could have enjoyed more pleasant
times and directed all their efforts to building peace
and prosperity had it not been for those events.

Kuwait has already expressed, at the international
and regional levels, its clear position with regard to the
current crisis between Iraq and the United Nations.
Today's meeting provides a further opportunity for us
to reaffirm our position, which I would like to sum up
in a number of points.

First, Kuwait fully supports the efforts being
made to find a peaceful resolution of the issue of
disarming Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction, in
keeping with international law. We would like to point
out that the resolutions and final declarations adopted
at summit meetings of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
League of Arab States and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference not only express a preference for a
peaceful settlement of the problem, through the
international community, but have outlined the path
that is to be followed by asking Iraq to implement all
the relevant Security Council resolutions and to
cooperate fully, immediately and unconditionally with
the inspectors, in implementation of resolution 1441
(2002).

Secondly, the draft resolution that the Council is
considering would furnish the Iraqi Government with
additional time during which it could reveal its
weapons of mass destruction and hand them over to the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission. Kuwait hopes that the Iraqi Government
will avail itself of that opportunity and accept the
international community's appeals, thereby protecting
the Iraqi people and the region from suffering the
consequences of war.

Thirdly, the draft resolution reflects the Council's
determination with respect to Iraq's current challenge
to the international community, and therefore deserves
full support.

Fourthly, although we hope that it will not be
necessary to use military force, we reaffirm our belief
that it is for the Iraqi Government to protect the Iraqi
people and the people of the region as a whole from the
dangers and other negative repercussions resulting
from military action by altering its behaviour and
changing the direction in which it is moving as quickly
as possible and by actively and substantively
cooperating, instead of pretending to do so - merely
acting in a procedural and nominal manner.

Fifthly, unity within the Security Council must be
preserved. Such unity is an indispensable factor for
securing the implementation of the provisions of
Council resolutions, in particular if they are supported
by effective force. Council unity, backed by concrete
will, is the message that must be sent, very clearly, to
the Iraqi leadership. Past experience in the Council
with respect to Iraq shows that only common will,
resolve and a united front on the part of members will
be able effectively to bring about the desired results.

The obligations imposed on the Iraqi Government
by the Security Council are not confined to the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction. Although
that is an important and crucial aspect of securing
international peace and security, it is not the only
obligation imposed on Iraq. There are also important
matters that have remained unresolved since the
liberation of Kuwait from the invasion in 1990. It is
unfortunate that the approach taken by the Iraqi
Government since 1991 with regard to the inspectors
and the task of eliminating its weapons of mass
destruction- an approach with which we are all
familiar - is the same as that taken by Iraq when
dealing with humanitarian matters, such as the issue of
the Kuwaiti prisoners of war and detainees, and with
regard to returning Kuwaiti property. This shows how
evasiveness, procrastination and deceit are a fixed part
of Iraq's way of dealing with international resolutions.
Iraq has, since, last January, been participating in the
Technical Committee, which forms part of the
Tripartite Committee presided over by the International
Committee of the Red Cross. The Technical Committee
has met four times to date in Amman, Jordan.
However, no concrete results have yet been
forthcoming. During those meetings Iraq showed no
sincere willingness to follow through on those issues.
Again, Iraq dissembled, used delaying tactics and
failed to live up to its promises. Superficial and
procedural forms of cooperation have been employed
by the Iraqi Government for many years when dealing
with those humanitarian matters. That flies in the face
of the obligations set out in Security Council
resolutions 686 (1991), 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999).

The same behaviour is evident with regard to
restoring Kuwaiti property, documents and archives.
Some documents were recently given back, but upon
examination it became clear that they were ordinary
forms of correspondence, not the official archives of
the Kuwaiti State, which were stolen by the Iraqi
Government.

Finally, Kuwait hopes that the Council will be
able to overcome its differences of opinion and its
internal divisions that threaten it authority and
jeopardize its basic responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. We also hope that the
Council will be able to reach an agreement that truly
reflects the common will of the international
community and its firm resolve to confront any
political manoeuvring by the Iraqi leadership. The Iraqi
leadership commonly employs that sort of
manoeuvring whenever political military pressure is
intensified. As we have seen in the past, Iraq is the sole
winner whenever there is division. In fact, differences
of opinion are a goal sought by the Iraqi leadership.
They do everything in their power to bring about such
differences, as that is how they can shirk their
obligations, weaken the Council's resolve and prevent
it from following up and implementing its resolutions.

