Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
wish at the outset to thank Mr. Abe, Under-Secretary-
General for Disarmament Affairs, for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General. We recognize the
presence of Ms. Yoriko Kawaguchi in our midst today
in the Council.

Tanzania acknowledges and welcomes the
increasing systemwide recognition by the United
Nations of the dangers posed by small arms to regional
and international peace and security. The measures
which have been taken so far by the Security Council
to address the problem of small arms are encouraging.

National security, as well as law and order, in
many African countries, including Tanzania, has been
adversely affected by the easy availability of small
arms and light weapons due to many factors, including
porous borders, recurrent subregional conflicts, the
presence of armed elements among refugees and illicit
international trade in these weapons. For decades,
small arms have spread uncontrolled, with devastating
consequences for human security in Africa.

Small arms are the weapons of choice in most
conventional conflicts and insurgencies. They claim
thousands of lives and cause injuries around the globe
every year, the majority of the victims being civilians,
especially women and children. These weapons fuel,
intensify and prolong conflicts, frustrate peace
initiatives and destabilize regimes emerging from
conflict. Small arms and dual-use instruments such as
machetes in the hands of undemocratic regimes and
insurgent non-State actors have been responsible for
some of the most gross human rights violations,
genocides, crimes against humanity and war crimes in
Africa. As we know all too well, today car bombs and
dynamite sticks are among the deadliest weapons in the
arsenals of terrorists and international terrorism. The
control of the spread of small arms and light weapons
should therefore be one of the major preoccupations of
the Security Council in discharging its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The ease with which small arms and light weapons
are obtained is an obstacle to peace efforts and must be
addressed systematically and comprehensively as part
of the disarmament responsibilities of the United
Nations system as a whole. We welcome the
establishment of a small arms advisory service within
the Department of Disarmament Affairs.

While the steps that have been taken so far in the
realm of small arms control are commendable, there is
still a need for greater support from a number of actors
and stakeholders, such as the media; for the
participation of non-governmental organizations; and
for the involvement of human rights activists, religious
bodies and other advocacy groups. Such initiatives
should be coordinated with related development
strategies and goals.

We strongly recommend the implementation of
the recommendations contained in the Programme of
Action adopted by the July 2001 United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All its Aspects. Tanzania welcomes
and encourages the efforts of the Open-ended Working
Group established by the General Assembly in
December 2003 to negotiate an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace, in a
timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms and light
weapons. That initiative requires greater political
impetus on the part of exporting and importing
countries alike to move it forward. The Secretary-
General's initiative to establish a group of experts to
consider this issue is most welcome and should be
encouraged.

The linkage between illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons and the illicit exploitation of
resources should be clearly understood, with a View to
discouraging and stopping it. The scant attention given
to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programmes in post-conflict situations is a
major cause of the circulation of arms as currency and
a means of exchange and livelihood by ex-combatants.
It is one of the major sources of illicit arms circulation
and political instability following peace agreements
and the peacebuilding phase of post-conflict situations.

Most of the conflict-ridden areas, particularly
sub-Saharan Africa, are major recipients of small arms.
States in those areas should be encouraged to come up
with legislation on marking and end-user certificates.
They should also exercise restraint in military
expenditures and focus on transparency in weapon
registrations, including through credible national arms
registers.

We encourage initiatives like that of Japan for grant
aid for peacebuilding assistance established under the
United Nations Global and Regional Disarmament
Trust Fund, which can be used for development.

In collaboration with the General Assembly and
the Security Council, we could begin to build a culture
of tolerance which would enable people to own
weapons for their legitimate security interests without
necessarily utilizing them for criminal purposes or for
disrupting the peace.
Finally, efforts aimed at collecting and destroying
small arms and light weapons associated with criminal
activities such as drug trafficking and serious breaches
of law and order, nationally and regionally, should be
encouraged and financed.

