Mr. Biagini (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto, Executive Director Fedotov
and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for their
comprehensive briefings.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the European Union.

The events of the past few days and weeks have
highlighted the fact that Afghanistan's security
challenges remain extremely complex. International
support, through the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission in Afghanistan, in which Italy participates and
contributes as a Framework Nation, is therefore still
essential. However, as many Council members have
already noted in today's debate, we have recently been
witnessing some truly encouraging developments. We
welcome the courageous peace offer that President Ghani
extended in February, as well as the announcement of a
unilateral ceasefire for the last part of Ramadan and the

decision to extend it. For the first time since 2001, the
ceasefire was also initially reciprocated by the Taliban.
The political significance of these events is amplified
by the unanimously positive reactions from both the
Afghan population and the international community. In
that regard, I would like to reiterate Italy's unqualified
support for these initiatives, which we hope can serve
as a catalyst for the peace and reconciliation process.

We encourage all actors and stakeholders to
interpret these developments with the necessary caution
but without losing sight ofthe hope for a peaceful future
they have generated. This phase requires a heightened
sense of responsibility from all sides, and we therefore
urge the Taliban to react positively to President Ghani's
peace offer. We have a window of opportunity that
is manifest in the Afghan people's clear longing for
sustainable peace, which can gain further momentum
if all relevant regional and international actors work
together constructively to remove the remaining
obstacles to peace. Concrete cooperation among
neighbours on confronting terrorism, drug trafficking
and organized-crime networks remains essential. In
that context, we welcome the bilateral dialogue between
Kabul and Islamabad. Effective cooperation on issues of
common interest can also help to significantly improve
the prospects for peace.

Afghanistan is rapidly approaching a long election
season, culminating in the presidential election
scheduled to take place in 2019. The holding of free,
fair, credible and inclusive parliamentary and district
elections this October will be a crucial milestone for
Afghanistan's democratic institutions, as well as in
terms of delivering results for the Afghan people
and will also be a tangible demonstration of the
Government's commitment to reform in the run-up to
the Geneva conference.

We appreciate the efforts that the Afghan
Government and the relevant electoral institutions have
made over the past few weeks to produce a noteworthy
increase in voter registration, and it is encouraging
that almost one third of those who have registered are
women. In that context, I would like to reiterate the
crucial importance of protecting and promoting women's
rights. We encourage the Government to continue its
efforts in that regard, since the gains made so far cannot
be taken for granted, as shown in UNICEF's recent data
on declining primary-school participation, while also
taking into account the difficult security situation in
many parts of the country.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our sincere
appreciation for the important role and contribution
that the Special Representative and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan provide in the
framework of the international community's efforts to
bring peace, stability and development to Afghanistan.

