Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): Only a few days ago, the
Security Council adopted a resolution concerning Burundi.
Today, we are debating a draft resolution on Rwanda,
another country in the Great Lakes region. What unites
these resolutions is their common purpose: ensuring peace
and stability in this extremely volatile part of Africa.

We welcome the increasing signs of normalcy in the
internal situation in Rwanda and also the improvement in
Rwanda's relations with its neighbours. We value the
positive role that the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda (UNAMIR) has played in restoring a climate
of relative stability in the country after its terrible
experience of civil war and genocide. We pay a tribute to
the UNAMIR personnel, who have made great efforts to
help Rwanda recover, and who have worked in extremely
difficult conditions. Although we are encouraged by the
progress towards normalcy in Rwanda, we must not lose
sight of a number of issues, which, if they are to be
solved, require particular attention and urgent action on
the part of the Rwandese Government, with the assistance
of the international community.

 

The voluntary and safe return of the 1.7 million
Rwandan refugees is the most important factor for progress
towards national reconciliation, and, at the same time, a
return is essential if the general security situation in the
Great Lakes region is to be improved. We remain seriously
concerned at the slow pace of the voluntary repatriation
process, which still lacks the necessary momentum. The
underlying causes of the refugees' unwillingness to return
home can be addressed only by the Government of
Rwanda, by restoring peace and stability and promoting a
climate of confidence and trust within the country. This can
be achieved only by improving the workings of the judicial
system and by strengthening law enforcement.

Since the disaster of 1994, Rwanda has faced the huge
tasks of economic recovery, reviving its administrative and
educational systems and rebuilding its public utilities. The
international community, together with UNAMIR, has
supported the steps taken by Rwanda in areas that are vital
for the future of the country. Today we can welcome the
Rwandan Government's assurances that it will succeed in
dealing with all the tasks I have mentioned, and we
recognize its pre-eminent role in that process. After all, it
is the Government that must assume primary responsibility
for reconstructing Rwanda and for ensuring genuine
national reconciliation.

Nevertheless, we believe that, notwithstanding the
imminent end of UNAMIR, in view of the enormity of the
tasks that must be carried out in Rwanda, the United
Nations should have a presence there. We would even have
been willing to consider extending UNAMIR's mission to
continue a peace-keeping type of operation.

Out of respect for the Rwandan Government's
commendable efforts to reconstruct its country, we are in
favour of maintaining a United Nations office in Rwanda
with the aim of supporting the Rwandan Government's
efforts to promote national reconciliation, facilitate the
return of refugees, improve the judicial system, rehabilitate
the country's transport, communications and other
infrastructure, coordinate the activities of relief
organizations; the office would also have the task of
monitoring the situation there.

In our view, the mandate of the United Nations office
in Rwanda, as set out in the draft resolution before us now,
addresses Rwanda's urgent needs and is an adequate
response to the wishes of its Government.

In conclusion, I should stress that, once UNAMIR's
mandate is finally over, the problem of ensuring the safety
and security of the international Commission of Inquiry,
the International Tribunal for Rwanda and all United
Nations personnel - and of all the other expatriate staff
working in the country - becomes all the more
important. I must stress that responsibility for this
important aspect of the internal situation lies with the
Rwandan Government.

Recognizing as it does the need for a continued
presence in Rwanda on the part of the international
community, the Polish delegation will vote for the draft
resolution before the Council now.

I should add that we associate ourselves with the
statement made by the representative of Italy on behalf of
the European Union.

