Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to congratulate
you, Mr. President, for the manner in which you are
conducting this meeting of the Security Council.

The decision of my delegation to participate in this
meeting was motivated by its attachment to international
law and the principles of self-determination of peoples
and respect for the sovereignty of States.

At the outset, we wish to express our solidarity with
the Government of President Nicolas Maduro Moros
and with the Venezuelan people. We would also like
to underscore a point that has been raised previously
in this Chamber. My region - the region of Latin
America and the Caribbean - has proclaimed itself a
zone of peace.

We have taken the floor to express our concern
over the convening of this Security Council meeting
today. This body is called upon to look into matters
related to threats to international peace and security,
and Venezuela does not in any way constitute a threat
to either the region or the world. On the contrary, as has
been stated in this very Chamber, the aggressions of
which Venezuela has been on the receiving end are what
constitute a threat to international peace and security.

The members of the Security Council, and
particularly the permanent members, have the duty to
avoid the political and ideological instrumentalization
of this body. We therefore consider this attempt to
bring the internal situation of a State Member of
the United Nations to our attention absurd. On the
contrary, we call on Council members to encourage
respect for international law and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, which were the basis
for the establishment of our Organization and include
explicitly the non-interference in the domestic affairs
of States and respect for their sovereignty.

The meddling policies used by the Government of
the United States of America to control this situation,
far from helping, are only making it worse. Convening
a meeting of the body dedicated to the preservation of
international peace and security only weakens the efforts
that multilateralism, especially the Security Council,
must develop. It erodes the dynamics of preventive
diplomacy, further distances the possibility of dialogue
between the parties and violates the principles of
equality of States, as well as the recognition of the will
and sovereignty of peoples.

The subject of the humanitarian situation
experienced by many Venezuelan citizens has come up
numerous times. I wish to make two remarks in that
regard. The first has to do with the illegality ofunilateral
sanctions. The international framework makes it clear
that any sanctions imposed by any State on another,
outside Security Council resolutions, are illegal.
Furthermore, those who impose unilateral economic
and financial sanctions claim to be providing a method
of resolving the humanitarian crisis. Allow me to read
an excerpt from a report of the Congressional Research
Service of the United States on the sanctions situation.

(spoke in English)

"Analysts are concerned that stronger sanctions
could exacerbate Venezuela's difficult humanitarian
situation, which has been marked by shortages
of food and medicines, increased poverty and
mass migration. Many Venezuelan civil society
groups oppose sanctions that could worsen
humanitarian conditions."

(spoke in Spanish)

If we are going to talk about the humanitarian
situation in Venezuela, then let us talk about who is
responsible. Let us talk about who is behind the illegal
unilateral sanctions.

Unfortunately, we see that the real purpose of
those who requested this meeting is not the defence of
democracyorhumanrights;therealpurposeistopromote
situations of instability and to use those situations
to push regime-change and natural-resource-control
policies. There are three motives. The first of course
is oil, of which not much has been said during this
meeting. The second is geopolitical control. The third is
the warning to those States that do not align themselves
with the policies of the United States.

I wonder, what country is better off after the
intervention of the United States? Have we not
discussed repeatedly in this very Council the seriously
adverse consequences being experienced in Iraq, Syria
or in Libya? I reiterate that the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States has proclaimed that
Latin America and the Caribbean is a zone of peace.
The real purpose is to intimidate democratically elected
Governments that have manifestly rejected its policies,
considering those policies a threat to the sovereignty
and free determination of their peoples.
Finally, we call on the members of the Security
Council, who have a great responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations, to allow themselves to
be guided by the Charter and its principles, and in the
framework provided by the same to avoid situations
of uncertainty and confrontation. On the contrary,
they should promote spaces of dialogue and peaceful
mediation that allow lasting solutions to be reached.

We may have ideological differences, which is
natural. We may also have political differences. But we
must not differ in our interpretation of international law.
In the same way that unilateral sanctions are illegal,
threats are also illegal. Threats of use of force are
illegal. Interference in internal affairs is illegal. If we
remove those variables from the security equation, then
we might find a satisfactory solution to the situation in
Venezuela, in particular in the framework of solutions
that have been put forward by States such as Mexico
and Uruguay. However, we will not find a solution in
the systematic and widespread violation of the norms
of international law.

