Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this very
relevant open debate. Close cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union is vital from the
viewpoint both of strengthening African peacekeeping
operations and of the impact that such cooperation can
have on sustaining peace. In that regard, Switzerland
welcomes the various framework agreements signed
between the United Nations and the African Union. I
would like to emphasize three points.

First, Switzerland is convinced that a human
security approach that places the human being at
the heart of peace and security is fundamental. It is
necessary to understand and address the causes of
violence in order to provide real alternatives that make
a peaceful future possible. For that reason, for several
years Switzerland has been pursuing with its partners on
the African continent an agenda to prevent violence and
to strengthen peace. That involves promoting inclusive
dialogue to reduce the political, economic and social
exclusion that are often the root causes of violence. In
the United Nations context, Switzerland supports the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission, in particular by
chairing the Commission's Burundi configuration. We
welcome the fact that the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund have strengthened their
cooperation with the African Union and other regional
organizations in recent years. In the bilateral context,
we maintain, for example, a network of human security
advisers who work to promote peace and human
rights and are based in our representations in Africa
and elsewhere.

Secondly, Switzerland would like to highlight the
important role played by the centres of excellence of the
various regional economic communities in capacity-
building for African peace operations. For nearly a
decade, Switzerland has committed itself to African
peacekeeping operations by supporting such centres,
namely, at the School of Peacekeeping Alioune Blondin
Beye in Bamako, the Kofi Annan International Peace
Training Centre in Accra and the International Peace
Support Training Centre in Nairobi.

Thirdly, Switzerland, like the African Union,
its member States and other actors, is of the view
that ensuring sustainable and predictable funding for
African peace operations is strategically important.
Respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law remains an important frame of reference for that
cooperation. In that regard, Switzerland provides
expertise to the African Union.

We recognize that many challenges cannot be
overcome in isolation. The peacekeeping partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
paves the way for strengthened multilateralism for the
benefit of the entire continent and beyond.

