Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): 1 thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding over this open debate.

On behalf of the people and the Government of
Malaysia, 1 would like to take this opportunity to convey
our deepest condolences to the families and loved ones
of victims of the earthquakes that struck Ecuador and
Japan over the weekend. We wish godspeed to the
recovery and assistance efforts.

Like Spain and Venezuela, we too condemn all acts
of violence.

My delegation warmly welcomes the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Murray McCully, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, and His Excelelncy
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United
Nations, at this meeting.

We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing,
which we listened to very carefully. We completely
agree with the message conveyed by the Secretary-
General and by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
New Zealand. The current situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory is not sustainable and requires
urgent action by the Council.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representatives of Iran and Kuwait on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
the Organization ofIslamic Conference, respectively.

For the purpose of today's open debate, my
delegation wishes to focus solely on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. There are two main reasons for
that. First, of the issues pertaining to the Middle East,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been on the United
Nations agenda for the longest period. It is as old as the
United Nations itself. And, whether we wish to admit it
or not, the protracted Palestinian question is the nucleus
that has triggered various other threats to international
peace and security.

Secondly, unlike all other Middle East conflicts,
there is no recent Council action on the question of
Palestine. The last time a Council resolution was
adopted was more than seven years ago, which belies
the worsening situation on the ground and the rising
threats to the two-State solution. Worst of all, there is
simply no political will by the Council to act to bring
an end to Israel's illegal occupation and to salvage the
two-State solution, in accordance with international
law, the values and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international human rights
standards. There is also a clear lack of appetite by the
Council to use the tools at its disposal on the issue of
Palestine, unlike with regard to Syria, Lebanon and
Yemen. Therefore, Malaysia is of the view that this
issue deserves our undivided attention at this meeting.

Malaysia strongly condemns the extrajudicial
killings perpetrated by Israeli forces against
Palestinians, including children and women. The cold-
blooded murder of a Palestinian youth by an Israeli
soldier in Hebron - the youth was shot in the head
as he lay injured on the ground - is a clear instance
of Israel's shoot-to-kill policy. Tragically, if not for the
fact that the incident was captured on video, it would
have been treated as another act of self-defence by the
Israeli army, and the perpetrator would have gotten
away with murder. Even if the incident is investigated
by the Israeli authorities, we remain sceptical as to
whether justice will be served, as only 3 per cent of
criminal investigations into violence committed by the
Israeli forces and settlers have resulted in indictments.

The facts on the ground surrounding the murder
proved that it was not an isolated incident. If it had
been an isolated incident, the Israeli forces would not
have reacted by storming the family home of the person
who had filmed the incident in order to harass and
intimidate him. Israeli settlers would not have reacted
by gathering outside that same house to threaten him.
The Israeli medical staff present at the scene would not
have remained indifferent to the injured Palestinian,
even when he was shot in the head right in front of them.
And the Israeli soldier who pulled the trigger would not
have received the support of over half of Israelis, as
recorded by an opinion poll.

That incident reflects the culmination of a long-
standing systematic policy that dehumanizes the
Palestinians, one perpetuated by an unconstrained
culture of impunity. It is an ideology of violent
extremism, sanctioned by the occupying Power and
institutionalized in Israeli society and its political,
military and judicial institutions. In other words,
this is what we sow by our inaction. This is what the
Palestinians reap in a tragically horrifying manner.

Another unfortunate consequence of our inaction
and the prevailing impunity is the rapid expansion of
illegal Israeli settlements. This year, Israel continued
with its settlement construction, land confiscations
and forced evictions, depriving Palestinians of their
property and shelter and rendering hundreds of
Palestinians - including children - homeless. As
reported by the Israeli non-governmental organization
Peace Now, the building of illegal Israeli settlements
increased by 250 per cent in the first quarter of this
year, as compared to the same period last year. Over
the years, Israeli authorities have taken over more
than 85 per cent of the total area of the historical land
of Palestine.

The construction of the apartheid wall also continues
unabated, against the decision of the International
Court of Justice in 2004. The latest construction in
Bethlehem's Cremisan Valley will severely restrict
the access of nearly 60 Palestinian families to their
agricultural land and devastate their livelihood.
Slowly but surely, the illegal settlement activities and
the apartheid wall are undermining and fragmenting
the contiguity and territorial integrity of Palestine,
including East Jerusalem, and physically threaten the
viability of and prospects for the two-State solution.
On the situation in Gaza, as mentioned by the
Secretary-General, we are deeply concerned about
Israel's latest ban on building materials to reconstruct
thousands of damaged and destroyed homes and
infrastructure. Two years after Israel's military
offensive in Gaza, as many as 75,000 Palestinians
remain homeless. The international community must
act to end the illegal and inhumane blockade of Gaza,
as it constitutes the main obstacle to reconstruction and
a form of collective punishment that grossly violates
international standards of human rights.

Malaysia reiterates the need for the Council to
use all tools at its disposal on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, just as in the case of Syria, Lebanon and
Yemen. We must end the impunity with which Israel
acts by increasing the price to maintain the status quo
in occupied Palestine. The end of apartheid in South
Africa did not come about through the international
community merely standing by and doing nothing.
Instead, the international community chose to take
effective action by increasing the political, economic
and social costs, thereby opposing discriminatory and
unjust policies that violated the international standard
of human rights. The situation in occupied Palestine is
much worse.

The most burning issues that require our urgent
action are the illegal settlements, the blockade of
Gaza, and the need for international protection for the
occupied Palestinian people, in line with international
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention. As
mentioned in the latest report (A/HRC/31/73) of the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, a
protective presence for Palestinians is needed against
the effects of Israeli policies and practices related to
the occupation.

For seven years, the Council debated and produced
nothing. For seven years, it bore witness to the many
atrocities. For seven years, the Council procrastinated,
with disastrous consequences. Meanwhile, during those
seven years, more blood has been shed, more walls of
hatred have been built, more hopes have been dashed
and society has been dehumanized.

We speak today to clear our conscience - doing
nothing is not right. We have no quarrel with Israel, the
Jewish State or its right to exist. We never have. Our
prayer is for Israel to live up to the commandment to
love thy neighbour, and stop the atrocities. However,
we are left with no choice but to urge the Council to
begin to bear witness to good tidings, to use the tools
at its disposal, salvage the two-State solution and bring
justice and peace to these troubled lands.

