Mr. Skinner-Klee Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Guatemala thanks your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing this critical debate, as well
as for the concept paper (S/2018/982, annex) that you
have provided. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and briefing this morning.

It is necessary to recall that the Organization
was created to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war and that those who forget their history
are condemned to repeat it. Neglecting multilateralism
is tantamount to returning to the era before the
Congress of Vienna in 1815. Exactly a century ago,
the armistice of 11 November 1918 was signed, which,
as the Ambassador of India mentioned, ended the
war that was supposed to end all wars. Although the
League of Nations was not able to avoid war, that was
not an excuse, after the ensuing world war, for nations
to obviate the option of maintaining peace through
multilateralism, in the belief that the solution to all
wars necessarily depends on the collective action of the
international community.

Not only is the contemporary landscape complex,
but today's world is facing the polarization of ideas, the
clash ofgeopolitical interests, the imposition ofinterests
and the consequent breakdown of trust among Powers
and cultures. Peaceful coexistence often fails and human
rights are violated due to an incessant struggle to impose
spheres of influence or abject domination. When, in
recent history, we were able to reach basic consensuses
that sustained fruitful alliances and institutions that
promoted collective security, it was on the basis of
good faith and known truth. Today, on the other hand,
the major determinants of international relations that
threaten peace are characterized by mistrust, unilateral
action and a relative or an alternative reality, as it were,
that is built on the basis of post-factual revisionism.

Despite the challenges facing global governance,
people organized in States are called by international
law to attain international peace and security, and
the Security Council cannot abdicate its essential
responsibility or be a passive spectator when entire
populations are at risk or suffer the violence of war.
That is why we must reverse the negative tendencies that
separate us and instead foster mutual trust on the basis
of an international order based on respect for common
rules built on reason, justice and mutual benefit, with
the supreme goal of ensuring the common good and the
sustainability of the planet.

The defence of multilateralism as an option for
addressing and resolving global problems must be
preached according to the principle of good faith
in the fulfilment of international obligations, since
the imposition of unilateral criteria contradicts an
international order based on rules that aspire to enjoy
sustainable peace, not only from the point of View of
the absence of conflict, but also as an expression of the
political will to achieve peaceful and useful coexistence.

The international order based on a system of
generally recognized rules and practices requires
Powers to work together, instead of antagonizing one
another or competing for influence. It is therefore
necessary to re-establish mutual trust among them,
as well as the international community's trust in
the Security Council. Our common destiny and the
survival of the human species require a basic consensus
on intrinsic principles, as well as the due observance
of human rights, mutual respect among nations and
economic progress in freedom, all of which fertilize
the progress of nations. To that end, international
cooperation is a sine qua non condition and requires
scrupulous observance of the tenets of the Charter of
the United Nations, which is entered into freely but
must be complied with once agreed to.

Beyond theory, multilateralism is praxis and action,
and has an evident impact on every inhabitant of the
planet. One of the noblest tasks of the Organization has
been peacekeeping, which my country is honoured to
support. Peacekeeping is a positive strategic partnership
among States that, even with large asymmetries, share
a common goal. Similarly, conflict prevention through
the concept of sustainable peace is another concept
that promotes a better world. That is why, despite the
imperfections of multilateral initiatives, the United
Nations remains the only universal forum where the
world converges and the most cherished hope of peoples,
not only those afflicted by conflict but particularly
those of us that yearn to achieve the fulfilment of the
Sustainable Development Goals prevails.

Allow me to conclude by saying that Guatemala
deeply values multilateralism and treasures peace.
We are witnesses to the fact that in difficult periods
of our history, the friendly hand of the international
community has enabled us to advance along the path
of democratization with social inclusion. That is
why we believe that it is not through hostile actions
or impositions that we will achieve a more just and
secure world, but through cooperation and collective
action to prevent the outbreak of conflicts and entrench
international security. That public good, as it was
called by the Ambassador of the United Kingdom said,
which goes by the name of the United Nations, must
be at the service of humankind, and that is why it is
called on to discharge its duties through solidarity and
collective consultations, upon the basis of the greatest
possible consensus.
