Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation for the initiative of Egypt
and and Spain in convening this briefing. Allow me
also to join others in thanking all of the four briefers.

(Spoke in French)

I should like in particular to thank Ms. Hindour
Oumarou Ibrahim for having conveyed the voice of the
people of her region directly to the Security Council.
(Spoke in English)

Japan looks forward to the acceleration of the
United Nations actions in the Sahel under the leadership
of Mr. Ibn Chambas as Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel.

The Sahel faces many major challenges today. Peace
and security remain fragile. The spread of terrorism
from the Sahel to the rest of West Africa is worrisome.
I saw the reality with my own eyes in northern Mali,
where, due to the absence of State authority, the local
population has no choice but to coexist with terrorists
and to depend on an informal economy.

Despite all the challenges, there remains hope.
Some countries are becoming resilient to the threats.
Building resilient societies in the Sahel is an achievable
goal. The United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel (UNISS) is a valuable tool to that end. One of the
key elements overarching the UNISS strategic goals is
the importance of institutional capacity-building, which
Japan fully supports. Indeed, Japan's commitments to
institution- and capacity-building in Africa, which were
made at the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD-V) have already been translated
into concrete actions. That includes capacity-building
support for some 2,000 people in the Sahel aimed at
enhancing counter-terrorism capacity. That support
was announced by Prime Minister Abe at the TICAD-V
thematic session dedicated to the Sahel.

The role of the Group of Five Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in
promoting the UNISS should also be commended. The
G-5 Sahel has made efforts to foster regional capacities
through the establishment of subregional training
schools in the field of security and defence. We fully
support such actions.

Countries that have more or less successfully
implemented the UNISS, including through inclusive
governance and social cohesion, show greater resilience
to terrorism, organized crime, drought and other threats
to peace and security. I was ambassador to some of
those countries. In the case of Burkina Faso and Niger
1 was ambassador some time ago, and I witnessed those
cases. In Burkina Faso local communities have been
constructing more thane 1,400 reservoirs for irrigation
but also in anticipation of future droughts. Their
society is a model ofpeople combining their efforts, not
only to prepare for the worse, but also to reinforce the
foundations of their livelihoods. In Niger, various ethnic
communities are politically represented and integrated
into the central Government, and that ensures effective
and responsible governance throughout the country
despite its vast territory and great diversity.

I believe there are two keys to creating societies
that are resilient to threats. The first is ownership
and the second is consideration of the local context.
When Japan was implementing the technology-transfer
project to counter desertification in Burkina Faso,
we recognized the potential difficulty of ensuring
sustainable maintenance and the practical difficulties of
applying advanced technologies to local conditions. We
drew two lessons from that experience. The first was
that it is very important to make full use of traditional
knowledge and customary procedures. The second was
that in order to ensure ownership, decision-making
must be promoted at the community level through the
traditional system. The efforts of the United Nations
and other international partners in the Sahel should be
guided by the principles of ownership and consideration
of the local context.

Ownership has been one of the core principles
guiding the J apan-led multi-stakeholder TICAD process
for more than two decades. This coming August the
next TICAD will be held in Africa, at the summit level,
for the first time in the African continent's history. We
look forward to the active participation of countries
from the Sahel region and the G-5 Sahel.

