The Secretary-General (spoke in French):
Following the debate yesterday (see S/PV.8413), I
again thank the delegation of Cote d'lvoire for having
proposed this open debate on the role of States, regional
arrangements and the United Nations in the prevention
of conflicts.

(spoke in English)

Our world is faced with complex threats that are
multidimensional, interconnected and unpredictable.
The number of countries experiencing violent conflict
is higher than it has been in 30 years. The number of
low-intensity conflicts has increased by 60 per cent in
the past 10 years. We have a responsibility to act, not in
isolation but collectively.

Since assuming office, I have prioritized prevention
of all kinds, from conflicts to natural disasters to
pandemics and the foreseeable dangers posed by new
technologies. There are complex links among those
threats, which can reinforce and amplify each other and
should not be seen in isolation. I have therefore called
on all parts of the United Nations system to focus on
prevention, including, obviously as a priority for us,
the prevention of conflict. We are overwhelmingly
managing crisis and conflict, when we should put far
more effort into preventing them from happening in
the first place. Rather than launching humanitarian aid
operations to save lives, we should invest in reducing
the need for aid.

For us, prevention is an end in itself. It should never
be seen as the instrument of any other political agenda.
First and foremost, it saves lives and protects people
from harm. But prevention also makes economic sense.
The recent United Nations-World Bank study entitled
PathwaysforPeace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing
Violent Conflict concluded that prevention would save
approximately $34 billion in damage in countries that
avoid war. Those benefits are compounded over time,
to reach over $140 billion after 15 years. From greater
use of my good offices, including through my Special
Representatives and Envoys, to investing in mediation,
to strengthening the contribution of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding to prevention, we are working to
improve our capacity. The endorsement of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative by 151 Member States
is a strong sign of support for the central role of our
peacekeepers in preventing conflicts from worsening,
and in proactively supporting peace.

Beyond the peace and security pillar, the entire
United Nations system is tackling the root causes that
can make communities and societies vulnerable to
violence and conflict, which often lie in competition
over control of power and resources, inequality and
exclusion, unmet aspirations, the marginalization
of women, young people and minority groups, poor
governance and the instrumentalization of ethnic
and religious divisions. They are also interlinked and
exacerbated by climate change, migration, transnational
crimes and global terrorism.

All our work to achieve the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, from human rights and
humanitarian affairs to gender equality, environmental
protection and combating climate change, has a role
in preventing conflict. Sustainable development is an
end in itself, and must be considered as such. But it
is also one of the most effective tools for prevention.
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals will
make a significant contribution to tackling root causes
and building lasting peace.

While conflict between States has declined, internal
conflicts are increasing and account for the majority of
humanitarian needs and displacement around the world.
Strong, resilient societies are enriched, not threatened,
by diversity. But such societies do not come about by
chance. As societies become more multi-ethnic and
multireligious, cultural and economic investments in
cohesion are vital. Every member, every group, must
feel valued.

We must also invest in education and training for
young people so that they have hope and prospects for
the future. Young women and men must be empowered
to participate in making the decisions that affect their
lives. That is a vital goal in itself, but it is also essential
to counter the risk of alienation and susceptibility to
extremist narratives, and even recruitment. By the
same token, we must invest in helping countries and
communities that are emerging from conflict. Justice,
truth and reconciliation are essential for societies to
heal and move beyond war. The United Nations works
to support such efforts in many countries and regions
of the world. States and subregional and regional
organizations are our vital partners in all those efforts,
and we are working together with respect and trust.

Our relationship with the African Union is
showing the way forward, through our frameworks for
enhanced partnership for peace and security and the
implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. I am delighted that the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission is here
to discuss this important issue with us today.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
shows the visionary genius of those who drafted
our foundational document. At that time, regional
organizations barely existed. Seventy years on, regional
and subregional organizations are an indispensable
part of the rules-based global order. Chapter VIII
even envisages our cooperation on joint peacekeeping
operations. Regional and subregional organizations
have the proximity, experience, knowledge of local
dynamics, flexibility and relationships to engage more
rapidly and effectively when situations deteriorate.

In the Gambia two years ago, the coordinated joint
action of the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the United Nations and
neighbouring countries helped to prevent a political
crisis and supported a peaceful, democratic political
transition. In Madagascar, the United Nations worked in
close coordination with the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community and the International
Organization of la Francophonie to facilitate dialogue,
which contributed to peaceful presidential elections last
month. We hope that cooperation will be maintained in
the near future. When crises broke out in Mali and the
Central African Republic, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Economic Community of
Central African States were the first to deploy troops
and engage in mediation efforts. The African Union
took over the operations, which later became United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In Central Asia,
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia supports regional dialogue
on transboundary water management and promotes
water diplomacy, in close cooperation with national
Governments and the International Fund for Saving the

Aral Sea. And in the aftermath of contested elections
in Honduras in November 2017, the United Nations
maintained close contacts with the Organization of
American States to ease tensions and facilitate dialogue.
Those efforts should - and must - be replicated
elsewhere.
(Spoke in French)

That was the subject of the high-level interactive
dialogue that I organized in June with the leaders
of various organizations, including regional ones,
to consider ways and means of strengthening our
cooperation by placing special focus on prevention.
I intend to continue that dialogue and intensify our
collaboration with a view to contributing our expertise
and support to anchor stable and resilient societies. I
also intend to take inspiration from the success of
frameworks adopted by the United Nations and the
African Union, but also coordination mechanisms
in other regions of the world. The reforms I have
undertaken will help us to improve the coherence of
our efforts. In particular, we need to help regional and
subregional organizations to better anticipate crises and
take preventive measures early. The Alert and Response
System of the Economic Community of States of West
Africa is a rather edifying example in that regard.

No State or organization can alone overcome the
current challenges, whether they involve climate change
or inequality. I fear therefore that the current political
trends, prevailing pessimism and lack of confidence
could undermine multilateralism and the international
rules-based system. I urge world leaders to renew their
commitment to inclusive multilateralism based on the
Charter of the United Nations, and on the principles of
complementarity and subsidiarity. I also urge them to
use the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals as a global plan of
action. The willingness to collaborate and act quickly
must be translated into genuine and tangible results.
Promoting prevention and resilience must be at the
heart of our collective efforts.

I believe that we have the knowledge and resources
required to achieve that objective. We lack only the
courage and political will. We must involve everyone
in building stable and resilient societies, work together
with management teams, ensure the full participation of
women and harness the energy and creativity of young
people. Conflict prevention is a responsibility we all
share. Regional and subregional organizations play a
key role in implementing a global multidimensional
strategy that can meet the challenges ahead.

