The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the terrorist attack that occurred
in Islamabad on 20 September 2008, causing
numerous deaths and injuries, including among
foreign diplomats. It expresses its deep sympathy
and condolences to the Victims of this heinous act
of terrorism and to their families, and to the
people and Government of Pakistan.

"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring the perpetrators, organizers, financiers
and sponsors of this reprehensible act of terrorism
to justice, and urges all States, in accordance with
their obligations under international law and
resolution 1373 (2001) and consistent with
resolution 1624 (2005), to cooperate actively with
the Pakistani authorities in this regard.
the

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
Whenever and by Whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. The Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to
combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/35.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
08-51426
