Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, Mr. President,
I would like to express appreciation to you for your
leadership in convening this debate on Somalia and
for giving me the opportunity to address the Security
Council. I also would like to express appreciation to
Mr. Elmi Ahmed Duale, Permanent Representative
of Somalia, for his statement and to Ambassador
Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, for his briefing.

After more than 20 years of devastation and 8 years
of a transitional period, the concerted efforts of the
Somali Transitional Federal Government, the African
Union (AU), the United Nations, the Security Council
and other partners have contributed to the advancement
of peace and stability in Somalia. Those efforts include
the Djibouti Agreement and the Kampala Accord,
as well as the road map, which together have set
up a timeline for the political process leading to the
end of the transitional period. Japan strived to play a
substantial role in those efforts.

The political tasks have been achieved, despite
some delays. Japan commends the ownership
demonstrated by the Somali people in a democratic
and transparent manner, with the adoption of the new
provisional Federal Constitution of Somalia and the
election of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. The
progress that has finally put an end to the transitional
period has been remarkable. We cannot forget to
applaud the dedication of Special Representative
Mahiga to that process. Sincere tribute should also be
paid to the Somali Transitional Federal Government
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
whose sacrifices made possible the liberation ofa large
majority of the territory of Somalia. Japan extends its
appreciation to AMISOM. troop-contributing countries
and Ethiopian troops in that regard.

The Somali people have overcome major challenges.
Now is the time for the people of Somalia to enter the
next phase of new political dispensation, stabilization
and peacebuilding. Japan welcomes the six-pillar policy
introduced by President Mohamud at his inaugural
speech, and his appointment of Mr. Abdi Farah Shirdon
as his Prime Minister. Japan is ready to support the new
Somali Government in its new endeavour towards the
reconstruction and development of the country.

While acknowledging the progress made so far,
we need to consolidate that progress. In this regard,
security still remains key, and it is indispensable to
reinforce the Somali National Security Forces. Japan
has been one of the leading actors in security sector
development in Somalia, and remains committed to
working with the United Nations and other donor
countries towards peace and security in Somalia.

Piracy also remains an important item on the
agenda in terms of stability in Somalia. The number
of attacks by pirates is decreasing, thanks to the joint
efforts of Somalia and the international community.
Japan is proud to have taken part in those efforts, and
continues to ensure maritime security of the region by
various measures, including the deployment of two
destroyers and two patrol aircraft in the Gulf of Aden,
working in close cooperation with other partners.

Last but not least, as Somalia enters a new phase
of peacebuilding, it is necessary for the Somali
people - who have suffered and therefore deserve
to receive the dividends of peace - to become the
front-runners in the development of the country. For
that purpose, a new road map should be made for the
reconstruction and peacebuiding of the country. Japan
appreciates the initiative of the Secretary-General
to hold a mini-summit on Somalia last month, where
participants discussed the future dispensation of
Somalia, as well as the modalities of peacebuilding
in the country. We also appreciate the United Nations
ongoing efforts to conduct a strategic review on the
future presence of the United Nations in Somalia.

Those peace, security and development initiatives
in Africa will be the top priority on our agenda under
our initiative, the Tokyo International Conference on
African Development (TICAD). The TICAD process is
the platform whereby Japan has explored and promoted
the development of the African continent, together with
its African countries and friends, since 1993. Next
June, Japan, the United Nations, the United Nations
Development Programme, and, for the first time, the
AU will co-organize the fifth TICAD meeting, and
discuss current and future challenges that Africa is now
facing, including peacebuilding in Somalia.

Japan would like to invite a high level of
participation by African countries and partners.

