Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): Allow me first of all to
express my delegation's warmest congratulations to you,
Mr. President, for the outstanding way in which you have

 

presided over the work of the Security Council during the
month of June and to convey its best wishes to you on your
way to retirement.

Italy welcomes the adoption of the resolution on the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) until 15 September 1995.

During the course of the consultations we, like many
other delegations, stated that unless the warring factions
reached a major breakthrough in the ongoing political
negotiations and took some practical steps to begin
implementing the Akosombo and Accra agreements the
UNOMIL mandate could not be renewed. We also share the
Secretary-General' s view that in that event UNOMIL would
have to be turned into a good-offices mission.

As others have already said, the true and real victim
of the present situation in Liberia is the civilian population.
The United Nations and the international community have
a responsibility not to abandon Liberian men, women and
children to the chaos and violence of civil war. But once
again we must point out that attempts to provide aid and
material assistance to Liberia have been hindered by
obstacles set up by the factions.

Our hope is therefore that the parties in conflict can
finally reach an understanding, in the higher interest of
peace and stability in the country and in the entire region.
There are still some grounds for optimism, thanks to the
mediation of the countries of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), whose action we highly
commend. The Liberian factions must not waste this last
opportunity. They must realize that the prosecution of the
conflict can only make it impossible for the international
community to continue to provide assistance to the country.
The experiences of the recent past have taught us that there
is little that the United Nations and the international
community can do if there is no true desire for peace on
the part of the parties in conflict.

We therefore renew our appeal to the Liberian factions
to go back in good faith to the negotiating table.
