Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It is
a great pleasure to see Prime Minister Diarra among us.
I should like to thank him for the hospitality which the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire showed the Security
Council mission during our visit there at the end of last
month, for the trouble he is taking to follow up that
mission and the resolutions of the Council on C6te
d'Ivoire, and for his briefing this morning.

It is also a great pleasure to see Special
Representative Tevoedjre with us this morning. It is
very valuable to have him on the ground during this
crucial period of the development of a new stability
and reconciliation in Cote d'Ivoire. We need to
continue to work closely with him as we take our own
business forward on this important country.

I join with Ambassador De la Sabliere in
congratulating the Prime Minister on the progress his
Government has made, including the presentation to
the National Assembly of a comprehensive programme
of work to implement the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement. We warmly welcome the joint declaration
of 4 July ending the hostilities on the ground, and we
note with approval that the security situation on the
ground in Cote d'Ivoire has improved. I think that the
work that is being done on the implementation of the
Agreement owes a great deal to the personal input and
dedicated response of the Prime Minister personally.

But as he has indicated to us, we all have to be
aware that progress on some important issues identified
by the mission has been mixed. There is a lot more still
to do. We would like to see a very early date for the
adoption by the National Assembly of the amnesty law.
We would like to see, finally, the appointment of fully
responsible ministers of defence and interior security.
We would like to see also the further extension of
Government services throughout the country.

We have had an important briefing on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme - and we also had a foretaste of the
excellent dinner which the Prime Minister gave us in
Abidjan. This is a good programme. In some ways it
can form the elements of a model for the United
Nations in taking forward a DDR programme, but it
needs to be implemented, and those time lines need to
be adhered to.

The United kingdom will fully support the Prime
Minister's efforts to make progress in this and in the
other areas, and, as he will know from this meeting this
morning, the Council will be following up assiduously
to make sure that implementation proceeds.

The United Kingdom recognizes the importance
of continuing international support to C6te d'Ivoire in
this period. We have promised an additional 1 million
pounds sterling to ECOMICI, and we strongly
encourage other potential donors to do the same.

As the Prime Minister has underlined to us, the
long-term target for C6te d'Ivoire remains successful
elections in 2005. The holding of those elections is
closely connected with the full implementation of the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, and it was very good to
have the full understanding of President Gbagbo in
Abidjan about that when we were there. Since meeting
that deadline is going to require very careful
preparation for the elections themselves, we would be
very glad to have confirmation from the Prime Minister
as to whether the Government will ask for United
Nations and international assistance in that, because I
think that that would be a very positive sign.

We are grateful to France for the draft of the
presidential statement which I hope we can adopt later.
It forms an important element of the Council's follow-
up to our missions this summer to Africa.

