Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
like first of all to welcome Mr. Bernard Kouchner, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Kosovo, to the Council and to thank him for his
informative briefing on the evolution of the situation in
Kosovo.

In recent weeks Kosovo has been engaged in
intense activities that the international community
continues to follow with a great deal of interest. The
municipal elections that took place in Kosovo on 28
October are of particular importance in light of the
recent developments in the region as a whole. The
results of these elections are encouraging and deserve
the effective support of the entire international
community.

My delegation is pleased by the conditions under
which the elections were held. The election process as
a whole was a real success, in particular as regards
respect for electoral procedures and the complete
absence of violence. These elections are an important
milestone in the democratic evolution of Kosovo. The
heavy participation of the inhabitants in this vote
reveal a profound desire to move ahead on establishing
a durable peace for this region. Nonetheless, this level
of participation should not mask the lack of
participation by the Serb inhabitants. In this regard, the
international community is called upon to continue its
efforts to seek appropriate solutions that can promote
the participation of all the minorities in the
reconciliation process.

We are concerned by the fresh outbreak of
political violence. These acts are capable of
undermining the efforts of the international community
and are for the most part directed against the ethnic
minorities. In this regard, the police continue to have a
fundamental role in preventing and suppressing such
acts. It is also necessary to increase local public
awareness of how to prevent crimes and to project the
values of tolerance and peaceful coexistence among all
the elements of Kosovo society.

The reform ofthe judicial system is a crucial step
in the process of re-establishing peace in Kosovo.
Establishing the rule of law and the scrupulous and
non-discriminatory application of the law will tend to
strengthen the faith of all inhabitants in the impartiality
and independence of the judicial system. The
conclusions of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) study of the Kosovo
judicial system shows clearly that the improvements
that have been made to this system are insufficient. We
hope that increasing local judges' awareness of this
situation and the participation of international judges
and prosecutors will be able to remedy the situation.

The issue of refugees is of particular concern as
winter approaches. In this regard my delegation
supports the call of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for a moratorium on the forced
return of refugees to Kosovo. We agree that the
returning refugees have not been housed and taken care
of in a satisfactory manner because of the lack of
infrastructure for receiving them and because of the
limited availability of housing. At the same time, we
congratulate the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for its efforts to
coordinate the assistance and provide the necessary aid
to the most-disadvantaged populations so that they can
grapple with the winter.

The issue of detainees and missing persons
remains one of the principal sources of inter-ethnic
tension. My delegation is pleased by the appointment
of a Special Envoy for Persons Deprived of Liberty
during the Kosovo Conflict, whose mandate covers
prisoners and detainees irrespective of their ethnic
origin. In this regard we urge all the parties concerned
to cooperate with this Envoy, in order to find a solution
to this complex problem as rapidly as possible.

In conclusion I would like to pay tribute to Mr.
Bernard Kouchner and to thank the staff of UNMIK
and of the Kosovo Force for their praiseworthy efforts
to re-establish peace in this region and to apply
resolution 1244 (1999) ofthe Security Council.

