Mr. Martin: When I last briefed the Council a
month ago (see S/PV.6698), I noted that the public
mood in Libya was gradually changing as it
increasingly demanded improved institutional
performance that meets popular expectations, and
accountability and transparency in public affairs; and
that as the countdown towards elections began, civil
society was becoming increasingly assertive in
monitoring and critiquing the performance of the
National Transitional Council (NTC) and the
Government. Criticism of Libya's interim leadership
has grown, and in recent days has been expressed in
ways that go beyond a healthy democratic spirit,
including some physical violence, and has led to the
resignation of the Vice-Chairman of the NTC.

Meanwhile the challenge of reconciliation has
been highlighted in the most serious way by the
outbreak of fighting in Bani Walid. Last week,
Chairman Abdul J alil discussed with me the challenges
the NTC has been encountering in its efforts to appoint
new leadership of the local councils in Bani Walid and
Sirte that would be broadly acceptable to the people of
each city. In the case of Bani Walid, an NTC committee
had held local discussions with all stakeholders in
2
efforts to find a solution. Following my Deputy's visit
to the two cities on 3 and 4 January, the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) issued a call for
more attention, including focused reconciliation efforts
to accelerate their full return to normalcy, and we have
pursued this in our contacts with the authorities.

Regrettably, in the charged local atmosphere, a
security-related incident triggered clashes between
members of the local population and the revolutionary
brigades stationed in the city, as a result of which
several were reportedly killed. This has been
misreported as pro-Al-Qadhafi forces taking back
control of the city. The Government responded by
dispatching units from the national army, and is
currently engaging with all stakeholders to contain the
situation and address the underlying security and
political challenges in Bani Walid.

In very different ways, each of these
developments indicates the problems associated with
the transitional period while the interim authorities
continue to lack the full legitimacy of elected bodies,
at both the national and the local levels. The protests in
Benghazi began as part of a movement to "correct the
path of the revolution" and appear to have been
triggered following widely publicized comments in
early December, made as part of the debate regarding
national reconciliation, about a possible amnesty being
granted to former Al-Qadhafi fighters or members of
his regime. The protests acquired momentum as they
evolved into a platform critical of the NTC's
performance. Demonstrators focused their demands on
calls for greater transparency and accountability, as
well as the needs of the war wounded. There have also
been calls for supporters of the former regime to be
barred from the political process and purged from all
State institutions, and for the reappointment of local
councils based on local elections. Public frustration
regarding the perceived shortcomings in delivery by
the Government is growing.

When full legitimacy can be established only by
elections, some interim legitimacy must be accepted to
determine the framework for the first elections, which
is a key responsibility of the NTC. The interim
Government was established only in late November,
after months during which there was an almost
complete vacuum of governance. Transparency,
communication and consultation are indeed important
elements of fostering confidence and trust in the
interim authorities.
12-21455
But the handicaps are not only on the part of
Libya's leadership. Libya's new media are as yet very
far from being a reliable channel to convey correct
information to the public, and civil society is only
beginning to organize itself into forms that facilitate
consultation. The former regime may have been
toppled, but the harsh reality is that the Libyan people
continue to have to live with its deep-rooted legacy:
weak, at times absent, State institutions, coupled with
the long absence of political parties and civil society
organizations, which render the country's transition
more difficult. This is further complicated by what was
a systematic distortion of the country's socio-political
fabric.

Those of us who engage with the interim
Government meet committed and capable ministers
struggling to address major challenges with little
support in a context of institutional inexperience and
an over-large bureaucracy of uncertain competence and
allegiance. But the public experiences only the delay in
delivery of funds and services. The agreement of the
Sanctions Committee to the request for the delisting of
the Central Bank and the Foreign Bank has cleared the
way to overcoming the crisis of liquidity, but this is
barely beginning to be experienced by national and
local institutions, let alone by the public at large.

The combination of a tight timeline, inexperience
in drafting electoral legislation, shortcomings in
communication and the lack of proper mechanisms for
consultation have set limitations to the process of
drafting the electoral law. The NTC and most
stakeholders have remained determined that the
commitment in the Constitutional Declaration to
electing a national congress by late June must be
respected. This has left little time for consultations on
the legislative framework, which must embody some
difficult and inevitably controversial political choices.

Within the limits of the time available, the NTC
electoral committee made real efforts to engage the
public, publishing the draft law and convening or
participating in a number of public consultations. It
also welcomed close engagement with the UNSMIL
electoral team, adopting many of its technical
recommendations, as well as responding to concerns
expressed in the public consultations. As a result, we
believe that both the main electoral law and the parallel
electoral administration law, which establishes a
l7-member high national electoral commission, gained
in clarity and focus. UNSMIL had presented its
12-21455
concerns in regards to the restrictions in the eligibility
criteria for voters and candidates alike, and welcomes
some progress in making these criteria more inclusive.

Criticism that public consultation has, however,
been inadequate is sharpened by the fact that the
proposed division of the country into constituencies
and allocation of seats has not been published and
remains under discussion by the NTC. Political
groupings are concerned that the law makes no
mention of the rights and responsibilities of political
parties. Of particular concern to UNSMIL, and indeed
to the Secretary-General, is the rejection by the full
NTC of the proposal by the electoral committee that
would have ensured the presence of at least 10 per cent
of women in the National Congress - a proposal that
some women's groups and civil society voices rejected
as insufficient, while according to the electoral
committee there did not appear to be general public
support for any quota.

The NTC has adopted the electoral administration
law and appointed the High National Electoral
Commission, and had intended also to announce the
main electoral law on 22 January. Amid the protests in
Benghazi, however, the NTC decided to continue
consultations and to consider further amendments until
29 January. UNSMIL's electoral experts remain
engaged with the NTC team, and are opening
discussions with the Chairman of the High National
Electoral Commission regarding United Nations
support during the operational stage ahead. We
particularly hope that the extended period may allow
for reconsideration of the case for special measures to
promote the representation of women.

As I have highlighted in all my previous briefings
to the Council, security remains a major concern.
Events on the ground over the past month highlight the
risks associated with both the continued abundance of
weapons on the streets and the diverse armed brigades
in the country with unclear lines of command and
control. In the capital, clashes in early January between
rival brigades from Misrata and Tripoli resulted in
several fatalities and injuries; armed clashes later in the
month between brigades in Gheryan and Al-Asabah,
and earlier this week in Bani Walid, required high level
intervention to put an end to the fighting. Although
authorities have successfully contained these and other
more minor incidents that continue to take place across
the country on a regular basis, there is the ever-present
3
possibility that similar outbreaks of violence could
escalate and widen in scope.

Those at the head of the interim Government
regard it as their highest priority to assert the authority
of the State and address the future of the members of
the brigades. The success of any integration process
will hinge on the ability of the authorities to conduct
consultations with relevant stakeholders to forge a
consensus on the way forward, including agreement on
processes for the integration or reintegration of
ex-combatants, while at the same time setting up
workable mechanisms to deal effectively with security
challenges, including those related to the upcoming
election. As experience has shown elsewhere, this
process cannot be treated as a purely technical
exercise, but requires a political framework to ensure
its viability.

Amid some initial confusion, an inter-ministerial
committee has initiated a process for registering
ex-combatants, the first phase of which will be carried
out by local councils across the country. Information
collected would then be centrally processed, to be
followed by the referral of registrants to the Ministries
of the Interior, Defence or Labour in accordance with
their preferred option. UNSMIL and the United
Nations Development Programme are in discussion
with the relevant ministries and bodies about their
needs for technical assistance.

As regards the police, the Ministry of the Interior
faces the dual challenge of integrating ex-combatants
at the same time as it strengthens and reforms the
inherited police force, its training and administration.
At the request of the Minister, UNSMIL is increasing
its direct advisory support within the Ministry, as well
as supporting its overall coordination of international
assistance. Several Member States have come forward
with offers of training and other assistance, and some
have signed bilateral agreements to support the police
force in a number of areas. UNSMIL's assistance
includes supporting the Ministry in the development of
a training strategy and curricula for a number of
courses, including for election security.

Following the mandate given to UNSMIL in
resolution 2022 (2011), I am now supported by a
special adviser on the threats and challenges posed by
arms and related materiel in Libya. Among his
responsibilities is the continuing coordination of efforts
around the identification and eventual control of man-
portable air defence systems (MANPADS) and other
explosive remnants of war, ammunition storage
management and mine action. UNSMIL has further
strengthened its team by bringing in a MANPADS
expert to support ongoing mapping efforts and an arms
registration advisor.

The joint United Nations/African Union mission
to several Sahel countries in December confirmed
previous assessments that there is as yet little evidence
that MANPADS have been smuggled out of Libya in
significant numbers. This reinforces the need to focus
on arms control measures within Libya. In this respect,
UNSMIL has started co-hosting with the Ministry of
Defence an operational sub-group on MANPADS,
which coordinates the bilateral mapping and
identification efforts currently under way. While so far
123 weapons holding sites have been visited and an
estimated 5,000 MANPADS systems and components
have been accounted for, access to many of the
holdings of brigades remains a challenge.

A number of donors have come forward to lend
their support for action against landmines and
explosive remnants of war in the period since I last
briefed the Council, and I express my thanks for this
generous response. We now have 28 clearance teams
and 30 risk education teams working throughout the
country. New reports of mines and explosives
contamination, however, are being recorded almost on
a daily basis. The current capacity on the ground
remains insufficient to meet the growing demand and,
in the short term at least, greater external financial
support remains necessary to tackle this issue
effectively until Libyan funding becomes available.

There also has been further progress in the
inspection and verification of chemical materials,
particularly of those previously undeclared materials
located after the end of the previous regime and
identified by the new Libyan authorities in their
declaration of 28 November. From 17 to 19 January,
inspectors of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) visited the sites and
verified the declared chemical weapons, which consist
of sulphur mustard agents that were not loaded into
munitions. Libya must now submit to the OPCW a plan
and timeline for the destruction of the declared
materials by the end of April. Several Member States
have indicated their support in this effort. Regarding
nuclear materials, the eventual sale and transfer of the
12-21455
6,400 barrels of nuclear material stored in Sabha
remain a key priority.

The concerns of Libya's neighbours regarding
arms proliferation are mirrored in Libya's own concern
that former Al-Qadhafi supporters may be regrouping
and training in neighbouring countries in order to
destabilize parts of Libya. This, together with an
increase in illegal immigration and drug trafficking at
its southern borders, has led border security and
management to become a top priority of the interim
Government. To this end, UNSMIL has now convened
two coordination meetings with senior representatives
of the Ministries of Defence, Interior, Finance and
Foreign Affairs and relevant bilateral partners to
identify Libya's priority needs in this area and to
facilitate offers of assistance. UNSMIL is coordinating
closely with the European Union, which is fielding its
border management assessment team in February. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the International Organization of
Migration are participating in a sub-group on illegal
immigration and supporting the Libyan authorities
regarding the current influx of Syrian refugees via the
Egyptian border.

On all of these issues, an intensified dialogue
with Libya's neighbours on the threats emanating from
a porous regime on both sides of Libya's borders is
indispensable and has been promoted by the first visits
of Libya's Minister of Foreign Affairs to Niger, Mali
and Chad. Chairman Jean Ping told me during his
recent visit to Tripoli of his positive discussions with
the Government, and welcomed the intention of Prime
Minister El-keib to head Libya's delegation to the
African Union summit later this week.

The Council is about to hear from the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, so I will limit my
own remarks regarding human rights issues. I regret to
report that there has been only limited progress
regarding the situation of detainees since I last briefed
the Council, with the justice system continuing to face
significant challenges in its operations. To date, the
Ministry of Justice has been able to manage six
transfers of detention facilities from brigades to the
Ministry, two since my last briefing. The process of
transferring facilities is hindered by many factors,
including insufficient numbers of judicial police who
carry out core prison administration functions.
UNSMIL continues to press the Government to
expedite those handovers, so that a comprehensive

review of cases of detainees can be undertaken,
culminating either in their release or in formal charges
in accordance with legal standards. The large detainee
caseload is taxing the Ministry's current level of
capacity, with frustrations mounting, which culminated
into a riot two weeks ago at one facility by inmates
protesting their continued detention without due
process.

The outbreaks of local conflicts highlight the
pressing need to adopt and implement a national
framework for transitional justice and reconciliation.
Towards that end, the NTC has adopted a law on
transitional justice, but has so far not made it public,
pending the further development of the judicial and
legal institutions necessary to implement its provisions.
In that regard, UNSMIL, in partnership with the
Ministry of Justice, as well as with the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, organized a conference
from 23 to 25 January to discuss advancing the
transitional justice agenda with national Government
counterparts and members of civil society. The
conference was opened by the Prime Minister, who
stressed the importance of transitional justice to
Libya's progress.

With regard to Libya's efforts to locate and
identify missing people, the Government has decided
to incorporate that responsibility within the Ministry
for the Assistance to the Families of Martyrs and
Missing Persons, and to dissolve the commission that
had been established last October. UNSMIL remains
committed to supporting those efforts within whatever
framework the Government decides, and has urged that
the transfer to the Ministry should not prevent the
process for the search for, and identification of,
missing persons from remaining neutral and
independent, and implemented in accordance with
international standards. The Prime Minister and other
Government officials have assured us that those
principles will continue to guide the Government's
actions.

A positive step towards advancing the protection
of human rights in Libya has been the NTC's
establishment in December of the National Council for
Public Liberties and Human Rights. The ll-member
Council, comprising human rights defenders including
women and youth, is currently engaging in
consultations with Government officials, civil society
and the international community while they prepare
their start-up. UNSMIL will be providing technical
assistance in response to their request.

My Deputy, as Humanitarian Coordinator, and the
Libyan Humanitarian Relief Agency continue to
discuss with representatives of the Tawergha
community displaced in Benghazi and representatives
of the local council ways to address ongoing
humanitarian needs, as well as the possibilities of
promoting a durable solution to this issue.
Approximately one half of the remaining internally
displaced persons in the country are Tawerghans who,
as previously reported, remain unable to return to their
hometown.

On 30 and 31 January, United Nations, European
Union and World Bank representatives will participate
with Libyan ministers, officials and civil society in a
workshop aimed at aligning assistance from the
international community with the Government's urgent
priorities. The Government has decided that this should
focus on seven Government priorities outside the
security sector, namely, civil society and media,
elections, public administration, public financial
management, social service delivery, strategic
communications and transitional justice. We expect
that the workshop will determine whether the
Government wishes to proceed with assessments of
needs in those areas, and its future framework for
coordination of international assistance.

Following the Government's identification of its
priorities, and the ministries' efforts to identify their
objectives and targets for a national transitional plan,
the United Nations has been assisting the Deputy Prime
Minister's Office and the Ministry of Planning
regarding coordination within the Government and
with respect to international assistance. That has
included meetings between United Nations country
team members and ministries to link agencies with
their respective counterparts, so that United Nations
recovery and development activities are in line with
their priorities.

I am very pleased to inform members of the
Council that, on 10 January, the status of mission
agreement was signed by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation, Mr. Ashur Saad
Bin Khayyal, and myself. The signature of the
agreement in such a short period of time since the
establishment of the Mission in mid-September and the
formation of the interim Government in late November
6

is a reflection of the excellent relationship already
established. Meanwhile, we have consulted Libyan
authorities regarding the role of UNSMIL beyond its
current mandate, and are finalizing the integrated
mission planning process, which will be reflected in
the Secretary-General's recommendations in the report
to be submitted to the Council by the end of February.

I think that it is not hard to understand the
contexts of the difficulties facing Libya's interim
authorities, which have been manifested in recent days.
They do indeed require determined political
management by transitional leaders, who must be given
the space to address their internal priorities, rather than
the longer-term interests of external actors. UNSMIL
remains focused on supporting them in those key
challenges, and that will be reflected in the proposals
that I look forward to discussing with the Council on
the basis of the Secretary-General's recommendations
in March.

