Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I am sure that you will ably lead the Security
Council through a productive and fruitful month in May.
Once again, I wish to express the sincere appreciation of
the delegation of China to the members of the Council
for all the support that they have given us during the
month of April. I wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing. China has listened carefully
to the briefings made by Mr. Peter Maurer, President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, and the
representative of Medecins Sans Frontieres.

In recent years, the safety of medical personnel
and humanitarian organizations exclusively engaged
in medical duties and of the medical facilities and
equipment during armed conflict have been increasingly
under threat, which has received broad international
attention. China pays tribute to the medical personnel
and humanitarian-assistance organizations for putting
themselves at risk to save lives and care for the
wounded and sick. We are concerned about the safety
of that personnel and relevant medical facilities and
equipment. We therefore support the enhancing their
protection by the international community.

I wish to emphasize the following four points.

First, protecting medical personnel and facilities
during armed conflict is the inescapable responsibility
of the States and parties to the conflict. States have the
primary responsibility for protecting the population
throughout their entire territory, and they should step
up the protection of medical personnel and facilities.
Parties to the conflict should respect international law,
including international humanitarian law, international
conventions and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in fulfilment of their obligation to protect
medical personnel and facilities, so as to ensure safe
and timely humanitarian access. Acts of violence,
attacks and threats against medical personnel and
facilities during armed conflict should be investigated
and punished by States in accordance with the law. The
international community should provide the necessary
assistance and support on the basis of full consultations
with States.

Secondly, medical personnel and humanitarian
organizations engaged in medical duties should, in
carrying out their humanitarian assistance activities
during armed conflict, fully comply with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
respect the humanitarian principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence in providing
humanitarian assistance, and fully respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, avoiding
any involvement in the conflict or supporting any of the
parties to the conflict. That is the basis of humanitarian
assistance - to win the understanding and trust of
all parties, which serves as an important guarantee to
ensure the safety of medical personnel and facilities in
conflict areas.

Thirdly, the Security Council should actively carry
out preventive diplomacy and political good offices
with the aim of striving towards the settlement of
differences among parties through peaceful means,
including through dialogue and negotiation, so as
to find a political solution to the questions and to
prevent or contain conflicts from escalating in order to
fundamentally prevent medical staff and facilities from
being threatened.

Fourthly, the United Nations should carry out
its actions together with humanitarian assistance
organizations. The United Nations should conduct
in-depth analysis and assessments of the risks and
challenges faced by humanitarian assistance activities
in conflict areas, and, on the basis of respecting
the views of States, maintain communications and
coordination with all parties to conflict in order to step
up the protection of medical personnel and facilities.
The relevant medical staff and humanitarian assistance
organizations should maximize preparedness for their
own safety and protection, while establishing effective
communications mechanisms with States, the parties to
the conflict and the relevant United Nations agencies
and institutions.

