Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (Spoke in Arabic): I extend
to the Security Council a greeting ofpeace on behalf of
the people of Yemen, who aspire to peace.

At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your excellent leadership of the
Security Council for this month. I would also like to
express our great gratitude to you, Sir, for giving us
this opportunity to speak before the Council today. We
would like to express our gratitude to the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed for the great efforts they are undertaking. The
Yemeni Government fully supports their efforts aimed
at achieving at a sustainable peace agreement that would
put an end to the coup against the Yemeni State and
end the war that has been waged by the Houthi-Saleh
coalition against our people since September 2014.

The Council meets today two weeks after a great
deal of activity at the United Nations following the
opening of the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly. The Republic of Yemen participated in the
opening of the session with a high-level delegation, led
by His Excellency President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour. The meetings and dialogues held with various
senior United Nations officials, as well as Security
Council member States, with regard to the situation
in Yemen were especially important. The primary
message of those meetings can be summarized in the
willingness of the Yemeni Government to immediately
meet the requirements for sustainable peace and in
order to put an end to the war in Yemen under the
auspices of the United Nations and the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General on Yemen.

However, we cannot put an end to the war and
achieve peace unilaterally. On the contrary, putting
an end to the war requires the acceptance by the coup
party to return to the negotiating table and to accept
the elements ofpeace, as well as the terms of reference,
in order to put an end to the suffering of our patient
Yemeni people.

The opening of the seventy-second session of
the General Assembly coincided with the three-year
anniversary of the war, which is being waged by the
Houthi/Saleh coalition against the people of Yemen. The
war runs contrary the national consensus, embodied
in the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and
its means of implementation, and the outcomes of the
National Dialogue for a peaceful political transition in
Yemen, which was adopted under the auspices of the
United Nations and with the blessing of the Security
Council. The Security Council held an extraordinary
meeting in Sana'a in January 2013 in order to support
the aspirations of the Yemeni people towards building a
democratic federation based on justice, equality, human
rights and good governance.

Three years have passed since the Houthi/Saleh
coup d'e'tat - the greatest catastrophe ever witnessed
by Yemen - began, and the miserable circumstances
in my country are apparent. The coup has displaced
millions of Yemeni people, inside and outside Yemen.
It has killed tens of thousands of Yemeni citizens and
it continues to indiscriminately shell the heroic city of
Taiz. It has caused the spread of cholera and turned
Sana'a into an enormous prison detaining thousands of
Yemen's best citizens in terms of thinkers, academics,
students and journalists, not to mention the fact that
children are being recruited. The coup has demolished
the homes of its opponents and has changed the
educational curriculums in line with a narrow,
dynastic, religious perspective that proclaims a divine
right to govern the population without observance of
the principles of democracy and pluralism in which we
all believe.

Three years after the beginning of this human
suffering, which is unprecedented in the history of
Yemen, all observers can see that the Houthi/Saleh
alliance is exploiting the security, stability, sovereignty
and humanitarian situation in Yemen. The spread of
health-related disasters is being used in a strategy of
precariousness hatched by Tehran in the context of its
expansionist view of the region and carried out with
the Houthi tentacles in Yemen. In Yemen we can either
accept the rule of the Houthi militias and the imposition
of a Hizbullah-like model or face death and destruction,
as well as the spread of instability and tension in
the region.

The Houthi-Saleh alliance continues to usurp
authority. According to the final report of the Panel
of Experts established in accordance with resolution
2266 (2016), that alliance has looted 70 per cent of the
State's resources (see S/20l7/81). It rejects the peace
initiatives that have been submitted and presented by
the Special Envoy to the Secretary-General on Yemen
in Geneva and Kuwait, the most recent of which was
the Hudaydah initiative, which was welcomed by the
Yemeni Government and discussed in detail by the
President during his meetings in New York. What
cannot be disputed is that the Houthis do not have the
political will to directly engage with the requirements
for peace in Yemen. The political will of the Houthis is
being held hostage by outside forces that do not hope
for security and stability in Yemen or the region.

The Yemeni Government continues to believe
that war cannot be the means by which the Yemeni
crisis will be settled. As everyone knows, the Yemeni
Government did not resort to taking up arms when the
Houthi militias controlled Sana'a. The Government has
made concessions in order to arrive at the controversial
Peace and National Partnership Agreement, which was
rejected by the party responsible for the coup. That
party then hijacked the State, thinking that they would
get away with it by killing the State's leadership and
its opponents and burying the initiative of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the results of the National
Dialogue Conference, which all Yemenis agreed to. The
attendance and participation of the party that carried
out the coup in all the rounds of negotiation in the past
were simply maneuvers used in order to gain time and
impose a criminal scheme that aims to destroy Yemen
and assault neighbouring States. That is all within an
agenda that is being carried out by Iran in order to
spread tension and destabilize the region by creating
tension and fabricating conflicts, which fuel sectarian
violence and swell feelings of hatred. Such actions
spread violence and chaos within the region.

Sustainable peace will not be achieved if Iran does

not stop interfering in Yemen's affairs and in the affairs
of the region. The world must today take a collective
stand in order to reign in Iran's expansionist greed.
The experience of the Ayatollah's oppressive regime,
which was rejected by the Iranian people, cannot be
imposed on Yemen. The terms of reference for peace
in Yemen, which are embodied in the initiative of the
Gulf Cooperation Council, the outcome of the National
Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, include the necessary elements to guarantee
a sustainable solution to the Yemeni crisis. Moreover,
resolution 2216 (2015) is gaining more strategic
importance with time. The framework of reference for
the international community is growing, along with the
unified position of the Security Council regarding the
Yemeni crisis. It strongly confirms that any sustainable
solution to the Yemeni crisis can be based only on the
withdrawal of the militias responsible for the coup and
the return of power to the State, as well as the handing
over of weapons and rockets of the State. Only the State
should be in possession of weapons.

Before the General Assembly, President Hadi said
that the rockets targeting the territories of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, as well as those that the militias
have threatened to use against the territories of the
United Arab Emirates, which have a range of over 600
kilometres, are Iranian rockets (see A/72/PV.ll). He
said that they are distinct from the rockets that are in
the possession of the Yemeni army.

The Yemeni Government has limited capabilities
and is undergoing a very complicated situation.
Additionally, it faces great challenges in the economic,
security and services sectors because of the war and the
destruction that it has wrought on all facets of daily life.
Yemen is in dire need ofinternational assistance in order
to support its own efforts to entrench peace and security
and activate services in the liberated areas, commence
reconstruction and remedy security breaches. It must
also continue with its efforts to combat terrorism. Yemen
continues to need support, due to the levels of poverty
and the lack of food security, especially in areas that
are being shelled on a daily basis by the militias, such
as the besieged city of Taiz, which has been under siege
for over two and a half years. In the governorates under
control of the coup forces, there is a dire humanitarian
situation, as a result of the rebels' refusal to pay wages
to employees of the State in the sectors of health care
and education. The militias continue to loot funds and
resources from the customs and tax authorities. They
continue to loot the reserves of the Central Bank in
order to fund the so-called Houthi popular committees
and war efforts. They continue to fully drain economic
and financial institutions.

The role of the private sector has diminished
and, in its place, a sector of war merchants has been
created. That has been enabled by capital being gained
during the war by people who are taking advantage of
opportunities to rob humanitarian aid in order to traffic
fuel and weapons, loot public funds and impose mafia-
style protection tactics on normal citizens who are being
deprived of their monthly wages. School curriculums
have not been safe from the onslaught. They have
been replaced by extremist, racist curriculums that
encourage a culture of conflict, violence and religious

sectarianism, which represents a clear reproach to the
rest of the world. The Yemeni Government calls upon
the international community to pressure the rebels to
accept the Hudaydah initiative of Mr. Cheikh Ould
Ahmed. There must be further initiatives in order to
build confidence and mobilize the resources ofthe State
and transfer tax and customs revenues at the Hudaydah
port to the branch of the Central Bank in Hudaydah, in
coordination with the branch in Aden. The Government
has also pledged to cover the deficit accrued from
paying the salaries of civil servants, especially in major
sectors, such as education and health care and areas
under militia control.

Our people have not been paid in a year and
the militias refuse to cooperate with the Yemeni
Government, the Special Envoy or international
organizations, such as the World Bank, to pay the
wages of our people. Faced with such a catastrophic
situation, we call upon Member States to shoulder the
responsibilities of the Yemeni crisis by pressuring the
rebel forces to implement Security Council resolutions
and offering real concessions, so that Yemen can be
spared from further bloodshed. We must work towards
allowing access to humanitarian aid for all Yemenis
living under the control of rebel forces.

The Yemeni Government is most concerned with
alleviating the suffering of our people. The Yemeni
Government has repeatedly expressed its readiness to
reopen the airport in Sana'a to humanitarian flights,
provided that the militias exit the airport and hand over
management duties of the airport to the professional
staff that ran it before September 2014, under the
supervision of the United Nations. We could open
the airport in Sana'a today if the militias abided by
those conditions.

Dealing with the Yemeni crisis from a humanitarian
perspective, despite its importance, without paying
due attention to the political perspective or working
towards arriving at a sustainable political solution
to the Yemeni issue, is simply an exercise in damage
control that would prolong the war and suffering caused
by the coup carried out by the Houthi-Saleh militias.
Therefore, the Security Council's serious desire to deal
with the humanitarian situation in Yemen is being put
to the test, because it must help deal with the root causes
of the crisis, as opposed to just treating the symptoms.

In conclusion, we highly value the great efforts
being exerted by the international community and the
Ambassadors of the Group of 18 to achieve security and
stability in Yemen. I take this opportunity to reiterate
the call made by President Hadi to the friends of
Yemen to resume their efforts to implement peace and
reconstruction in the country. On behalf of Yemen, I
would like to renew our thanks and appreciation to the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates,
as well as to the rest of the States of our coalition, for
their efforts to restore legitimacy, security and stability
in Yemen and aid its people.

