Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): This is the last time that
Ethiopia will speak on this subject in the Council, and
our position on this issue remains the same. The referral
by the Security Council of the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and the subsequent
developments concerning the President of the Sudan
do more harm than good. To make matters worse, the
way the ICC has liberally interpreted and applied the
Council's referral is very short-sighted, with grave
implications for the peace and security of the Sudan
and the region.

That also continues to be the position ofthe African
Union (AU), which should not be surprising. It is well
known that the manner in which the ICC has operated
has left a very bad impression in Africa, and that is
why Africa has been expressing serious reservations
about the ICC that have been reflected in a number of
decisions adopted by the African Union's policy organs.
The African Union Commission is taking the necessary
legal and other initiatives to address those issues based
on the decision of the African Union Assembly of
Heads of State and Government. However, the intent
of those exercises should not be misunderstood. As
a matter of fact, many of the member States of the
African Union were among the first to ratify the Rome
Statute. Time and again we in Africa have affirmed
our unflinching commitment to fighting impunity
and promoting democracy, the rule of law and good
governance throughout the continent, in accordance
with the Constitutive Act of the African Union, and that
has been empirically validated by bold actions taken by
the AU in recent times.

The AU reiterates that the quest for justice should
be pursued in a manner that is not detrimental to the
quest for peace. The Security Council's referral of
the situation in Darfur runs counter to that, which is
why the AU has repeatedly asked that the proceedings
against President Omar Al-Bashir be suspended and
urged the Security Council to withdraw its referral to
the ICC. It is indeed regrettable that Africa's repeated
request has so far been neither heard nor acted on.
What the African leaders have requested is far from
difficult for the Security Council to meet. The Council
has simply been asked to discharge its responsibility
under the Charter, and as far as we are concerned, there
is no legitimate reason to reject the request. The issue
of the ICC has remained a nuisance in the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union, and
the sooner we address it through genuine dialogue based
on trust and understanding, the better it will be for our
ability to address challenges to peace and security in
Africa. That is the kind of opportunity that Africa has
been looking for but has been denied by the Council.

Turning to the situation in Darfur, we are pleased
to note once again that it continues to improve and
can no longer be characterized as an armed conflict
between Government forces and non-State actors. The
problem now is basically the lack of development. It
is in recognition of that that the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Secretary-General
of the United Nations have recommended that the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur wind down its operation in Darfur and that the
role and capacity of the United Nations country team be
strengthened in exchange. For its part, the Government
of the Sudan is making significant efforts to find durable
solutions to the suffering of the people of Darfur.
Such efforts require substantial assistance from the
international community to ensure their sustainability.
We are also encouraged by recent developments in
the political process. We welcome the signing of the
pre-negotiation agreement for the resumption of the
peace process in Darfur. We trust that it will serve as
a stepping stone to concluding a comprehensive peace
agreement forthwith. We call on the holdout groups
to join the peace process without conditions and avail
themselves of the positive trends. We have no doubt that
the Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council will use their comparative advantages to make
refusing the call to join the peace process cost dearly.

Finally, we are witnessing at first-hand the
constructive role the Sudan is playing in dealing with
peace and security issues in the region, including on
fighting terrorism, combating human trafficking
and illicit migration, regional peace and stability and
humanitarian relief. In fact, the Sudan is becoming
increasingly important and indispensable player in the
region and beyond. It would only be appropriate for the
Council and the international community at large to
review their approach towards the Sudan in the light
those developments. It is high time that the undue
politicization that has victimized the President of the
Sudan come to an end.
