At the outset, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines extends our compliments to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Antonio Guterres, and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat. We thank them both for their insightful remarks, and we commend the Republic of the Niger for convening this important and timely discussion. The overlapping health, socioeconomic, political and security risks precipitated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have converged to present our multilateral system with its most complex challenge since the Second World War. This pandemic will claim more than 1| million lives, as it destroys the livelihoods of millions more globally. Given these profoundly altered conditions for life, living and production, our world will never be the same again. It is therefore of critical importance that we adapt our systems of global governance to this extremely challenging contemporary reality. Turbulent times bear disproportionately on the vulnerable - on refugees, displaced persons and those made stateless due to painful cycles of violent conflict; on women and children, who shoulder an unequal share of the social and political burdens; on the communities and families that become fractured due to instability and unrest; and on conflict-affected countries that struggle to safeguard their social contracts as emerging threats such as COVID-19, and existing risk multipliers such as climate change, present themselves in novel ways posing unprecedented security, humanitarian and political challenges. COVID-19 has laid bare the undisputable fact that today's complex challenges will not be solved by military strategies. Nor can they be effectively addressed in siloes. Moreover, this pandemic has presented incontrovertible proof that, in our increasingly interconnected world, the uneven development of economies, health- care systems and governance institutions produces vulnerabilities that affect us all. We can protect ourselves only by protecting each other. In this regard, we can, and we must, do better to build capacities for the most vulnerable among us, and to promote inclusivity, peace and resilience in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. This remains the primary blueprint for a peaceful, just and secure world. In order to tackle the root causes of insecurity and ensure that conflict- affected countries are able to restore trust in public institutions, repair their social fabrics and advance political processes to achieve national unity and reconciliation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphasizes the need for predictable and reliable development financing. We reiterate our calls to developed countries to honour their overseas development assistance commitments. We also reiterate that a lack of meaningful action by some States to curb their emissions and to set and honour ambitious pledges for climate adaptation and mitigation serves to perpetuate climate-driven security risks in many fragile contexts. To those that suffer the effects of climatic hazards, this failure by major emitters is an act of hostility. From Haiti to the Horn of Africa to the Middle East, the peace and security implications of climate change must be comprehensively acknowledged and robustly addressed. As we embark on the decade of action to accelerate progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals, integrated and coherent strategies that bring together all United Nations organs and specialized agencies, within their respective mandates, are urgently needed. Only through a renewed multilateralism that places people at its centre, considers the needs and perspectives of all Member States equally and fully respects the guiding principles of international law can we effectively address the challenges of the twenty-first century.
