Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
We are honoured to see you, Sir, preside over the
Council's meeting. I would like to start by
commending Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani of
Singapore, the current President of the Council, and
Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul of Mauritius, the
Chairman of the Working Group, for organizing this
special meeting devoted, yet again, to the situation in
Africa. It is our intention to make a modest
contribution to the workings of the Working Group.
But before I do that, I would like to congratulate the
people of East Timor for achieving statehood. The
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
deserve our commendation.

As we are meeting, my delegation would like to
register our appreciation and delight at the good news
emanating from The Hague with respect to the border
conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea, from Luanda,
the capital of Angola, and from Freetown in Sierra
Leone. The Ethiopia-Eritrea border conflict has been
settled, and the two countries have accepted the
arbitration of the Boundary Commission. In Angola, a
general amnesty has been proclaimed to UNITA
fighters and a Memorandum of Understanding has been
signed between the Government and UNITA. A few
days ago, the Council lifted sanctions on UNITA for 90
days. The latest good news is the peaceful outcome of
the presidential and parliamentary elections in Sierra
Leone. In all these cases, the peoples of those countries
deserve our very hearty congratulations. But it would
be remiss not to recognize the positive and active
participation of the United Nations and of the Security
Council, in particular.
It is against that backdrop that these deliberations
are being held today. In all three cases war situations
have been resolved through the use of different
mechanisms. But one thing is certain and evident, and
that is that the Security Council worked in close
collaboration with regional and local entities. Perhaps
the Working Group could go over the elements that
were positive and isolate the negatives in order to
expedite conflict resolution.

In the light of the above positive developments,
we may wish to ask whether there is a need to revisit
all resolutions pertaining to the three resolved conflicts
and determine what elements are still outstanding so
that they can be programmed for resolution.

In the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, from where the Security Council Mission has
just returned, it is heartening to note that the inter-
Congolese dialogue took place in Sun City, South
Africa. From the reports we have seen, substantial
progress was made. We expect that the Council will
stay engaged until all the outstanding issues are sorted
out and ownership of the process returns squarely to
Congolese hands. However, at this stage it is important
to commend the Congolese people on the achievements
registered. Along with that, we took note with
appreciation of the destruction of 1,000 firearms during
the Security Council Mission's visit to Kisangani.

Trafficking in illegal small arms and light
weapons is the worst scourge in African conflicts. It
will be recalled that the Council has had occasion to
address the issue. I need not over-emphasize here that
African conflicts cannot be resolved without also
addressing the perennial problem of illegal trafficking
in small arms and light weapons.

Peace is central to addressing the development
equation of Africa. African leaders are determined to
bring positive change to the continent. The people are
yearning for peace so that poverty, ignorance and
disease can be confronted head on. It is, therefore,
important that the Council become an active partner for
change. At this juncture, I would like to underscore the
postulates ofthe 2000 Millennium Summit with respect
to the plight of Africa. We hope that the Working
Group will not try to reinvent the wheel. Rather, we
hope that it will analyse the various proposals and
come up with workable solutions.

I need also to state here that some progress was
achieved in Burundi by the end of last year. After four
years of protracted negotiations, an agreement was
reached and one of the recommendations was an
interim power-sharing arrangement. The transitional
Government was installed on 1 November last year. In
12 months there will be a changeover. Fighting,
unfortunately, is still continuing, but the regional
leaders are working very hard to secure a ceasefire. At
the international level, it would appear that there is a
wait-and-see attitude. That is not helpful.

The pledges made in Paris have not been
honoured. The Transitional Government needs the aid
that was promised. It is our conviction that, if
assistance were given to the Transitional Government,
it would greatly help cement peace by isolating the
rebels for what they are. I cannot overstate the fact that
conflict resolution has elements of "the carrot and the
stick". It is vitally important that the two elements are
carefully calibrated. Otherwise, all the efforts will
come to naught.

Let me conclude my statement with a few general
observations, which I hope the Working Group will
address as well.

One of the unintended consequences of conflicts
is the movement of peoples, either as refugees or as
internally displaced persons. Tanzania has been host to
refugees since long before its independence. Currently,
we host over 500,000 refugees from Burundi and over
170,000 from the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. It
is a huge responsibility. We submit, therefore, that
conflict resolution mechanisms should at all times be
factored into the plight of refugees. I am aware that
disarmament, demobilization, reinsertion, repatriation
and resettlement are an integral part of the conflict
resolution mechanism. I am, therefore, flagging the
issue of refugees, so that it is does remain an
afterthought.

The second issue is the question of the
relationship between the Council and local actors. I
raise this because of three considerations. The Council
is entrusted with the overall authority for securing
international peace and security. Along with that
mandate is the power to impose sanctions. Given the
fact that it is the neighbours of a conflict area who bear
the brunt of the fallout of the conflict, it is our View
that sound coordination is vital. The region is closer to
the scene on a daily basis and punitive measures by
neighbours have managed to cajole an obstinate
Government to negotiate. Yet, in the light of past
experience, the Working Group could discuss the issue
and come up with recommendations as to how best to
use regional mechanisms to enforce Council mandates.

Last but not least, I would like to address the
issue of peacekeeping operations in Africa. There have
been misgivings with regard to the handling by the
Security Council of African peacekeeping operations.
There is a perception out there that there has been a lot
of hesitation and under-subscription. The Sierra Leone
experience is instructive. There were, indeed, two
peacekeeping operations: one by the United Nations
under the Security Council and the other by a leading
member of the Council. It is quite obvious that that
model cannot be replicated elsewhere in the continent,
but the Working Group could examine the implications
and the ramifications of such an experiment. I have
referred only to the presence of two operations in the
same area with different command structures. I did not
tackle the firepower at the disposal of each of the
forces. That can be analysed by the Working Group.

In conclusion, I will only make brief reference to
the importance of the peace dividend in any conflict
resolution. The African drama has been documented
extensively. Indeed, all analyses emphasize the
preponderance of poverty. It is our hope that in
working on blueprints for conflict resolution, the
question of humanitarian assistance and overall
development will be given pride of place.

This initiative is welcome. But I would like to
conclude by hoping that special sessions do not replace
African initiatives; at the end of the day very little is
achieved on the ground. With the good will of all, I am
quite sure that peace can prevail in the continent and
that African development can become a reality.

