Mr. Mpinganjira (Malawi): Malawi is very pleased
to participate in this debate under your presidency, Sir.
Dutch interest and involvement in Africa and African
issues are quite well known and very well documented.
We are therefore delighted that you were able to call for
this meeting to discuss the situation in Africa.

We are also most grateful to Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his useful briefing on the state of Africa,
coming as it does soon after the briefing by President
Frederick Chiluba of Zambia last week. We also thank
the Secretary General of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), Salim Ahmed Salim, for his inspiring
statement this morning.

There is no doubt that the messages that are coming
out of this ancient continent are significant. These are
declarations of renewed African commitment, signs of
resolve and promises to act for peace and prosperity.
These are voices that have come most recently from
Algiers and from Sirte, with echoes all over the continent.
They are calls that we believe should be taken seriously.

The question that always arises, though, is: what can
the international community do to respond to Africa's
call? And what can the Security Council, consistent with
its responsibilities under the Charter, do to assist Africa?

The Secretary-General's incisive report on Africa
last year was very specific in the recommendations that
were offered. We stand by the statement that South Africa
made then on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) countries. We are
pleased that the relevant principal organs of the United
Nations, including the Security Council, have devoted
some time and effort to analysing and responding to the
contents of that important report.

Given that it takes time for matters of this nature to
coalesce and crystallize, the question still remains whether

 

the response of the international community has been
commensurate with the call to act with urgency, as
contained in the Secretary General's report. The progress
report of the Secretary-General, while optimistic, clearly
shows that more needs to be done.

Today almost everybody acknowledges that since the
end of the cold war, the world has undergone momentous
and significant changes. The winds of change that have
swept through the globe have rekindled hopes for a better
future. Democracies have blossomed, although many remain
nascent and fragile. Military dictatorships have started to
give way to civilian governments.

At the end of the cold war, there were even calls for
a new world order. However, most of those that have the
capacity to help Africa and enable it to change for the
better are reluctant to take any action, claiming that their
national interests or the protection of their vital interests do
not permit them so to do.

Quite often we have looked the other way, allowing
arms, diamonds and other mineral resources to be sold in
order to protect our vital business interests and in the name
of free trade, knowing full well that such arms or the
proceeds of such sales were being used in armed conflict.
We have deliberately broken the sanctions regimes.

Quite often we have used aid and technical assistance
to advance our own interests. Otherwise, how does one
explain the statement in the Secretary-General's report that
90 per cent of the $12 billion a year spent on technical
assistance is still spent on foreign expertise? We can and
must do something to change this, because clearly Africa is
not getting what it is said to be getting.

The point that we are trying to make is that so long as
national interests or vital interests continue to inform and
direct our involvement in international affairs, the chances
that meaningful change will come appear very slim. We
must redefine "national interest". It must of necessity give
way where international consensus to act exists. It must not
block such consensus.

While the task is not easy, it should not be difficult
for the Security Council. Under the Charter of this
Organization the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security rests with the Security
Council. This is a responsibility that the entire membership
has conferred on the Council. The Council must therefore
act to advance the interests of the international community
as a whole and not of individual members of the Council or
the General Assembly. The United Nations, particularly
the Security Council, should not and must not be seen as
being insensitive to African problems and crises. It cannot
afford to allow such a perception to germinate.

Africa is worried that our crises are receiving less
and less attention from an international community which
is devoting more and more attention elsewhere. In the
process, whole countries in Africa have been allowed to
disappear. For example, Somalia is no longer around
today as a country, otherwise it would have been
represented in this Chamber. And yet the international
community and all of us Africans, as well as everyone
else, are watching.

The Security Council has the capacity to act
resolutely and expeditiously in response to crises in
Africa. Many countries in Africa are ready to assist. We
have the commitment. In southern Africa, for example,
SADC forces have re-established peace in Lesotho, and
SADC forces and SADC peace initiatives, led by
President Chiluba, have re-established the peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are waiting for
the Security Council to commit the necessary troops to
keep the peace in that country. But time is of the essence;
the peace there is fragile. If we wait too long, we cannot
be too sure of what is going to happen next.

My own country is keen to be more involved in
peacekeeping operations. We are ready to provide troops
in the service of peace. We have participated in the
African Crisis Response Initiative, sponsored by the
United States Government, precisely because we want to
be able to respond to humanitarian crises and
peacekeeping challenges in a timely manner. We have
also indicated to the Secretariat our readiness to enter into
the Standby Arrangement System. At the same time, we
are the first to realize that our intention to participate in
peacekeeping operations cannot be achieved without
financial assistance and logistical support. We will
continue to rely on outside help for this. We have no
alternative. We have no choice. The United Nations and
OAU trust funds established to improve preparedness for
conflict prevention and peacekeeping in Africa must be
properly resourced. The Security Council can also play an
important role in preventive diplomacy or conflict
prevention. A clear and unequivocal message, and indeed
action early on in a dispute or crisis, can make all the
difference.

After so many years of dictatorship, my country is
now a democracy where all human rights and

 

fundamental freedoms are respected and promoted. Within
the constraints of our resources and financial assistance
from developing partners, we are trying our best to build
and strengthen our democratic institutions. Unfortunately,
it is not an easy task. The international climate has not been
favourable, particularly to small countries like mine.
Poverty and underdevelopment are a source of immense
hardship to our people. We give this example only to
buttress the point that the democracies that are spawning
will remain fragile if the international community does not
assist them to overcome their economic and financial
problems. We ourselves have obeyed and followed ever so
religiously all prescriptions by the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), but we are still as poor
and backward as we were.

The biggest challenge for the international community
will be to build a durable peace and promote economic
growth in Africa. Such a challenge can be met only by
moving beyond our own national or vital interests. The
African people need meaningful assistance, assistance that
is people-centred. The Secretary-General was quite right in
pointing out that it is in deeds rather than in declarations
that the international community's commitment to Africa
will be measured. This is a challenge that we must all live
up to. That is why I was so delighted to hear the
revolutionary speech made earlier this morning by the
United Kingdom, and indeed by the solidarity expressed in
all the speeches that I have heard here today. It is my
prayer that Africa will now receive renewed attention and
action.

It is my hope that when all the pieces are put together,
when the principal organs have concretized their responses
to the Secretary-General's report, this will lead to Africa
and its people enjoying enduring peace and prosperity.

There have been references to the question of the
control of small arms in Africa. We believe that that issue
should not be a major problem at all, because we all know
the sources of those small arms.
If those who produce small arms have the will to help
Africa, they will be able to do so. There is no point in
asking us in Africa to take action against small arms when
they keep being pumped into Africa every day. We have
seen how, because of reasons beyond our control, our
resources in Africa - resources in battle-ridden
countries - are being utilized. The whole world looks
away in order to allow unscrupulous businessmen to trade
minerals for arms in order for us to be able to continue to
fight each other. The countries of the West - the
developed countries - have a moral responsibility to
ensure that there is stricter control over arms flowing into
Africa.

AIDS is eating away at the whole of Africa. We
believe that in this respect, too, Africans are working
hard, encouraging people on the continent to change their
attitudes. However, for those already afflicted by the
disease, only cheaper medication available to a large
majority of people would help ease the problem. As of
now, most of the drugs used to treat AIDS are not
affordable for the majority of Africans, and this will
therefore continue to pose a major problem.

