Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour to speak before you, Sir,
representative of a friendly country such as France. At
the same time, I should like to express my delegation's
congratulations to the former President of the Council,
the representative of Colombia, on his excellent work
during his tenure. I should also like to congratulate the
representatives of Angola, Chile, Germany, Pakistan
and Spain, who have just joined the Council.

First of all, I should like to express Ecuador's
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his new and
important report on children and armed conflict
(S/2002/1299), in which he presents an account of
activities undertaken and progress achieved related to
that crucial issue during the period of the report. We
express our congratulations to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict on his valuable initiatives and on
the commitments reached in various countries in order
to ensure the protection and well-being of children
during and after conflicts, as well as compliance with
obligations arising from international law. We
encourage the Special Representative to continue to
undertake all necessary efforts, in coordination with the
competent bodies, to achieve increasingly significant
results and commitments.

It is also important to highlight - as the
Secretary-General did in his report - the adoption by
the General Assembly of the document "A world fit for
children", annexed to resolution S-27/2, in which the
Assembly agreed on a renewed commitment to protect
children during armed conflicts, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
The Security Council resolutions in that area and
effective compliance with them are also important
means to contribute to that objective.

Other important advances in that sphere are the
entry into force of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, as well as
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
which ensures that the gravest significant crimes for
the international community - among which are
crimes committed specifically against children - will
not go unpunished. The strengthening of international
law in that sphere, respect for it and effective
application of it are indispensable in order to guarantee
the necessary protection for children, especially in the
light of the persistence of conflicts of all kinds in
various regions of the world. We also welcome the
progress that has been made in the incorporation of the
issue of the protection of children as an essential
component of the work of peacemaking, peace-building
and peacekeeping.
One of the saddest and most tragic realities that
we see in various parts of the world today is the
unspeakable suffering experienced by the innocent and
most helpless victims of society - children - as a
result of armed conflicts. The report of the Secretary-
General describes that intolerable reality, including the
risks to which children are exposed as a result of
landmines, unexploded ordnance and small arms and
light weapons. It also discusses the serious situation of
displaced children and the exploitation and abuses of
every kind to which children are exposed. Therefore,
the international community must accord high priority
to the situation through the implementation of better
concrete measures to guarantee children's most
fundamental rights and to mitigate and prevent the
pernicious effects that armed conflicts have on them.

In his report, the Secretary-General also
emphasizes the problems related to child soldiers.
Nothing is more inhuman and more contrary to the
highest values of any society than the fact that, instead
of toys, children are forced or permitted to handle
instruments of death; that human beings, in the earliest
stages of their existence, are dragged into violence,
confrontation and destruction. The solution to this
problem must, of course, be a United Nations priority.

Ecuador wishes to note the list included in the
Secretary-General's report, at the request of the
Security Council, of the parties to armed conflict that
recruit or use child soldiers, in violation of applicable
international obligations. This is an important
development, through which we no longer speak in
general terms concerning the brutal realities that exist
in various regions and fully identified areas. Instead,
we are identifying specific parties, which will allow us
to encourage State and non-State actors involved to
alter their behaviour and to adhere to the basic norms
of human rights and international humanitarian law.

Although much remains to be done, the progress
noted by the Secretary-General in his report on the
issue of protecting children in armed conflict, while
limited, is praiseworthy. We hope that it will continue
and that the necessary efforts and actions will be
stepped up in order to ensure that the world can truly
become a place fit for children.

