Mr. Al-Hadaifi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on Malaysia's assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month. We thank you for
convening this meeting to discuss a theme of great
importance to the most vulnerable segment of society,
namely, children. Qatar commends your delegation's
efforts in chairing the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.

The Security Council's ongoing consideration
of this topic reflects the importance which the
international community attaches to the protection of
children, based on its understanding that building safe
and stable societies and achieving peace and security
in the world starts with the protection of children and
providing them with a safe and sound environment.
Despite the commitments undertaken in the framework
of international humanitarian law governing parties
to conflict that are intended to protect civilians in
armed conflict, and despite the fact that international
humanitarian law insists that warfare must be
bound by respect for the lives of civilians, given the
devastating impact of armed conflict on individuals
and societies - particularly children, who pay the
heaviest price as its most vulnerable, helpless and most
affected victims - we have all seen the grave impact
of war on the cognitive, physical and psychological
development of the children in armed conflict, as well
as its consequent effects on society.

International human rights law and instruments and
the Council's resolutions all provide for the protection
of children, particularly protections in accordance with
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and its additional
protocols. Article 77 of Protocol I of 1977 stipulates
that

"[c]hildren shall be the object of special respect
and shall be protected against any form of indecent
assault. The Parties to the conflict shall provide
them with the care and aid they require, whether
because of their age or for any other reason".

Similarly, article 38 of the 1989 (2011) Convention on
the Rights of the Child, which has been ratified by all
countries, stipulates the protection of children in armed
conflict.
Qatar believes in the importance of education and
its positive impact on children's development a sound
basis, free from violence and extremism. It is our
conviction that the right to education and concurrent
responsibilities are not rescinded due to armed conflict.
Children's rights must therefore be protected. The State
of Qatar attaches great importance to guaranteeing
children's education in times of crisis. This concern
was reflected in the establishment of the Education
Above All Foundation, which seeks to offer education
opportunities to societies suffering from conflict
and poverty. The Foundation has developed such
programmes as the Educate a Child initiative, which
has been implemented in cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
We provide education to children and empower them in
situations of armed conflict.

My country also supports the Safe Schools
Declaration which was adopted at the Oslo conference
last year under the them "Protect education from attack".
We continue to focus on that issue and organized, in
cooperation with the Qatari Education Above All
Foundation and a number of permanent missions,
a high-level event on the margins of the seventieth
session of the General Assembly to empower children
and promote their inclusion in development efforts.
It aims to provide them with skills and knowledge,
protect them from exploitation and protect their right to
a decent standard of living.

Children must live in a safe environment, free from
fear and displacement. We are therefore taking ongoing
measures to implement ajoint plan of action to that end.

Another important issue that we wish to highlight
is the responsibility of parties to a conflict to ensure
the delivery of assistance to children, which is a
critical obligation. The Fourth Geneva Convention
requires that civilians, even when associated with
the enemy, enjoy free access to medical supplies and
other items, including food, vaccines and medication.
In that regard, the State of Qatar is concerned about
violations that continue to affect child victims in the
occupied Palestinian territories and in Syria. Children
will continue to be be harmed and suffer until the
international community can achieve a settlement
to those conflicts. In that context, the Council must
prioritize the protection of children as it addresses
those matters.

Tolerant Islamic shariah law played a pioneering
role in developing rules on protecting children from
the scourge of armed conflict. Any professional
involved in international humanitarian law knows
that the provisions of Islamic shariah law are in line
with international humanitarian law and international
instruments on the protection of children in conflict, as
confirmed in a number of studies and literature issued
by the International Committee of the Red Cross. The
international coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen
has therefore taken great pains to protect civilians
there and to offer them humanitarian assistance, and
to treat children with special care in accordance with
international humanitarian law and religious law.

Qatar is determined to maintain its principled
position and commitments in order to maintain its
cooperation with the international community to ensure
an enabling environment for the protection of children,
not only during armed conflict but at all times and in
all circumstances, so that they can grow up in a healthy
and sound environment that nurtures their potential and
turns them into peacemakers, thereby generating hope
in their societies and for humankind as a whole.

