Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to join my
colleagues in thanking the Secretary-General for his
enlightening briefing today and, of course, affirming
our full support to him in his efforts regarding the
prevention of conflict.

As I was listening to my colleagues I found myself
envisioning the signing of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, an international document that has
become vital to respect for human dignity, emphasizing
the universality, indivisibility, interdependence and
progressivity of human rights as an essential part of
international law. Development, peace and human
rights, as we have seen, are also closely linked and
interdependent. Since the promulgation of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the international
community has agreed on a number of international
norms - such as the International Covenants on
Civil and Political Rights and Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights - and we have gone even further than
that, recognizing collective rights such as the right to
peace and to development, which are not spoken of
as much as they once were, and the right to a healthy,
clean environment.

Today, human rights represent one of the
fundamental pillars in the multilateral arena in which we
work. Clearly, a number of situations that the Security
Council has to address are connected to it, owing to
its cross-cutting nature. And that is the case with the
various peacekeeping operations and special political
missions whose mandates include human rights issues.
We consider it crucial to ensure that civilian, police
and military personnel all act within a framework of
absolute respect for human rights and for the local
population, as well as any third parties involved. We
should also emphasize the importance of those missions
for promoting, evaluating, monitoring and protecting
human rights. We therefore firmly condemn any form
of sexual abuse, commercial sexual exploitation or
other activity that violates the dignity and freedom
of the people in areas where United Nations military,
police or civilian personnel are deployed.

Every mission has its own particularities. It is
important to analyse them on a case-by-case basis in
order to decide whether it is relevant to include human
rights issues in their mandates. The approach in that
regard will depend on the various contexts affecting
each individual situation, which means that there is no
single formula that applies to all missions.

While human rights cut across the issues we
address, it is important to remember that the Charter
of the United Nations gives the Security Council
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. It is not supposed to concern itself
with generally promoting the protection of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms. In that regard, the
General Assembly, in its resolution 60/251 of 3 April
2006, reaffirmed the universality and indivisibility of
human rights and created the Human Rights Council
as the principal United Nations entity responsible for
promoting universal respect for their protection. The
resolution also recognized the importance of ensuring
universality, objectivity and non-discrimination in
considering human rights issues, of eliminating double
standards and avoiding politicization.

The Human Rights Council also serves as a forum
for dialogue on all human rights issues and is the
main arena for dealing with human rights violations,
including serious and systematic ones. We would like
to highlight the Universal Periodic Review process,
which so far is the only universal mechanism enabling
every country to inform the international community
about its fulfilment of its human rights obligations and
commitments within a framework of objectivity and
access to reliable information, under the auspices ofthe
Human Rights Council.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia affirms the
views of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
which brings together 120 States Members of
our Organization - almost two-thirds of the
membership - as expressed in a recently issued
communique that outlines the Movement's position
taken at its latest Summit. I will read out some
paragraphs in English, the language that it was
originally issued in. The group of the Heads of State of
the Non-Aligned Movement

(Spoke in English)

"[r]eiterates its concern over the continuing
encroachment by the Security Council on the
functions and powers of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council through
addressing issues which traditionally fall within the
competence of the latter organs, and the attempts
to enter areas of norm-setting, administrative and
budgetary matters and establishing definitions
which fall within the purview of the Assembly;
further expresses concern over the constant
attempts by the Security Council to use some
thematic issues under its consideration, including
those related to human rights, to expand its
mandate into areas which do not pose a threat to
international peace and security and further urges
the Council to confine to its mandate in accordance
with the charter provisions;

"Reaffirms its commitment to the promotion
and protection of all human rights without
discrimination and underlines that democracy,
sustainable development and the respect of all
human rights, civil and political; economic, social
and cultural rights, in their universal, indivisible
and interdependent character, including the
right to development, are all closely related and
mutually reinforcing;

"Reaffirms that democracy, development
and respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing, and that the international community
should support the strengthening and promotion
of democracy, development and respect for all
human rights and fundamental freedoms in
the entire world, without distinction between
developed and developing countries, in compliance
with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter;

"Opposes and stops ongoing attempts to shift
issues under the agenda of the General Assembly
or the Economic and Social Council to the Security
Council, and the encroachment by the latter on the
functions and powers of the Assembly;

"Reaffirms that all organs and bodies of the
United Nations should carry out only those tasks
which are established in their respective mandates;
in that regard, it reiterates that the principal United
Nations organs have distinct and separate roles in
accordance with the United Nations Charter;

"Opposes the ongoing practice by the Security
Council of dealing with human rights issues
which do not pose a threat to international peace
and security and calls on the Security Council
to respect its mandate as outlined in the United
Nations Charter;

"Rejects the use ofthe Security Council as a tool
to pursue national political interests and agendas,
aggravating rather than alleviating situations
contrary to its mission as enshrined in the Charter,
and stresses the necessity of non-selectivity,
impartiality and accountability in the work of the
Council, and the need for the Council to strictly
keep within the powers and functions accorded
to it by the Member States under the United
Nations Charter;

"Rejects the ongoing practice of the Security
Council of dealing with human rights issues in
pursuit of certain States' political objectives."

(spoke in Spanish)

That is the end of the statement made on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

It is not that we do not want to discuss the topic of

human rights. Rather, we want to discuss it in a forum
in which the membership agrees on the topic. We want a
much more democratic and transparent forum than the
Security Council. I understand that some permanent
members of the Security Council insist on examining
the topic in this Council because they have been here
over the past decades and they will remain here for a
long time. However, that is not the case for the two-
thirds of the Organization's membership represented in
the Non-Aligned Movement.

I would like to cite the example of a NAM. press
release and its contents. It seeks to avoid the politicization
of certain topics. For example, the General Assembly
has adopted tens of resolutions callign for an end to the
economic, financial and trade embargo imposed by the
United States against Cuba, stating that the embargo
causes suffering in the Cuban population and that it
limits the exercise of certain rights. However, I think
that in the area of human rights, Cuba has made great
strides in the promotion of certain rights. The fact that
the issue is politicized and that some countries are
singled out on the issue makes it impossible to have a
frank discussion on the topic.

Bolivia has signed almost all international standards
of human rights. It is signatory to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child; the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment; the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights; the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Rome
Statute. In addition, Bolivia has also invited the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to actively
work in the country and monitor activities and the
status of human rights in Bolivia.

I ask the Council: How many countries have
ratified that many human rights instruments? How
many have ratified the Convention on the Rights of
the Child? How many have ratified the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights?
How many have ratified the Rome Statute? We believe
that one way to guarantee the exercise of human rights
is to join together in ratifying such instruments in order
to ensure their universality.

