Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (Spoke in French):
In July of last year, after three years of stagnation,
the United States administration had extracted an
agreement on a resumption of direct negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians. We all began to hope
again. Nine months later, despite intense negotiations
and the tireless efforts of Secretary of State John Kerry,
the negotiations once again ended in deadlock. In the
summer of 2014, war began again as Gaza was bombed
relentlessly for more than 50 days. The ceasefire
agreement of 26 August ended the fighting, but the
negotiations on lifting the blockade of Gaza are still
stalled. We have witnessed dangerous tensions on the
Temple Mount, the unbridled pursuit of colonization
and cycles of revenge between extremists with a real
risk of a new intifada at the end of it all. The recent
rocket attacks from Gaza illustrated once again the
volatility of a situation without a political horizon.

It is time to create that political horizon. The time
has come take bold, concrete measures designed to
achieve a just and lasting peace. Israel has the right to
live in peace and security. But it is clear to us that the
security of the State of Israel depends on the creation
beside it of a sovereign, democratic, contiguous and
Viable State of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders,
with Jerusalem as the capital of the two States. A two-
State solution is the only one that can be fair, both
politically and morally. There is no alternative.

By voting today for the draft resolution submitted
by Jordan on behalf of the Arab Group (S/2014/9l6),
Luxembourg voted for that two-State solution - two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security. We voted for a solution that we
have advocated throughout our term on the Security
Council and one that has consistently been a priority
of our foreign policy. We voted for a peace settlement
that meets the legitimate aspirations of both Israel and
Palestine.

Ifthe two-State solution is to be saved, we must learn
the lessons of the past. Israelis and Palestinians will
be able to reach an agreement only if the international
community commits more positively than it has in the
past and establishes the framework for a settlement with
clear parameters and a specific timetable. That was the
entire purpose of the draft resolution introduced by
Jordan. Despite the outcome of today's vote, we remain
convinced that the Security Council can and should
play a constructive role in this matter. If it is to live
up to its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Council must take
on a more active role in supporting and preserving a
two-State solution and ending the occupation.

Our vote today is an expression of belief - the
belief that it is urgent that we act, and act now, and that
we cannot postpone deadlines indefinitely. Salvaging
a two-State solution cannot be extended ad infinitum.
Our vote today is aimed at no one. It is not about
dividing or pointing fingers. On the contrary, it
aspires to be a vote for hope. In voting for a two-State
solution, we appeal to the parties - to Israeli and
Palestinian political officials, as well as to Israeli and
Palestinian citizens - asking them choose the path of
reconciliation and the resumption of negotiations. We
call on the countries of the region and the international
community as a whole to work resolutely beside the
Israelis and Palestinians so that peaceful co-existence
between two States, the State of Israel and the State of
Palestine, can finally become a reality.

We regret that it was not possible today to adopt
the draft resolution submitted by Jordan, but we very
much hope that after the vote it will soon be possible to
resume discussions in good faith and work together for
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace, in the interests
of Israel and Palestine and the whole region. We no
longer have the right to fail. The year 2015 must not be
another year lost for peace in the Middle East.

