Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like at the outset to refer to the Sanctions
Committee on Rwanda. During 2006, I had the honour
of chairing the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 918 (1994) concerning Rwanda.

As the Council is aware, the restrictions imposed
by paragraph 13 of resolution 918 (1994) on the sale or
supply to the Government of Rwanda of arms and
related materiel were lifted on 1 September 1996, in
accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution 1011 (1995).
However, all States remain under the obligation of
abiding by restrictions on the sale or supply of arms
and related materiel to non-governmental forces for use
in Rwanda. During my chairmanship, the Committee
did not receive any information as to violations of the
sanctions in place. That does not mean that there have
not been any violations, but they have not been proven.
That is why I would like to stress that we must be
informed of any arms transaction, particularly since
there is no specific monitoring mechanism that can
ensure the effective implementation of the arms
embargo. Therefore, the Committee depends
exclusively on cooperation from States and from
organizations that are in a position to communicate any
violations of the arms embargo.

I would like to inform you, Mr. President, that
during 2006 the Committee held various informal
consultations and during some of these - on 25 April,
on 10 August and 3 November 2006 - the Committee
considered a letter dated 10 March 2006 from the
President of the Security Council Committee relating
to resolution 1533 (2004) on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, addressed to me as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 918 (1994) dealing with Rwanda. In that
letter, the Chairman of the Sanctions Committee
dealing with the Democratic Republic of the Congo
had stressed the existence of imports and exports of
arms to the Government of Rwanda. The report of the
group of experts for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo had pointed out that those transactions could be
included under paragraph 11 of resolution 1011 (1995).
That resolution required States to notify the Sanctions
Committee on Rwanda of any transfer of arms to the
Government of Rwanda.
06-67222
On 10 November of this year, I submitted on
behalf of the Sanctions Committee on Rwanda a letter
responding to the Chairman of the Sanctions
Committee on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
stating that on 11 September 1996 the Sanctions
Committee on Rwanda had issued a press release in
which it said that States no longer had the duty to
notify arms exports and related materiel from their
territories to the Government of Rwanda and that the
Government of Rwanda did not have the obligation to
inform on the import of arms and related materiel. That
understanding was then reiterated and put in writing in
the report of the Sanctions Committee on Rwanda,
which was prepared for the Security Council for the
year 1996 and which is contained in document
S/1997/ 15.

I would like to stress that the States referred to in
the report of the panel of experts for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo therefore acted on the same
understanding that the Sanctions Committee on
Rwanda had had when they did not inform the
Committee of the transfers of arms to the Government
of Rwanda. That is difficult to understand, so I will
repeat it. I would like to stress that the States referred
to in the report of the expert group for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo had acted on the same
understanding that the Sanctions Committee on
Rwanda had had when they did not notify the
Committee of the transfer of arms to the Government
of Rwanda.

I would like to conclude by pointing out that the
Committee is currently revising the requirements for
the notification procedure for future arms transfers to
the Government of Rwanda, in accordance with
paragraph 11 of resolution 1011 (1995). Based on my
experience and having followed discussions in the
Committee in 2006, and, in particular, based on
informal consultations that we have held, I would like
to inform the Security Council that the Committee has
still not been able to arrive at a consensus on the status
of the requirement for notification for transfers of arms
and related materiel to the Government of Rwanda. In
this regard, I would like to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the ambiguity with regard to the
duration of the requirements for notification
established by paragraph 11 of resolution 1011 (1995).
In my capacity as Chairman of the Sanctions
Committee on Rwanda, I would like to request the
Security Council to take a decision on the future status
06-67222

of this requirement. I suggest that we take into account,
on the one hand, the current peace and stability
situation that Rwanda is experiencing, but also, on the
other hand, we should take into account the
implications that the transfer of arms has for the Great
Lakes region.

