Mr. Danesh-Yazdi (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I wish to extend the appreciation of my delegation
to you, Sir, and to other members of the Security Council
for convening this important meeting with a view to
debating the critical situation in Afghanistan.

I feel bound to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, Ambassador
Brahimi, as well as to the personnel of the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA) for the dedicated
and tireless work they are sincerely engaged in. I wish
Ambassador Brahimi a speedy recovery and good health.
The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran highly
values and fully supports Ambassador Brahimi's
endeavours aimed at bringing peace and normalcy to
Afghanistan. In our view, such efforts are indispensable if
the situation in Afghanistan is not to deteriorate even
further.

The latest military offensive launched by the Taliban,
and the changing fortunes of the parties that followed,
vividly demonstrated, once again, that there can be no
military solution to the protracted Afghan conflict.
Afghanistan is a multi-ethnic society, governed over the
centuries through ethnic harmony and a delicate
mechanism of power-sharing in which all ethnic and
linguistic groups could play a role. The Afghan history
and experiences of similar societies illustrate that the gain
or loss of territory through military operations can never
resolve any deep-rooted crisis and bring peace. Therefore,
it should be recognized that the militarist policy adopted
by the Taliban and their foreign supporters - a policy
that seeks domination by one group over Afghan society
- is a naive policy and lies at the origin of the current
situation in Afghanistan.

The all-out Taliban offensive to the north over the
past few weeks, despite the substantial reinforcements of
personnel and material the Taliban received from outside
Afghanistan, did not result in any significant military
victory but, most unfortunately, only succeeded in
creating a human tragedy by rendering hundreds of
thousands Afghans homeless. The term "scorched earth",
as employed by the office of the United Nations
Coordinator for Afghanistan in the news release of 14
August 1999, best describes the brutal and ruthless policy
of the Taliban against the inhabitants of the Shomali
plains - a policy that could be considered tantamount to
ethnic cleansing.

The forced displacement of Tajik inhabitants of the
region - taking a large number of them to the remote
south-eastern city of Jalalabad, on the one hand, and
burning their villages to the ground and setting fire to
their crops in order to deter them from coming back, on
the other - is a clear violation of international
humanitarian law by the Taliban. The same policy has
been implemented against Hazara people over the past
few years. There have also been reports of sizeable
movements of civilians to north of the front line, into the
Panjsher Valley. Hundreds of thousands of civilians are
in dire need of basic emergency items to survive.

The demands on the Islamic Republic of Iran and
northern neighbours of Afghanistan are tremendous,
beyond the resources available. We urge the international
community to provide assistance through the United
Nations to the desperate people of those regions. This
Council is expected to take appropriate actions so as to
deter the Taliban from their senseless campaign against
the civilian population.

 

The recourse of the Taliban to violence against ethnic
groups is tending to further polarize the multi-ethnic
Afghan society and consequently aggravate the situation.
This trend poses a serious threat to the future of the country
as a whole. Let me be very frank in expressing our deep
concern that the path taken by the Taliban may jeopardize
Afghanistan's unity and lead to a situation that endangers
the national security of the neighbouring countries and thus
further destabilizes the region. The Islamic Republic of Iran
emphasizes the need for respecting the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of Afghanistan and
calls on all to refrain from adopting any policy likely to
endanger Afghanistan's existence as a sovereign and united
country.

To our great regret, the Taliban continue to disregard
the repeated demands of the international community that
they desist from insisting on a military solution to the
conflict and seriously engage in negotiations aimed at
settling the conflict peacefully, as demanded by the Security
Council in its resolutions 1193 (1998) and 1214 (1998), as
well as the declaration of the "six plus two" group. The
latest large-scale offensive launched by the Taliban
immediately after the "six plus two" meeting in Tashkent
- which their own representatives attended - clearly
demonstrates their contempt for the wishes of the
international community as expressed in the Tashkent
declaration urging the parties to resume political
negotiations aimed at achieving the goal of establishing a
broad-based, multi-ethnic and fully representative
Government.

The intransigent attitude of the Taliban, in defiance of
numerous General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, has been the root cause of the agony and
suffering of the Afghan people over the past few years and
in practice has perpetuated instability and lingering
problems in the region and beyond. The Security Council
should not fail to seriously address this highly significant
matter in order to restore stability and normalcy in that
country. The continuation of military offensives by the
Taliban, which could not be carried out without outside
political and military support, certainly destabilizes the
whole region. The engagement of an ever-growing number
of non-Afghan nationals, fighting alongside the Taliban
forces, could change the Afghan conflict into a
transnational one. The persistence of this dangerous element
could cause the conflict to spread beyond Afghan borders.

The Islamic Republic of Iran continues to be adversely
affected by the negative consequences arising from the
chaotic situation and lawlessness in Afghanistan. Heavy
traffic in drugs and arms, terrorism and instability close
to common borders are among the consequences my
country has been suffering from over the past two
decades. To combat these menaces, we have paid a very
high price in terms of human and material resources, and
we stand ready to cooperate with the international
community with a view to finding a just and lasting
solution to the Afghanistan conflict. In this context, we
are willing to continue working with the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy to persuade Afghan
groups, particularly the Taliban, to abandon fighting and
engage in serious political negotiations.

Last but not least, after more than a year, the issue
of the tragic murder of the staff of the Consulate-General
of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Islamic Republic
News Agency (IRNA) correspondent in Mazar-e-Sharif by
Taliban forces in the wake of their offensive against that
northern Afghan city in August 1998, is still pending and
remains unresolved. The Taliban - as the international
community, including the Council itself, is fully aware -
continues to stubbornly disregard the rules of international
law and has yet to implement Security Council resolution
1214 (1999), which in its operative paragraph 5 condemns
this crime and calls upon

"the Taliban to cooperate with the United Nations in
investigating these crimes with a view to prosecuting
those responsible".

I would like to emphasize that the Islamic Republic
of Iran is determined to pursue vigorously the matter, as
we have in the past. We remain hopeful that the Council
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General will
continue their valuable efforts in this regard.

The threat which the protracted crisis in Afghanistan
poses to regional and international peace and security, and
the unacceptable, inhumane and horrifying situation in
which millions of Afghan people now find themselves
require immediate attention by the Security Council. We
believe that the Security Council needs to review the
situation in Afghanistan with a view to taking a number
of concrete measures in line with its previous resolutions
and aimed at compelling the Taliban to heed the demands
of the international community concerning peace in
Afghanistan. Such effective and timely measures by the
Security Council will undoubtedly help save lives in
Afghanistan and shield the region and beyond from the
threats and problems stemming from the continuation of
the war in that country.

 

