Mr. Larrain (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
Government and people of Chile are deeply concerned
about the serious situation currently facing the people of
East Timor. Public opinion in Chile is dismayed by the
deaths and humanitarian tragedy unfolding there.

 

The delegation of Chilean observers to the popular
consultation, led by the Vice-President of the Chamber of
Deputies, was able to witness first-hand the persecution of
partisans of independence, including the family that hosted
our envoys.

This would not have happened if the obligations
entered into under the 5 May Agreement, according to
which the Government of Indonesia is responsible for the
maintenance of peace and security in East Timor, had been
fulfilled.

We urgently appeal to the Government of Indonesia to
reestablish law and order in East Timor, putting an end to
the activities of the anti-independence militias and
guaranteeing the human rights of all groups involved. It is
essential that the current process be resumed and that the
United Nations Mission in East Timor fully resume its
functions.

If Indonesia is not able to fulfil this obligation, then
we agree with the Secretary-General and the Security
Council that the Government of Indonesia must agree
immediately to allow the international community - by
means of a multinational force authorized by the United
Nations - to assist it in fulfilling its responsibility. Chile
is seriously considering participating in such an operation.

My delegation would like to say to the Indonesian
Government - with which we have strong ties of
friendship and cooperation, both of us being coastal States
of the Pacific - that the international community, through
the United Nations, simply wishes to help it with the East
Timor process that Indonesia itself began. We believe there
are three elements which provide a solid foundation on
which Indonesia can respond to this international appeal.

First, the Government of President Habibie
demonstrated its resolve and its courage, which have been
praised, when it decided to take an historic step in regard
to East Timor. Thereupon it negotiated and signed the 5
May Agreements with Portugal, with the support of the
United Nations. The process that was carried out,
notwithstanding the difficulties encountered, was indeed
remarkable, with the major milestone of the 30 August
popular consultation, in which a huge majority of the East
Timorese people were able to vote, with dignity and in
safety, on their future. Indonesia has set out on this road
and must continue along it.

Secondly, article 7 of the 5 May Agreement stated that
during the interim period between the conclusion of the
popular consultation and the start of implementation, the
parties would call on the Secretary-General to maintain
"an adequate United Nations presence" in East Timor.
This concept of an adequate presence provides a legal
basis for the United Nations and Indonesia to agree on the
nature of a force that would allow Indonesia to discharge
its mandate to maintain peace and security in East Timor.

Thirdly, this question of East Timor is special. It
does not relate to other areas. For the United Nations East
Timor is a non-self-governing territory, covered by the
provisions of Chapter XI of the Charter. That is why East
Timor has been on the agenda of the Special Committee
on Decolonization and why, within the framework of the
United Nations, a process has been pursued, a process
that finally allowed for the historic signing of the 5 May
Agreements.

The demands of the inhabitants of East Timor and of
the international community, as well as the elements
outlined above, should all lead Indonesia to agree
immediately to accept assistance from an international,
United Nations force. This should also help contribute to
the process of reconciliation so necessary in this territory.
In this regard, we await with special interest the report of
the Security Council mission to Jakarta and Dili.

Chile trusts that very soon there will be an
agreement that allows us to avert an even worse
humanitarian catastrophe than the one the international
community is now witnessing - a situation it can no
longer passively tolerate.

