Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock and Mr. David Lillie for their briefings.
We also thank Major General Bakin, the Head of the
Russian Reconciliation Centre, for his briefing on
the latest situation in Syria. I would like to note that
the information provided by the Russian specialist is
reflected in the bulletins of the Russian Ministry of
Defence on the de-escalation zones, which we distribute
on a regular basis to Security Council members.

Given the briefing by Major General Bakin, we
will not speak in detail today, especially because we
discussed the humanitarian situation in Syria just last
week (see S/PV.8553). However, we have been obliged
to conclude that the information conveyed from the
high forum that is the Security Council sometimes
contradicts operational reports coming directly from
the de-escalation zones, which testifies to attempts to
politicize the Syrian humanitarian dossier.

In general, it is time to stop applying double
standards with regard to what is happening in Syria.
Mr. Lillie said today that the people of Idlib feel
abandoned. They have not been abandoned. They are
being held hostage by the terrorists of Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham. We are constantly hearing about suffering
in the Rukban camp for internally displaced persons
(IDPs), but very little is said about the Al-Hol camp,
where the humanitarian situation is critical. We have
already asked why the Council has not considered the
situation in which the so-called coalition wiped Baghouz
and Hajin off the face of the Earth. In the first quarter
of 2019 alone, as a result of mass coalition air strikes
on the town of Baghouz Al-Fawqani in Deir ez-Zor
governorate, more than 1,200 people died and civilian
infrastructure was destroyed, including hospitals and
schools. All of that is public information. And once
again, of course, we could also mention Raqqa, which
was literally razed to the ground.

We have repeatedly heard and continue to hear
calls from Council members on the need to adhere
to the Sochi memorandum of 17 September 2018. We
certainly have not abandoned it, as the Head of the
Russian Reconciliation Centre confirmed today. The
memorandum is being implemented, and it asserts in
black and white the importance of combating terrorist
activities. I will say it once again. All military action is
aimed exclusively at eliminating hotbeds of terrorism.
We want to stress once again that the Syrian armed
forces and the Russian Aerospace Forces only attack
terrorist targets confirmed by intelligence. In that
regard, we once again urge the Secretariat and the
United Nations specialized agencies, including the
World Health Organization, not to rush to release
unverified information. Data should be taken from
reliable, non-politicized sources, and should always be
double-checked, including as to whether infrastructure
that has allegedly been attacked has been through the
de-confliction process. Unfortunately, we still have
serious doubts about the reliability of those sources and
their verification methodology.

We continue to be concerned about the situation on
the eastern bank of the Euphrates in the Al-Tanf area,
which is illegally occupied by the United States. We
would like to point out once again that under the Geneva
Conventions, the occupying Power is responsible for the
population of an occupied territory. Needless to say, the
Council should pay particular attention to the situation

in the Al-Hol IDP camp in Hasakah governorate, which
is not under the control of the Syrian authorities.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
Russia's position remains unchanged. We will continue
to make every effort to restore peace to Syria both
in our national capacity and as a permanent member
of the Security Council and a member of the Astana
troika, which has done more than any other format to
de-escalate and eliminate the terrorist threat, expand
humanitarian assistance and advance the political
process.

Speaking of the political process, we are pleased
to note the level of cooperation that has recently been
established between the Syrian authorities and the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, We hope that the dialogue
between the United Nations and Damascus will help to
launch a sustainable political process that is Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned, with the assistance of the United
Nations, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the decisions of the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress in Sochi. We call on all interested parties
to unite their efforts to stabilize the situation in Syria
and work together to eliminate terrorism, undertake
post-conflict reconstruction and help refugees and
IDPs return home. Strengthening efforts in those areas
will help to give Special Envoy Pedersen's efforts
significant momentum.

