Mr. Mardini: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important and timely debate on silencing
the guns in Africa. This year we mark the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, the very first
article of which, common to all four Conventions,
obliges States to respect, and ensure respect for,
international humanitarian law. That duty frames the
rules that govern the international arms trade, including
the Arms Trade Treaty. Today's adoption of resolution
2457 (2019) is an important step. It highlights Africa's
determination to rid the continent of conflict and
strengthen arms control and disarmament, with the
support of the international community.

Today I want to address two points - first,
the humanitarian consequences of the uncontrolled
availability of small arms and light weapons, and,
secondly, ways the international community can reduce
those consequences.

When conventional arms are poorly regulated
and widely available, the humanitarian consequences
are grim - prolonged conflicts, violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and increased risk of death and injury for civilians.
Suffering continues even after hostilities are over, as
the widespread accessibility of arms fosters a culture
of violence, undermines the rule of law and threatens
reconciliation efforts.

The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) witnesses those consequences at first hand on a
daily basis. Armed conflict in the Lake Chad basin has
forced more than 2 million people to flee their homes.
In Libya, large parts of arms stockpiles remain outside
any Government control, fuelling violence and exacting
a heavy price from the Libyan people, who suffer death,
injury, disability and displacement. In South Sudan, the
peace agreement brings hope of an end to a conflict that
had brought catastrophic humanitarian consequences.
Untold thousands of children have been deprived of
schooling, and many women suffered sexual violence.
Humanitarian organizations like the ICRC bring
much-needed relief to the many places in Africa and
elsewhere in the world where peace remains elusive.
But aid alone cannot solve the underlying causes of this
immense suffering.

That brings me to my second point, which is how
the Member States of the Security Council - and
in fact all States - can act to silence the guns in
Africa. They can do so by ensuring a responsible arms
trade and preventing the diversion of weapons to the
illicit market. To that end, solid frameworks, such as
the Economic Community of West African States
Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and Other Related Materials and the
Central African Convention for the Control of Small
Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All
Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their
Manufacture, Repair and Assembly, and, at the global
level, the Arms Trade Treaty, provide a blueprint for
reducing human suffering. We urge States to join,
implement and support those treaties. Responsible
arms transfers improve the protection of civilians over
the long term and, more broadly, lay the foundation for
peace, security and stability.

We must make a difference on the ground. Words
alone will not prevent the devastating and irreparable
harms caused by weapons in the wrong hands. The
ICRC's recent study The Roots of Restraint in War
found that integrating the law into doctrine, rules of
engagement, training and compliance mechanisms
increases restraint on the battlefield. The ICRC
encourages States to commit to this task and offers
its assistance to States wishing to promote respect for
international humanitarian law by arms bearers - a
role we have assumed, for instance, for the Group of
Five States for the Sahel.

The appalling humanitarian consequences I spoke
of earlier are preventable. When there is respect for
international humanitarian law, there is a better chance
for silencing the guns in Africa and in the world. The
ICRC stands ready to support States to achieve that goal.

