Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): First of all, let me
express my Government's condolences to the
Government of Bangladesh on the tragic death of nine
peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the situation in Timor-Leste and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Hasegawa for his excellent presentation. I should like
to take this opportunity to praise the dedicated efforts
of the civilian, military and police components of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) and to congratulate them on their many
achievements in Timor-Leste.

I would like also to welcome Foreign Minister
Jose Ramos-Horta and to thank him for his valuable
contribution to this debate.

Portugal fully subscribes to the statement made
by the representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union. I will add only a few comments of
our own.

First, we very much welcome the establishment
of a commission of experts to conduct a thorough
assessment of the progress made by the judicial
processes involving the Ad Hoc Human Rights
Tribunal in Jakarta, the Serious Crimes Unit and the
Special Panels for serious crimes in Dili. We look
forward to its recommendations.

We also note and highly commend the steady and
significant developments that have been taking place in
the relationship of Timor-Leste with its neighbours
regarding such important issues as land and maritime
borders. It is of great importance that Timor-Leste
secure timely access to its natural resources, thus
paving the way for its peaceful and economically
sustainable development.

Timor-Leste is in a critical period of its
peacebuilding process, and the report of the Secretary-
General clearly outlines a number of areas that will
require international assistance beyond the expiration
of the mandate of UNMISET. Much work remains to
be done in the area of police training, namely in the
management of the border, which remains porous and
therefore a source of illegal incursions and illegal
trade. Security on the border is a key factor for the
political and social stability of Timor-Leste.

We note with concern that land border
demarcation is incomplete. This is particularly
worrisome because a successor arrangement to the
present military liaison arrangement is not yet in place.

The Secretary-General's report states that Timor-
Leste has made significant advances towards self-
sufficiency. Nevertheless, significant challenges
remain, and continuing international assistance beyond
the expiration of UNMISET's current mandate is
essential for the mid- and long-term security, stability
and sustainable development of that country.

That is why Portugal agrees with the
recommendations set out by the Secretary-General to
ensure that, after May 2005, a new structure for the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste is configured
in order to address the existing needs. This would
include such components as military liaison officers,
police trainers, civilian advisers, human rights officers
and a small office to support the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

We have made many advances and have invested
a great deal in Timor-Leste since 1999. We need to
preserve and consolidate the good results already
obtained. Therefore, we are convinced that in order for
the United Nations presence to have the credibility it
needs, it should have a clear mandate from the Council
and should be led by a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. We should pursue, for a further
period, a concerted effort to enable Timor-Leste to
achieve three interrelated goals: security and stability;
institution-building and State-building; and an
adequate environment that can lead to sustainable
development.

I would like to reiterate that Portugal - both
individually and as a member of the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries - will remain
committed to supporting those goals and the efforts by
the United Nations to that effect.

