Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): At the outset, Cameroon wishes to welcome
the Secretary-General's presence among us today. We
also wish to thank him for his contribution and
personal involvement in seeking the peaceful
disarmament of Iraq. His message, made last month at
the open meeting of the Council devoted to Iraq, was
particularly enlightening and meaningful in that regard.
Cameroon, which during its presidency of the Council
had to deal with the item of Iraq, was grateful to the
Secretary-General for his approach to the problem and
his involvement and invaluable advice.

We have just adopted unanimously a resolution
on the peaceful disarmament of Iraq, so that it will be
disarmed of its weapons of mass destruction. It is a text
of positive and constructive compromise because it is
balanced. It does not acknowledge victory for any
particular side. International peace and security are the
only victors.

Now the ball is in Iraq's court. Like preceding
speakers, Cameroon would like to make a solemn
appeal to the Iraqi authorities to cooperate fully with
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which
will soon be deployed in the field. By doing that, the
Iraqi authorities will enable Iraq to be true to itself - a
land of water, and therefore of life.

My country welcomes the clear statements just
made by the sponsors, spelling out the fact that the
resolution just adopted, on their initiative, does not
contain traps or automaticity. Along with us, they
confirm today, in the spirit of the statement of 12
September by made by President Bush to the General
Assembly, that they are working, and will always work,
for the centrality of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Cameroon has always maintained and supported that.
Let us trust in the Charter and abide by it.

In conclusion, I would like to wish good luck and
the best to the UNMOVIC and the IAEA inspection
teams. They have an enormous responsibility. They
have a very valuable work tool in their hands: the
strong, firm, unanimous and unequivocal support of the
Security Council. We know that they are real
professionals, who are extremely experienced. We have
confidence in them, and wish them the best.

