Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): I wish to commend the
Venezuelan presidency of the Council for convening
this important debate. It is indeed timely that we are
here today while elsewhere deliberations continue on
the twin draft resolutions concerning the Advisory
Group of Experts report (see S/2015/490). I would like
to commend the work of the Swedish chairmanship of
the Peacebuilding Commission and wish Ambassador
Kamau the very best as he assumes the post of Chair.
I would also like to acknowledge the work of the
co-facilitators of the intergovernmental process and
commend them for the way in which they are guiding
our work.

With your indulgence, Mr. President, I will submit
my written comments as part of the record, but I will
now address certain salient points which I believe have
arisen during the course of our debate.

The issue of sustaining peace is the central focus
of the Advisory Group of Experts report. For that we
commend Ambassador Rosenthal and his team for
focusing our attention on the urgency of the matter. As
far as Africa is concerned, it has been a key beneficiary
of the peacebuilding efforts of the Organization and
of key partners. We realize, however, that we need to
do more. We fully expect and hope that the guns of
conflict will grow silent by 2020, and that is reflected
in our "Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want". Africa
welcomes the key recommendations of the Advisory
Group of Experts report, and we believe that it provides
us a way forward.

On the issue of the definition of sustaining peace,
or peace sustainability, we believe that on this issue a
compelling case has been put forward by Ambassador
Rosenthal and his team. It is now a question of the
evolution not only of our thinking but also of practical,
political and diplomatic responses to the report. The old
thinking of peacebuilding as post-conflict, or thinking
of peacebuilding as something that happens when
considering a relapse into conflict, is now outdated. We
fully concur with that position.

Peacebuilding encompasses a whole range of
activities on conflictprevention. It starts before a conflict
is fully realized, when we see the causes of conflict
gathering. In the deliberations we have had today, the
issues have focused on financing and the viability of
the report. I do believe that the consensus is that the
report is well received and its core recommendations
are worthy of our strong consideration. But beyond
accepting the report and beyond praising the report, it
calls for compelling action. Time is of the essence. The
Organization, both within its core institutions, agencies
and committees in-house and those in the field, needs
to evolve and adapt to the new realities. Africa, as one
of the primary beneficiaries of peacebuilding efforts,
welcomes a greater, innovative partnership with the
United Nations. We believe that the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council
together can deepen their relationship for the benefit
of all.
With the reports that were recently delivered to
us-the Advisory Group of Experts report and the
Secretary-General's report (S/2015/716) on women and
peace and security and the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000)- and with all the elements that we have
to consider, it is important that we do not waste time.
We welcome the deliberations on the draft resolutions,
but we are concerned that the question of financing
seems to be a sticking point. It is quite clear that for
peacebuilding, or rather sustainable peace, to take hold,
there has to be clear, predictable financing.

We take on board the concerns of those States
and those delegations that are concerned that assessed
contributions may not be the way to go. However, we
believe that multi-year voluntary contributions must
be the minimum standard. It is for those delegations
that consider that the assessed contributions route
might be problematic, given the United Nations
financial system, namely, the Fifth Committee and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, to make the case that there is another option
that is equally satisfactory. The need for funding is
critical to all that we hope the Peacebuilding Fund, the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Commission will evolve and become. Without it, they
will not fulfil our best hopes.

The issue of financing is one that I believe we can
resolve. It is possible to create a mechanism of oversight
that can look at both a twin track of assessed and
voluntary contributions and report to the Council and
to the Commission on its success during a pilot phase.
I do not believe that we have to choose one or the other.
The course of the deliberations during the discussions
on the draft resolutions appears to have moved away
from the symbolic 1 per cent, the $100 million mark.
However, as has been reported and noted here in the
Council, the figure, the symbolic 1 per cent is a mere
drop in the ocean ofthe billions in funds that are devoted

to peacebuilding and humanitarian programmes. It is
not, therefore, wildly ambitious; we believe that it is, in
fact, quite modest.

We believe that the Secretary-General's marker
of 15 per cent for gender mainstreaming in all
peacebuilding programmes is similarly modest and
something that we should heartily embrace. Research
shows that, in any peacebuilding process, the effect of
having women fully involved increases the chances of
success. Sierra Leone has been cited as an example of
a relative success in terms of peacebuilding, and for
that we are grateful for the work of the Council and
all those who supported us on our journey. From our
darkest hours, days and months, we have evolved into
a fully functioning State, with institutions that are
growing stronger every day. As everyone is aware, the
advent of Ebola knocked back some of the gains made
in peacebuilding and threatened others. However, with
the support of the Organization, we believe that we are
on our way to economic recovery.

It is quite true that peacebuilding can only be an
adjunct to the efforts of the national Government. All
national Governments have the authority to take care
of their citizens in terms of stability and economic
security. However, when one has a situation in which
the national Government has perhaps collapsed,
asymmetric warfare has taken hold and rebel groups
roam the territory of a particular nation, it is time for
the United Nations to step in. But as the report clearly
indicates, there are markers before one gets to the
full-blown conflict, that is, indicators that the peace,
stability or security of the State are jeopardized. The
report quite properly calls for our attention and focus
at that time, prior to conflict, the outbreak of hostilities
and the breakdown of society, and we welcome that
focus.

I do not believe that we need to have an in-depth
debate about what the report posits as peace
sustainability or sustaining peace. I do believe that we
should concentrate our attention on the challenges of
peace sustainability. That requires in-house reform, the
evolution of the institutions within the house and efforts
on the ground. Sierra Leone has also been posited as an
example of a situation where the mission evolved from
a classic peace operation into an integrated mission.
That integrated mission was not integrated simply as
a matter of theory, but actually as a matter of fact.
The concept of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, combining the roles of the Resident
Representative and of the Resident Coordinator of
the United Nations Development Programme arm,
was novel and worked successfully. In effect, the
mission - the integrated office - was domesticated
within the national institutions of Sierra Leone. By
that I mean that the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General had full access to all the organs of
the Government, including the presidency.

While we look to the past for examples, we must
look to the future and commend the work that the
Peacebuilding Fund, the Peacebuilding Support Office
and the Peacebuilding Commission have undertaken to
date. In order for them to do more, it is important that
we answer the question of financial sustainability and
that we also ensure that they have the political impetus
and direction to evolve as they should.

We welcome the deliberations and efforts on the part
of all organizations, including civil society and other
multilateral and financial entities, which are focused
on the issue of peacebuilding and the future of peace
sustainability. It is perhaps fitting that the Council,
which gave birth to the peacebuilding architecture,
remains engaged today on the issue.

The test of our efforts and the test of any success
that we can claim will be borne out when the least
advantaged of populations in conflict societies can
see a measure of hope and a future where the conflicts
that have inflamed them will end. Beyond ending the
conflict, it is important that the economic drivers of
peace be fully embedded. That requires the work of the
development financial institutions and international
financial institutions and bold, creative and innovative
thinking on the part of the World Bank and other premier
financial institutions. The link between the Council,
the Organization and those other financial institutions
must be strengthened and deepened. We are all called
on not only to be the makers and enforcers of peace, but
also the sustainers of peace. Collectively, our actions
as diplomats, politicians, ministers, representatives of
civil society and citizens must make a difference.

I hope that the deliberations on the draft resolution
will produce a resolution worthy of its name and worthy
of the efforts of the members of the Advisory Group
of Experts. We owe succeeding generations no less.
The core objective of the Council's responsibility is
the search for peace, and as members of the General
Assembly, the principle organs and intergovernmental
entities, we all must collectively assist the Council in
the search for peace. We welcome once again the efforts
of the Experts, but now it is the turn of the diplomats
to match their work and also ensure that the search for
peace is fully realized.

