Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): At the outset,
Mr. President, allow me to express my delegation's
deep appreciation to the presidency of Pakistan for
organizing this open debate, which is the third so far
under your presidency.

It is reassuring and most gratifying that the
Security Council's open debates, which address a
number of subjects, have become customary. These
debates provide an excellent opportunity for countries
that, like mine, do not have the privilege of serving
on the Council to participate, share views and make a
contribution in our own small way to global discourse.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
that has been delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Since December 2010, the world community has
witnessed a transformation of epic proportions ushered
in by a revolutionary wave of demonstrations, protests
and legitimate struggle for freedom and economic
emancipation as ordinary men, women and youth have
asserted their political rights to bring about change
throughout the Middle East.

The Arab Spring has sent a strong and clear message
across the Middle East and beyond that even the most
selfishly ardent of regimes can never perpetuate the
status quo for any length of time against the will of the
people. It is therefore ill advised for those who, in the
eyes of their own citizens, have lost the legitimacy to
govern to continue clinging to positions of leadership,
unperturbed by the mass loss of lives and destruction
of property that come with their insatiable appetite for
power.

We are mindful of the fact that, even as we sit
around this horseshoe table of the Norwegian Room,
the people of Syria have had and continue to endure
immeasurable hardship and violence, ironically visited
upon them by those sworn to protect them and ensure
the welfare of their State. The world has, regrettably,
stood by helplessly as the regime of President Bashar
Al-Assad brutally persecutes its own people. Since the
beginning of the conflict 23 months ago, more than
60,000 people, mostly civilians, have been killed. The
number of the internally displaced and those fleeing the
violent repression has more than doubled as more and
more Syrians increasingly find the situation in their
country unbearable.

It is for that reason that the United Nations, and
in particular the Security Council, consistent with its
Charter responsibilities, need to assume a higher moral
ground in preventing further massacres of innocent
civilians in Syria. The Security Council has choices
to make with regard to the question of Syria. The
first choice is whether to continue with the current
business-as-usual approach, whereby some Members
are preoccupied with the pursuit of strategic interests
and priorities that are not exogenous to the suffering
of the Syrian people. The second and most desirable
choice is to desire and ensure for the Syrian people all
that is enjoyed by the respective populations of all the
protagonists, which is a livelihood that is not dictated by
bombs, massacres and gun battles. For once, the images
of frightened children amid collapsing walls and rubble
should be replaced by the laughter and smiles of happy
children with their families.

Botswana is among the 50-plus countries that have
signed a letter supporting the referral of the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court (S/2013/19, annex).

On a related issue, it is a matter of deep regret that,
for generations now, the efforts of the international
community to find a durable solution to the situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine,
have been fruitless. Botswana has consistently
expressed its position in various forums that there
is merit in the two-State solution. We believe in the
coexistence of Israel and Palestine, living side by side
as two sovereign States that share not only a border, but
a common desire for peace, security and prosperity.

In the interest of peace and the protection of
innocent lives of civilians, and for future generations
that will know no violence, the people of Middle East
need to embrace the virtue of dialogue and reject the
folly of violence. We therefore urge the parties to this
conflict to summon the necessary will and courage to
address all the hurdles that have so far prevented the
achievement of a balanced outcome acceptable to all
concerned.

It is also imperative that all the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions dealing
with this particular issue be fully implemented and
respected. That will go a long way in promoting
basic humanitarian principles, international law and
international humanitarian law, by all parties to the
conflict.

Botswana fully supports the intensification of
international diplomatic efforts aimed at creating an
atmosphere conducive to furthering negotiations, the
outcome of which should be mutual recognition and
the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. To that effect, we wish to
echo the call of the international community for
each of the parties to fulfil its obligations and act in
accordance with the various international instruments,
and to refrain from any steps that could undermine the
momentum of the negotiating process.

In the same context, Botswana encourages both
parties to shun violence and constructively engage
in acts that support rather than undermine peace. It
is for that reason that the State of Israel should heed
calls to end its settlement activities in order to provide
an impetus for the delicate process of remoulding a
peaceful accord.

In conclusion, transformative change and
accommodation in the Middle East should be the
greatest reward for the children of the region who face
constant confrontation and violence, in order that they
too can live the peaceful and dignified lives that are
experienced by their counterparts elsewhere in the
world.

