Ms. Wensley (Australia): Thank you, Mr.
President, for arranging this open meeting of the
Council, which has given non-Council members and
others whose interests are vitally and directly engaged
in these matters, such as the very welcome Jose
Ramos-Horta, the opportunity not only to hear directly
from the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
but also to hear the views of all Council members in
what I might describe as an unfiltered and
unabbreviated fashion.

Through you, Mr. President, I would also like to
thank Mr. Vieira de Mello for his candid and, indeed,
compelling briefing. My Government values greatly
the progress which has taken place under his leadership
as the Transitional Administrator in East Timor. We
congratulate him and all members of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) most warmly on their continuing and
effective management of the transition process, despite
the many continuing challenges to their work.

We also want to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to, in addition to the UNTAET team on the
ground in East Timor, all those Secretariat officials at
United Nations Headquarters who support UNTAET
activities from this end. They have many competing
pressures and demands to deal with. Yet they continue
to handle their responsibilities very effectively,
showing real commitment and dedication to making
this unique United Nations operation succeed.

This open meeting obviously provides a timely
opportunity for members of the Council and other
members of the international community to voice their
continuing concerns about the security situation in both
East Timor and West Timor. We continue to place a
high priority on the emergence of a future independent
East Timor which is stable, democratic and secure and
which has good relations with Indonesia and with its
neighbouring region. The situation in West Timor is of
deep concern to Australia because it continues to
undermine progress towards all these goals.

My Government is extremely concerned by the
ongoing militia activity and the obvious deterioration
in the security situation in West Timor since the last
open debate in the Security Council. We condemn the
militia attacks which resulted in the deaths of three
staff of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in Atambua in early
September. My Government conveys its sincere
condolences to the Governments and the families so
sadly affected. We look to the Government of
Indonesia to ensure that the perpetrators are brought
swiftly to justice. Australia strongly supports Security
Council resolution 1319 (2999) of 8 September, and we
look forward not only to its early, but to its full
implementation.

We have welcomed the Indonesian Government's
undertakings to resolve the security problems in West
Timor and, in particular, the timetable that it set out for
disarming the militia. We note that Indonesia is in the
process of working through this timetable, and we
recognize that the process still has some way to go
before it is fully implemented.

In this context, however, reports of militia
members continuing to act with impunity during
implementation of the process that Indonesia has laid
out, as in the events which followed the disarmament
ceremony in Atambua on 24 September, are, to say the
least, extremely disturbing. Recent incidents of militia
contact with the UNTAET peacekeeping operation in
East Timor in recent days also underline the need for
further action. More needs to be done if the
disarmament process is to succeed. Specifically, there
are a number of steps which my Government believes
need to be taken for this process to be successful. They
include the permanent surrender - voluntary or
forced - of all weapons by militia, the arrest and trial
of suspects in the UNHCR staff killings, the arrest of
key militia members, and the disbanding of the
militias.

It is incumbent on the Indonesian authorities, in
particular the Indonesian Military Forces (TNI) and the
police, to take whatever steps are necessary to deliver
on Indonesia's undertakings to the Security Council.
Australia and, as has been made abundantly clear by
the speakers who preceded me in this debate, the
international community are closely watching what
concrete steps are being taken on the ground, and we
look forward to the achievement of tangible results.

Resolving the militia problem in West Timor is
clearly a matter of importance not only to the
international community, not only to East Timor and
not only to the East Timorese refugees remaining in
camps, but to Indonesia itself. The activities of the
militias in West Timor are adversely affecting
Indonesia's internal security and are having a negative
impact on international perceptions.

Ultimately, resolving the security problem in
West Timor will be critical for resolving the refugee
situation there. Australia reiterates the importance of
Indonesia providing effective security to ensure that
there is no militia intimidation, that there is unimpeded
access to camps for UNHCR and that there is a credible
registration process. The international community has
already indicated its willingness to provide assistance
in implementing Indonesia's proposal to close the
refugee camps. However, provision of effective
security by Indonesia remains an essential prerequisite
for us to proceed with such assistance, and only
Indonesia can ensure this.
Even as we are concentrating on this problem of
the militias, we all need, as the Permanent
Representative of Canada reminded the Council, to
keep our focus on the situation of the refugees now,
without the presence or the protection of UNHCR or
other international personnel. At this very critical time,
it is also important that local West Timorese authorities
take effective measures to ensure the well-being of
refugees, including through effective distribution of
food supplies and the other necessities that were
mentioned by the Permanent Representative of Brazil.

