Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Rwanda takes the floor to
explain its vote on draft resolution S/2014/348, which
requests the referral of the situation of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the International Criminal Court (ICC). I
thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General, for
his statement and acknowledge the presence among us of
Ambassador Bashar J a'afari, Permanent Representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations.

Rwanda's position on the ICC, which we have
expressed on several occasions in the Council, is well
known, The debate on the International Criminal Court
is indeed legitimate and should continue within the
United Nations with a view to together achieving a fair
and more efficient criminal justice system that is better
able to fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes.

However, we are not here today to hold another
substantive debate on the ICC, as Ambassador
Samantha Power said. I fully agree with her. Our
grandchildren will one day ask us what we did to stop
the Syrian tragedy. We are here as fathers, mothers,
human beings and representatives of the community of
nations, who should listen to the voices of the more than
160,000 people slain over the past three years in Syria.
That reminds us that the Council cannot be inured to
mass atrocities. We are here as a collective body, vested
with the responsibility to maintain international peace
and security. That includes the responsibility to protect
and the obligation of hold accountable the perpetrators
of the most serious crimes. Children are being gassed,
women sexually abused and men tortured. Barrel
bombs have been used against hospitals and schools.
The communities devastated by the terrorist attacks in
Syria are living in endless horror.

Rwanda has repeatedly called for a political
solution to the Syrian crisis within the framework of

the Geneva peace process. We have also endorsed the
call of the Secretary-General, urging all concerned
States Members of the United Nations to refrain
from supplying weapons to aid any side in Syria. We
agree that no concerned State has heeded that call.
Nonetheless, the magnitude of human rights violations
in Syria requires immediate action by the international
community, in particular the Security Council. We all
know that the Syrian jurisdiction is currently not in a
position to hold the perpetrators of mass atrocities in
Syria to account.

We therefore thank France for introducing the draft
resolution as a strong signal to the warring parties
in Syria that the Security Council is committed to
accountability. That is why Rwanda voted in favour
of the draft resolution. Despite the failure to adopt it,
which we regret, Rwanda has not lost hope in justice
and accountability in Syria. However, to achieve that
goal, we need the permanent members of the Security
Council to open their minds and hearts in order to find
a solution to such a humanitarian and human rights
disaster. Despite the real achievements in eliminating
the Syrian chemical programme, it is clear that the
Council's credibility in maintaining international
peace and security remains seriously challenged over
its inability to end the horror being committed in Syria.

As co-chair of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect, and given our own history
of genocide, Rwanda takes this opportunity to reiterate
its call to all permanent members of the Security
Council to consider seriously and carefully the French
proposal of a code of conduct among themselves by
which they will voluntarily refrain from using the veto
in situations of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. In that context, pending a
meaningful reform of the Security Council, we believe
that such a code of conduct could be a necessary tool
to enable the Council to re-embrace the moral values
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

In conclusion, all of us must commit ourselves to
putting action for humanity above inaction for interests.
That is the only way we can honour the Syrian victims
and show to a sceptical world that we, the members of
the Security Council, have learned lessons from the
past and have decided to live up to the noble mission
with which the community of nations has entrusted us.

