Mr. Melkert: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address the Council. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for the confidence he has
bestowed upon me, with the Security Council's
support, to lead a mission as crucial as the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) is to
contributing to the future of the Iraqi people and to
stability in the world.

My recent brief introductory visit to Baghdad
confirmed the sense of strong determination guiding
the Iraqi Government and the spirit of utmost
dedication motivating all United Nations staff in their
joint efforts to promote hope and progress. I feel a
sense of purpose, as well as a great weight of
responsibility to add my part to these efforts.

Allow me on this particular occasion to
somewhat reserve my views on the country situation as
it stands and on the United Nations action to come.
First and foremost, I would like to benefit from the
Council's guidance and engage in intensive interaction
with all relevant partners in Iraq and the wider region.
The two occasions that I have had to meet with Prime
Minister Al-Maliki have been important to my
understanding of the Government's immediate
priorities. I am grateful to my predecessor, Staffan de
Mistura, for his able leadership, his handover and his
characteristic frankness in sharing his experiences and
insights.

From all sides in Iraq I heard the same
message - this is not only an unparalleled moment of
opportunity, but also one of great sensitivity. There are
many factors, some internal, some external, that could
still tip the scale.

On the one hand, there is a new sense of
optimism and energy spreading, with many Iraqis
determined not just to have reclaimed their country's
sovereignty but to mobilize the full responsibilities of
sovereignty in order to deliver economic and social
reforms, pursue political consensus and normalize
regional relationships. Iraq's national pride was evident
for the world to see as the Iraqi security forces
reclaimed full responsibility on 30 June for the
protection of Iraq's cities. The Government and people
of Iraq truly had reason to celebrate this occasion.

On the other hand, the new situation invokes new
responsibilities. Although statistics tell the story of a
downward trend in the overall level of violence, reality
is still tainted by an unacceptably high level of
09-43962
indiscriminate attacks on civilians. The coming period
will be a true challenge for the Iraqi Government and
the Iraqi security forces; they must show skill and
determination to gain the trust of the population and to
respect fundamental human rights. The United Nations
will continue to monitor facts and, it is to be hoped,
further progress.

The initiative to embark on the preparation of a
long-term National Development Plan is one good
example of a new mindset for governance, which will
give direction not just to Iraq's own national priorities
and budgeting, but also to international partners
seeking to invest in Iraq's future. Of course, socio-
economic reforms can bear fruit only in a climate of
political consensus. There have been some promising
moves in this direction. The establishment of the High-
level Task Force in the wake of the comprehensive
United Nations report on the so-called disputed internal
boundaries provides a much-needed framework for
ongoing engagement on an issue that will require
everyone's constructive effort and patience, as well as
a keen awareness that only through peaceful resolution
can long-term stability and progress in the area be
sustained.

The recent elections for the Iraqi Kurdistan
Parliament offer a renewed opportunity to resume
constructive engagement on outstanding issues. On the
basis of the provisional results, I congratulate the
people of the Kurdistan region on an impressive
turnout of 77 per cent and a peaceful electoral process.
I hope that a mutually respectful dialogue between the
main actors - particularly the Kurdistan Democratic
Party, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the Change
List - will now seek to translate this positive start into
a cohesive and truly representative regional
Government. With the Iraqi Independent High
Electoral Commission, we will assess the electoral
process against the generally accepted standards that
are constantly being promoted as part of UNAMI's
mandate.

On balance, there are grounds for cautious
optimism. It should particularly be noted that the Iraqi
people have shown persistent restraint and dignity in
the face of often unpredictable and vicious attacks in
deliberate attempts to throw Iraq off its current course.
This shows just how far out of step the attackers are
with national sentiment. For the Iraqi Government, it
remains a formidable task to provide reassurance to the
09-43962
people that their Government can protect them and that
returning to the normal life they seek is still on track.

Against the backdrop of these trends, I would like
to submit that the time has come to place economic and
social conditions up front. With one third of Iraq's
young people unemployed, a significant budget deficit
combined with debt service and compensation
obligations, drought and agricultural underperformance
and the reluctance of investors to step in, there is a
strong case for joining forces to invest in the
productivity and social cohesion of the country as a
whole. Eventually, progress should not only be
measured at the level of political authorities but also be
tangible for Iraqis in their jobs, schools, hospitals and
homes. This should also guide the United Nations
Mission more and more effectively.

Therefore, I see it as my principal task to bring
all United Nations organizations and staff together for
the purpose of delivering as one through the integrated
Mission in order to serve Iraq and the international
community in the most effective way. I would also like
to promote closer alignment with the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund to strengthen our
common cause.

I would like to align myself with my predecessor
in underscoring the importance of the broad mandate
provided by this Council through resolution 1770
(2007). Coming from a far distance, the United Nations
has increasingly embarked on the expanded mandate,
empowered to become an essential, impartial factor in
peacebuilding inside Iraq. In particular, we have been
able to provide a thinking pause for all stakeholders on
contentious issues, construct a framework for dialogue
and foster the skills needed to help move Iraq towards
the socio-economic revival it wants and needs. This
should continue to guide United Nations actions, while
more than ever before gearing our focus towards
translating political progress into tangible benefits for
the many Iraqis still struggling in their daily lives.

Now, as the multinational forces draw down and
international partners are tending to wait and see, we
have to resist the temptation to take on too much. To be
successful, the United Nations should base its actions
on Iraqi ownership, selectivity in priorities and the
nexus between national reconciliation and economic
development. Allow me to briefly highlight the main
areas of focus.
3

All the evidence shows that Iraq's healthy future
will depend on the diversification of its economy, on
creating jobs for young people, on better services for
its citizens and on the stronger capacities of those who
seek to deliver them. These are goals that cannot wait
for political consensus; rather, they can become a
platform for consensus.

The global financial crisis and oil price volatility
have hit Iraq hard, decimating its revenues almost to
2003 levels and challenging its future capital budget.
At the same time, indispensable systemic reforms have
been slow, fragmented or absent. Managing oil and gas
contracts, building on a few promising recent results,
remains key. Yet a shift from the current oil-dependent
economy towards a healthy private sector that
encourages entrepreneurship and international
investment is central to stability and growth. Large-
scale programmes to stimulate the private sector and
modernize Iraq's public sector are in preparation or
under way. These and further support activities will be
core priorities for an integrated UNAMI. The
Government of Iraq has requested that particular
attention be paid to the management of its agriculture
and internal water resources in order to try to halt the
damage caused by the tragic shrinking of its rivers.

The main vehicle for our assistance will be Iraq's
five-year National Development Plan, due to start next
year, on which we are already closely cooperating with
the Government. We welcome the intention for the
National Development Plan to refocus Iraq towards
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals,
tailored to the Iraqi context, in order to deliver on basic
social, economic and development rights.

It will be my priority to ensure that our
development support, as a United Nations family, is
fully aligned with the National Development Plan. The
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
2011-2014 will be based on the priorities of the
National Development Plan, with an emphasis on
capacity-building; a final draft will be completed by
the end of the year. That will enable the Government to
co-sign after the January 2010 national elections,
moving the United Nations and Iraq into a true
economic support and social development partnership.

Over time, that should enable the United Nations
humanitarian programme to shift focus, moving away
from emergency appeals towards more comprehensive
support to poor and vulnerable communities,

expanding beyond Iraq's displaced populations. We can
create conditions for return only by restoring jobs and
services where conflict and poverty have undermined
them and by fostering a climate of human rights and
social healing.

Having said that, there are those for whom
humanitarian needs are still dire, specifically
communities decimated by years of conflict and a
number of Iraq's over 3 million internally and
externally displaced. The United Nations consolidated
appeal for 2009 was only 33 per cent funded for
activities in-country by July, and needs for support to
returnee families have since increased by over $100
million. I thank the Member States that have provided
support so far and hope that more will be forthcoming
to fill that gap.

As a necessary precondition for long-term
stability, we will have to continue to work to bring to
term those reconciliation processes already under way
that are essential to internal consensus and stability.
Two of the most critical priorities within the Mission
will be preparations for the national elections in 2010
and resolution on Iraq's disputed areas through the
High-level Task Force.

On the former, we are continuing to work
alongside the Independent High Electoral Commission
to strengthen the legitimacy of the electoral process.
An update of Iraq's national voter list, planned for
August, is an essential factor. In addition, we will
continue to advise on the technical aspects of future
electoral events.

Our work on Iraq's disputed areas will follow the
path set by the reports on the disputed internal
boundaries, the High-level Task Force and the article
23 committee in Kirkuk, which continues to receive
extensive technical support from UNAMI. Dialogue
rather than precipitous decision-making should be the
method to disentangle complex and sensitive facts and
perceptions. With the Council's support, the United
Nations remains well placed to be the impartial
connector between interests that may differ in many
ways, but are also part of a common heritage.

Progress on deadlocked constitutional issues,
such as revenue sharing and the hydrocarbon law, are
inextricably linked to those initiatives on national
reconciliation. An open door on one issue would
naturally lead to doors unlocking on several others, and
UNAMI will continue to strive for that type of chain
reaction.

The scope for progress will be greatly enhanced
by a display of constructive neighbourliness by all of
Iraq's partners. An important conditioning area of
focus for our work will be to further open the door to
engagement on issues that still challenge Iraq's
relationship with its neighbours. The normalization of
Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations remains a priority. I am grateful
for the Council's interest in advancing the completion
of outstanding requirements in relation to resolution
1859 (2008). Lasting confidence on both sides would
be a major cornerstone of a new regional understanding
of the huge potential of the mutual benefits that are
within reach. Assisting Iraq to regain its rightful place
among the community of nations, as stated by the
Secretary-General in his recent report on resolution
1859 (2008) (S/2009/385), lies at the heart of our
Mission.

We also look forward to pursuing promising
dialogue on cross-border initiatives that will boost
regional confidence and cooperation, such as border
demining and border security. Integration into the
regional economy is crucial to Iraq's internal
development, including reaching agreements on the
export of oil and gas and on the management of the
region's dwindling water resources.

Iraq is also at a unique point in its history as it
comes to terms with its commitment, as a partner in the
international community, to the fundamental principles
of human rights. Those are a promise to the people who
have suffered long and deeply and still rightfully aspire
to more. Neither true reconciliation nor true
development can be built in their absence. The United
Nations focus will be on improving Iraq's own capacity
in that area to secure the legal and constitutional rights
of its citizens and to foster a climate of respect for
human rights as a way of rebuilding trust in institutions
and rule of law.

While it works towards normalization, this is
most certainly not the time for the international
community to disengage on Iraq or to lessen its
commitment. I hope that the United Nations can lead
the way towards a new global partnership on Iraq that
reflects Iraq's current reality and preserves the gains of
the International Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq
as it approaches closure. The balance between Iraq and
its international partners is shifting towards fewer

capital-intensive investments and more loans, growth-
related investment and technical expertise. That is a
natural alternative to direct development aid to a
country that, oil price fluctuations aside, has ample
resources. It should not, however, be a precursor to
losing interest. Iraqis would not understand, and the
global interest would not be served.

There is, I think, a common understanding that
any future formula for international engagement with
Iraq should emerge from Iraq's own vision for
recovery, reconciliation and development. The
International Compact with Iraq has to date been
critical to linking Iraqi and international priorities. It
may now be time for the next stage - one more
naturally integrated into the National Development
Plan, with Iraq itself clearly in the lead.

We have an ambitious programme of action
before us. To achieve it, we are committed to
increasing our presence and visibility in Iraq,
particularly through United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes. This month, we will mark the sixth
anniversary of the attack that cost and scarred the lives
of Sergio Vieira de Mello and many other friends and
colleagues who only wanted to stand by the Iraqi
people. Both Iraq and the United Nations Mission have
come a long way since that time. We now have to build
on the momentum.

It will be a considerable management challenge
to align the ambition to be more present and more
effective with maintaining paramount attention to staff
safety. With Iraq's Government, we will also work
towards a more self-reliant operational approach in
terms of our security and logistics. Unfortunately, that
will inevitably require a great deal of human and
financial resources. We will continue to assess the
situation and to adjust our policy as necessary or
possible. Suffice it to say that the adequacy of funding
of that part of the Mission, including through
commensurate contributions from agencies, funds and
programmes, defines the scope of our outreach. We
continue to count on Member States for their support in
that regard.

In closing, the theme that I would prefer to stress
at this early juncture is strategic acceleration, building
on progress in the political sphere and throwing our
full support behind economic growth and social
development benefiting the people, in partnership and
constant consultation with Iraqis themselves.

We often talk of ordinary Iraqis as the litmus test
for recovery, but even over these few short weeks, I
have come to think of them as extraordinary Iraqis.
These families held firm to a belief in the greatness of
their country throughout the most testing times. An
overwhelming majority show high motivation to help
the tree of democracy take root in Iraq, with the
expectation that the fruits of democracy will follow:
thatjobs will be available, streets will be clean, schools
revitalized and communities safe. We in the United
Nations share that motivation. I can promise them that
we will do all in our power over the coming months to
gear ourselves towards this challenge.

