The President (spoke in French): I should now
like to make a relatively brief statement in my national
capacity.

First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Le Roy,
Ms. Malcorra and Mr. Annabi for participating in this
debate. At the very least, that demonstrates their clear
desire to work with the Security Council to further
improve peacekeeping procedures. In addition, along
with the representative of Turkey, I too would like to
say how much we cherish those who have died in the
service of peace.

At the outset, I would like to say just how pleased
I am that it has been possible to hold this meeting, just
a few months following David Miliband's urgent
appeal to the Secretary-General for a fresh process of
reflection here in the Security Council. It seems to us a
promising development indeed.

I should also like to reiterate France's great
commitment to strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping capacities. Given that we will soon have
deployed about 1,800 very well-equipped men in Blue
Helmets to peacekeeping operations, especially in
Lebanon and Chad, France is no doubt a significant
contributor. That is especially the case when one
considers the troops and contributions we have
provided to operations under United Nations mandates.
France's annual financial contributions to United
Nations operations easily surpass €l billion.

Beyond those numbers, we are especially
committed to peacekeeping, both because it is one the
main responsibilities of the United Nations and
because the lives of millions of men, women and
children depend upon such operations, to say nothing
of the survival and reconstruction of entire regions of
the planet.

France has always advocated improving the
outstanding tool that peacekeeping operations
constitute. We welcome the improvements that have
already been made, especially thanks to the exemplary
cooperation between the Secretariat and the States
members of the Council and the General Assembly, and
especially the members of the Fifth Committee. We
also welcome the establishment of the Department of
Field Support, about whose progress and hopes
Ms. Malcorra has told us. On the military front, we
welcome, inter alia, the establishment of the Strategic
Military Cell and the increase in the number of staff in
the Office of Military Affairs. In addition, we welcome
the improvement in the Council's practices - with the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, just a few weeks
ago, as well as with the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad - with regard to
the development of mandates and the monitoring of
operations through the establishment of benchmarks.

The European Union has also always been among
the strongest supporters of the United Nations when it
has required support. I am thinking in particular of the
cases of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Chad
and Kosovo. My colleague from the Czech Republic
will soon make a statement on behalf of the European
Union, and I fully associate myself with that.

There is, of course, still a long way to go. That is
why we have launched this joint initiative with the
United Kingdom today. John Sawers has correctly
outlined it and highlighted our expectations and the
British and French positions on the issue.

I would merely like, at this stage, to make a few
comments prompted by the statements already made by
my colleagues.

It seems to me that there is a clear awareness here
of the magnitude of the questions that we must deal
with and of our collective will to tackle them. I note
that the questions raised in the French and British
non-paper have been raised on numerous occasions and
seem to be concerns shared by all of the members of
the Council. In particular, these include greater
involvement of the Council in the planning, follow-up
and evaluation of peacekeeping operations at the
strategic and technical levels; the strengthening of
dialogue and exchanges of information with the
Secretariat; the strengthening of the military expertise
of the Council; and improvement in the drafting and
development of mandates; better management of
available resources in thinking about alternatives to
troop deployments; substituting civilian for military
means whenever possible; the capacity for reducing
and then closing operations; and a better use of
instruments other than peacekeeping operations to
manage crisis exit strategies, for example within the
Peacebuilding Commission.

We must now define better integrated missions
for peacekeeping operations with overall coherence.
Having worked on the comprehensive reform of the
system and defined the concept of "One United
Nations", I believe we now need to work on the
concept of"One mission".

I also note the very clear will of the Council to
have its own practices evolve, together with the
Secretariat, in the preparation, follow-up and
evaluation of operations in the field.

Finally, this discussion also demonstrates, I
believe, the critical importance of the various
stakeholders in peacekeeping and peacebuilding: the
troop-contributing countries, the financial donors and
the various existing forums for dialogue, including the
Fifth Committee, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Peacebuilding
Commission.

The particularly important role of regional
organizations is also a subject of consensus. We need
to better define the modalities for intervention in
cooperation with the Council. The essential element in
achieving that is to draw up a transparent and inclusive
process, conducted in cooperation with all key
partners. It is to several of such partners that I would
now, in my capacity as President of the Council, like to
give the floor.

I now give the floor to the representative of India.

