Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, let me thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Yamamoto for his very
enlightening briefing, especially on peace efforts and
the electoral process. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Voronkov and Executive Director Fedotov
for their briefings on combating terrorism and drug
trafficking in Afghanistan, where the conflict is
tragically illustrative of the persistent combination of
local and global factors, whether relating to terrorism,
drug trafficking, negative climactic developments
or non-respect for basic rights, in particular those of
children and women.

France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the observer of the European Union.

I will comment on four areas today.

My first observation concerns the security situation
in Afghanistan, which continues to be extremely
unstable and calls for pursuing efforts to protect
civilians. France condemns in the strongest terms the
two suicide bombings perpetrated on 16 and 17 June
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
Province in the province of Nangarhar. That type of
asymmetrical attack - whether carried out by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province or the
Taliban - has become the leading cause of civilian
deaths, as the Secretary-General pointed out in his
quarterly report (S/2018/539). In that regard, more
must be done to protect women and children, who are
especially vulnerable should there be a resurgence of
violence. Almost one in three victims in Afghanistan
last year was a child. The implementation of the
national action plan deserves praise, but much remains
to be done 4 for example, concerning the detention of
children, their recruitment by parties to the conflict and
the police force, and early or forced marriages. France
reiterates its full support for the Afghan Government
in its struggle against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan Province and the Taliban insurgency.
In particular, we must see to it that foreign terrorist
fighters fleeing Iraq and the Syria are prevented from
finding refuge in Afghanistan.

France remains very concerned about drug
trafficking, which continues to fuel the illicit
economy, finance the Taliban insurgency and terrorist
groups, and threaten the health of many Afghans. As
Mr. Fedotov just underscored, recent developments
give cause for concern, with an unprecedented level of
opium production since last year. France calls on the
Afghan authorities to redouble their efforts in that area,
with the support of the international community and
the United Nations. We hope that this subject, which is
crucial to the future of the country, will be brought up
at the ministerial conference on Afghanistan to be held
in Geneva in November. In that regard, the Paris Pact
Initiative remains an optimal framework for sharing
ideas among all countries affected by drug trafficking
in Afghanistan.

My second point concerns the fact that the dire
security situation and the human cost of the conflict
must motivate us to redouble efforts to achieve lasting
peace in Afghanistan. We have seen encouraging
signs over recent weeks. The ceasefires, which
were honoured during Eid Al-Fitr, at the Afghan
Government's initiative, have given hope to the
Afghan people, who have begun their march towards
peace. France welcomes the unilateral extension of the
ceasefire by Afghan forces but regrets that the Taliban
did not respond positively to President Ghani's offer
to extend the ceasefire beyond Eid Al-Fitr. In that
regard, France highlights the importance of the Kabul
process for peace and security and calls on the Taliban
to engage in direct negotiations as President Ghani has
proposed. At the same time, we recall the demand of
the international community that the Taliban renounce
all forms of violence. Lastly, the improvement in the
regional dynamic must be commended and encouraged.
With regard to the electoral process - this being my
third point - France welcomes the preparatory efforts
of the Afghan Independent Election Commission.
As of today, nearly 7 million registrations have been
recorded on the electoral lists - an encouraging,
albeit inadequate, number. We call on the Afghan
Government to pursue those efforts, with the support
of United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and its international partners, to conduct
free, credible and transparent elections according to the
agreed timeline. The Independent Election Commission
must continue to work towards ensuring the largest
voter turn-out among the population. In that regard, we
are concerned about the dearth of candidates in some
provinces. It is also important to recall that women can
fully participate in the electoral process both as voters
and as candidates. In order to sustainably improve
women's political participation, support - including
financial support - for the national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, is needed today.

Lastly, my fourth remark concerns indispensable
international support for Afghanistan. By renewing
UNAMA's mandate in March, the Council reiterated
its unwavering commitment to restoring peace
in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I welcome the exceptional dedication
of UNAMA's personnel, who work with courage and
perseverance in particularly difficult conditions.

