Mr. Lagos Pizzati (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): The United Nations, and particularly the
Security Council, have the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
given that Article 25 of the Charter establishes that we,
the Member States, have agreed to accept and duly
carry out the decisions of that organ.

Twelve years ago, the international community,
through the collective security mechanism established
in the Charter, gave effect to a universally-supported
decision to restore the independence and sovereign
rights of a Member State of the Organization -
Kuwait - which had been flagrantly violated by Iraq.
It that context, a fundamental decision had to be made
that set the collective objective of disarming Iraq of
weapons of mass destruction, in order to avoid the
possibility of further threats to peace in the region and
to the world in general.

All this time having passed, it is regrettable to
note that that objective remains to be achieved and that
the Government of Iraq has not complied with its
international obligations, defying the will of the
international community and the binding decisions
adopted by the Security Council to maintain peace or
prevent acts that might undermine peace.

Today, the situation has not resulted in
substantive changes regarding the basic objective of
disarmament. That is so despite the fact that, as early
as 1999, the Security Council adopted resolution 1284
(1999), establishing that Iraq should provide
cooperation in all aspects to the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
and the International Atomic Energy Agency. That is so
despite the fact that in 2002, resolution 1441 (2002)
was adopted, in which it is categorically expressed that
that Government was being given a last chance to fulfil
its obligations regarding disarmament, for which
purpose Iraq should cooperate fully, immediately and
unconditionally with the inspectors.

The crisis that has now arisen and the protracted
suffering of the Iraqi people are nothing more than the
outcome of the negligence and irresponsibility of the
Government of Iraq in fulfilling its obligations that
were originally accepted and imposed by means of
resolution 687 (1991) and other relevant Security
Council resolutions.

As other delegations have stated, my Government
is profoundly concerned by the crisis generated by
Iraq's failure to fully comply with its obligations,
particularly by the almost imminent possibility of an
armed conflict and its repercussions on peace, security
and stability - important conditions for promoting the
well-being and development of peoples.

We believe that countless political and diplomatic
efforts - bilateral as well as multilateral - have been
made to convince the Government of Iraq to comply
with its international obligations regarding
disarmament by destroying its weapons of mass
destruction. However, the reality is that Iraq has defied
the authority of this organ, which is reflected in
resolutions unanimously adopted by its members.

Given that persistent defiance, the Security
Council, pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter, must
assume its lofty responsibilities and give effect to its
decisions. The international tension will continue if the
Government of Iraq maintains attitudes and delaying
tactics that run counter to the obligations stemming
from a binding resolution.

In the light of the reports presented to the
Security Council and taking into account the fact that
no delegation has declared that Iraq has fully complied,
the Government of El Salvador considers that we have
arrived at a stage at which the members of the Security
Council need to take a decision.

In taking that decision, with the greatest sense of
urgency, the utmost effort must be made to adopt a
resolution that will maintain the unity that has
characterized the Council on this issue. On the basis of
the fact that the inspections cannot go on indefinitely
and that Iraq cannot continue to delay the objective of
disarmament, Iraq must comply unequivocally and
immediately with its obligations, in a complete and
unconditional fashion.

Iraq should take advantage of what remains of
this last chance offered to it to overcome the crisis
peacefully, and it must do that with the certainty and
the conviction that it will be to the benefit of the peace,
security and stability of the peoples of Iraq, of its
region and of the peoples of the world.

