Mr. Cohen (United States of America): During
the Arria Formula meeting on the situation of persons
with disabilities in armed conflict, held in December
2018, the United States made a commitment to raise the
situation of persons with disabilities more systemically
in the Security Council. We are very pleased to see the
Council do that today. We want to thank Ms. Mustapha
for sharing her story and her perspectives and for
ensuring that Syrians with disabilities will never
be invisible to the Council. For our part, the United
States will continue to advocate for the needs of
persons with disabilities when planning, coordinating
and implementing humanitarian assistance in Syria
and elsewhere.

Numerous United Nations reports detail the
Al-Assad regime's systemic, barbaric use of arbitrary
detentions against hundreds of thousands of Syrian
civilians. The United States will continue to work
towards accountability and justice for those who
have been arbitrarily or unlawfully detained and for
missing persons in Syria. That will be necessary as
the political transition in Syria moves forward under
the leadership of Special Envoy Pedersen in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
The United States strongly supports a third United
Nations-led humanitarian convoy to the Rukban
internally displaced persons camp. Unfortunately,
as we have heard, the Al-Assad regime has denied
the United Nations request. We also understand that
commercial traffic into the encampment is blocked.
It is unacceptable to starve the Rukban residents
into submission. The United States condemns any
attempt to prevent the United Nations from delivering
humanitarian aid. As the residents of Rukban prepare
for the holy month of Ramadan, we call on Moscow to
ensure Damascus's agreement to provide humanitarian
assistance to Rukban immediately and to stop blocking
commercial traffic into the encampment.

Recent discussions among the humanitarian
community and in the press have once again shined
a light on the issue of cross-border assistance. Cross-
border assistance remains a critical lifeline for more
than 11 million people inside Syria. The Security
Council must remain united in its support for the
full implementation of the cross-border humanitarian
mechanism authorized by resolution 2449 (2018) in
December 2018. The United States is deeply concerned
about recent attempts by Russia and China in the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly to politicize
and undermine the Security Council's unanimous
authorization of cross-border humanitarian operations
by proposing cuts to the mechanism's operational costs.
Those attempts are at odds with the vital necessity of
United Nations cross-border humanitarian aid to the
Syrian people.

The United States calls on all Council members, as
well as its regional partners, to ensure that the United
Nations has the operational capacity to implement
cross-border aid deliveries through all agreed border
crossings, in accordance with resolution 2449 (2018).
No one should politicize or try to dictate United Nations
operations for cross-border aid delivery in Syria - not
the Al-Assad regime, not the Russian Federation, no
one. The Al-Assad regime continues to prioritize
the provision of humanitarian assistance, including
cross-border assistance, only to areas controlled by
regime forces. Yet even areas under regime control,
like Quneitra and Dara'a governorates in south-
west Syria, are struggling and reliant on approvals
that are purposefully delayed by regime officials
in Damascus. Those delays of regime approvals for
routine humanitarian access requests underscore the
importance of cross-border operations to continue
unimpeded from all four border crossings, including
the Al-Ramtha crossing from Jordan, which represents
a direct route to reach the hundreds of thousands in
need in south-west Syria.

The United States remains committed to the
guiding principles for the voluntary and safe return
of IDPs and refugees in dignity. They should return
only at a time of their choosing. They should be able to
choose where they go. They should have access to the
proper civil documentation necessary for the exercise
of their legal rights. They should be able to reclaim
their property and, when that is not possible, be given
appropriate compensation; and they should be free
from fear that they will be victims of disappearances,
unlawful detention or forced conscription.

Finally, the United States is alarmed by the surge
this month in Russian and regime air strikes in Idlib
governorate that have killed scores and displaced more
than 110,000 people. The United States position on Idlib
is clear. The September 2018 Russian-Turkish-brokered
ceasefire must hold. Any military escalation, including
any use of chemical weapons by the regime and its
allies in Idlib, would be catastrophic for the millions of
people there and for the stability of Syria's neighbours
and the broader region.

