Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate on United Nations peacekeeping.

A year and a half ago, the Secretary-General
launched his Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative,
which calls on all peacekeeping stakeholders - the
Secretariat, Member States and intergovernmental
organizations - to collectively address the challenges
facing peacekeeping. We must all remember the stakes.
Peacekeeping is an essential multilateral tool for
preventing conflict, reducing the risk of relapse and
reaching sustainable peace, and it has succeeded in
doing that in many countries. Today, United Nations
peacekeepers play a crucial preventive role where they
are deployed, and they protect millions of vulnerable
people around the globe.

While we have made progress on addressing the
challenges to which the Secretary-General spoke
in March 2018, many remain. The countries and
populations that we serve and the peacekeepers who
risk their lives in the name of peace deserve only the
best that we can deliver. The onus remains on each of
us to do our part.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
every Member State for its support to United Nations
peacekeeping - as troop- and police contributors,
financial contributors and members of the General
Assembly and Security Council. Today I will speak about
the results that we are achieving through our sustained
and systematic effort to strengthen peacekeeping. I will
also draw attention to areas in need of greater collective
progress, and I look forward to hearing Member States'
own plans for enabling us to advance the A4P agenda.

Political solutions are a prerequisite to sustainable
peace, and the pursuit of such solutions is at the centre
of the A4P agenda. In every country in which we are
deployed and our mandates permit, our missions are
proactive maintaining space for political solutions
to be pursued. In the Central African Republic, for
example, working in partnership with the African
Union (AU) and the Economic Commission of Central
African States, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) took advantage of its stronger
political mandate and the robust security posture of
its peacekeepers to create an environment that led the
Government and the 14 main armed groups signing the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic in February.

I have done, and will continue to do, what I can
to do my part in bringing peace to the people of the
Central African Republic. With the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, to whom I
pay tribute not only as a friend but, more importantly,
as a strong partner for peace, I visited the country twice
this year, first in January to encourage the parties to
reach an agreement and again in April to encourage
the parties to continue implementation. Commissioner
Chergui and I plan to return to the Central African
Republic next month. Thus far, the positive effects of
the agreement are evident, including in the marked
reduction in violence from last year to today.

Similarly, in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
the support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for the implementation of the
31 December 2016 political agreement was instrumental
in ensuring the necessary political space for the
country's first-ever peaceful transfer of democratic
power in February. As the Secretary-General noted
when he was in the country a few days ago, there are
now new opportunities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to advance peace and development.

Our efforts to support the pursuit of peace at the
national level are complemented by our contributions to
peacebuilding at the local level. In Darfur, for example,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) has continued to support the
peaceful resolution of land disputes and intercommunal
conflict, resulting in the adjudication and mediation of
more than 2,000 disputes last year.

Partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, as well as across the United Nations
system, are critical in every country in which we work,
particularly to facilitate transitions. In Darfur, we are
working closely with the AU to plan for the transition
of UNAMID from peacekeeping to peacebuilding with
a view to preventing a relapse of conflict following
the mission's eventual exit. UNAMID and the United
Nations country team have also pioneered an approach
to joint delivery through State liaison functions, which
provide context-specific support that responds to local
needs and increases the capacity of the country team
to support peacebuilding activities, while enhancing
partnership with local authorities.

The endorsers of the A4P Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations committed to pursuing clear, focused,
sequenced, prioritized and achievable mandates
matched by appropriate resources. We are grateful for
the efforts undertaken by penholders, and the Security
Council as a whole, to reflect prioritization in recent
mandates. But we also urge Member States, as Security
Council and General Assembly members, to ensure that
new priorities be allocated consistent with resources.
For example, the instability in central Mali has led
to the establishment of a second strategic priority
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), namely, to
support the restoration of State authority and protect
civilians in the area, but without the corresponding
increase in resources.

In addition, I take this opportunity to underscore
the importance of united political engagement by
Member States - Council members, as well as others
that have stakes in the conflicts where our operations
are deployed. A spirit of mutual and respective
responsibility is at the core of A4P, and nowhere is that
more important than in pursuing durable solutions to
conflict and instability.

The volatile political and security environments
where many peacekeeping missions are deployed
require well-equipped and capable military, police and
civilian components, with the right mindset and posture
to undertake flexible and rapid deployments. That is
why we are changing our approach to peacekeeping.
Our efforts are focused on adapting mission footprints
and strengthening capacity to ensure a more mobile,
robust, aware and integrated operational approach.

MONUSCO, for example, has shifted away from
static bases in many locations, replacing them with
rapidly deployable battalions. Rapidly deployable
battalions strengthen our mobility and robustness and, in
MONUSCO, are part ofthe Mission's protection through
projection concept. Rapidly deployable battalions
are capable of swiftly deploying to prevent, mitigate
and address protection threats as they emerge. Those
changes in footprint, posture and mindset have been
complemented by other protection measures, including
the establishment of community alert networks and
support to national efforts to combat impunity.

When a spate of horrific attacks against civilians
broke out in Ituri province in 2018, MONUSCO's
rapidly deployable battalions quickly sent out four
temporary base deployments to the hotspots of the
violence. Those deployments provided the necessary
security space for civilian staff to conduct human
rights monitoring and community engagement and
provided a degree of confidence among the population
to allow people to return to their villages. Coming back
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo just a few
days ago, I can assure the Council that the new spirit
of the rapidly deployable battalions reaches beyond the
units themselves to the Mission a whole. But we need to
do more, particularly in the areas affected by the most
brutal armed groups, which are also affected by the
Ebola outbreak.

In MINUSCA, military units with high readiness
and protection capacities were generated to mitigate
the challenges to mobility imposed by the difficult
terrain. In addition, the level of mechanization of the
infantry battalions was upgraded to ensure enhanced
protection. Readjustments of troop posture are also
under way there, with a new basing plan that aims to
achieve greater reactivity and operational flexibility.
In the past few days, in response to tension between
armed groups in the area of Birao, in the east of the
country, MINUSCA was able to quickly deploy military
reinforcements, while actively engaging in mediation,
thereby significantly defusing the situation.
We are also achieving results in our efforts to reduce
the number of fatalities in peacekeeping. As shown in
the document that has been circulated, the number of
fatalities as a result of violent attacks was significantly
lower in 2018, down to 27, and, after the first nine
months of this year, stands at 21. That is significantly
lower than when the action plan to improve the security
of United Nations peacekeepers was launched. In 2017,
we sustained, as those present will recall, a tragic 58
fatalities as a result of violent attacks.

In Mali, where MINUSMA is still the most
challenging Mission for the security of peacekeepers,
we are now much more effective in countering the
threat of improvised explosive devices (IEDs), resulting
in fewer fatalities as a result of IED attacks and many
more IEDs are being detected and neutralized. Our
camps are better protected and our units are better
equipped with mine-protected vehicles. Of course,
much more remains to be done, and one peacekeeper
being killed is still one too many.

We are encouraged by the response of Member
States in providing our missions with specialized
assets and equipment. As members of the Council can
see in the document before them, the number of units
with significant equipment gaps has been significantly
reduced; but we need to do more.

In MINUSMA, capability gaps include one
medium helicopter unit in Gao, two medium armed
utility helicopter units in Mopti and Kidal and one
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance unit in
Timbuktu. Further, specialized and high-performing
capabilities for peacekeeping - particularly critical
enablers, such as multi-role engineers; transport,
signal, aviation and medical units; rapidly deployable
capabilities; and French-speaking units - remain in
short supply.

Technology, such as unarmed unmanned aerial
vehicles, sense-and-warn systems and remote sensors
have equally become necessities for uniformed
personnel. We look forward to continuing to work with
all those present, troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
and police-contributing countries (PCCs), as well
as willing partners to address those gaps and ensure
full operational readiness. To that end, we support
and promote innovative solutions, such as equipment-
contributing countries or joint deployments.

We, of course, also increasingly need troop- and
police-contributing countries to come equipped
with vehicles that can withstand greater impact from
improvised explosive devices, including mine-protected
armoured personnel carriers. In MINUSMA, due
to the continued threat, an additional 80 armoured
personnel carriers with mine-protective standards are
still required, in spite of the progress that I mentioned
earlier. More comprehensive information on our
capability requirements is circulated to the Council
regularly through the uniformed capability readiness
paper, which is also available on the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System website.

Improved situational awareness is also a critical
component of effective operations, and we are making
progress in that regard. Mission peacekeeping-
intelligence coordination mechanisms have been
established in MINUSMA, MONUSCO, MINUSCA
and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) to ensure coordination among all actors
involved in peacekeeping intelligence, under the
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. Those mechanisms are already
enhancing efficiency and coordination among military,
police and civilian components.

Our efforts to strengthen performance are also
guided by the provisions of resolution 2436 (2018),
and we have made significant progress in that
regard. The strengthening of internal evaluations of
performance is a core component of the action plan
and the implementation of resolution 2436 (2018).
Since January 2018, we have conducted 16 enhanced
predeployment visits, which is a concept that was
created as part of our efforts to improve readiness.
Those enhanced predeployment visits have led to
significant improvements in the operational readiness
of our units.

We also conduct force commander and police
commissioner evaluations, which are giving us a
comprehensive view of the strengths, capacities and
limitations of every unit. They have allowed us to take
more informed selection decisions through monthly
performance meetings, which I chair. Those meetings,
together with the systematic independent investigation
of every significant case of failure to perform, enable
targeted engagement with Member States, including
to implement remedial measures, when needed.
Where we have encountered underperformance, we
have deployed mentors or training teams, adjusted
deployment timelines or even repatriated parts of or
full units. In such cases, we have also looked into what
had to be changed in the way missions are organized
or operate, including key questions of situational
awareness, integrated planning and coordination
among mission pillars.
The roll-out of the comprehensive performance
assessment system to six missions provides the
platform to assess the overall performance of our
missions, including their individual components.
Initial performance analysis conducted in the first four
missions reveals that the comprehensive performance
assessment system has strengthened unity of purpose
and cross-component planning, while enhancing
data collection.

We are also getting smarter in our approach to
training. In our drive to enhance performance, we have
changed the way that we interact with TCCs and PCCS,
both in terms of what we can do for them and what they
can do for peacekeeping. For example, we are reaching
out directly to national force planners, conducting
operational readiness seminars, which provide TCCs
and PCCs with the latest policies, and giving them the
chance to interact directly with senior officials from
the Department of Peace Operations.

To help new TCCs, we are also providing advice
on force generation and encouraging them to deploy
only forces that they can consistently train to United
Nations standards through multiple rotations. We
have deployed mobile training teams in MONUSCO
and MINUSMA to provide context- and skill-specific
training, ranging from much-needed jungle warfare in
the Kivus to tactical military decision-making, and we
have put in place and are utilizing the light coordination
mechanism, which is coordinating and deconflicting
bilateral training efforts.

Many of those measures will enhance our
peacekeepers' safety and security, but we are also
putting in place specific measures to ensure that our
personnel receive the best treatment in cases of injuries
or illness. Medical and casualty evacuation (CASEVAC)
is central to self-protection. We have embarked on an
ambitious programme of health reform to formally
establish a chain of reliable and safe care from the point
of injury to the hospital. CASEVAC exercises regularly
conducted in UNMISS, MINUSMA, MINUSCA and
MONUSCO have helped each of the missions identify
improvements needed and are informing a revised
CASEVAC policy.

Better performance will also be aided by improved
standards, captured in frameworks and guidelines.
We have been working to roll out or revise and update
guidance in many fields, such as the weapons and
ammunition management policy, the Guide for Senior

Leadership on Field Entity Closure and the Military
Peacekeeping Intelligence Handbook. Through such
guidance, our operations and peacekeepers have clear
frameworks when preparing for and performing their
duties and can have a better impact on the ground.
Peacekeeping has to be rules- and guidance-based, and
we are working towards that objective.

Improving the number of women peacekeepers
is key to improving peacekeeping performance.
Peacekeeping with more women is simply more
effective. We have increased the number of uniformed
women peacekeepers. The number of women staff
officers and military observers has doubled from 2017.
On the other hand, the number of women in formed
contingents has increased only from 3.6 per cent in
2017 to 4.4 per cent in July of this year. To improve
our engagement with local communities, we deployed
54 engagement platoons, half of which are women, into
infantry battalions in UNMISS, MINUSCA, the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and MONUSCO.
Those units are extremely effective in building trust
with vulnerable communities, preventing tension and
helping to reduce violence. The increase in the number
of women peacekeepers is encouraging but it is too
slow, in particular for formed units. I call on troop-
and police-contributing countries to redouble efforts to
deploy more women.

Even where performance is otherwise exemplary,
the entirety of United Nations peacekeeping is
undermined when our standards of conduct are
violated. Nowhere is that more damaging than in the
case of sexual exploitation and abuse. We have made
concerted efforts, in partnership with Member States,
to prevent cases of sexual exploitation and abuse. While
it is hard to pinpoint the direct effect of any single
initiative, our efforts are having an impact. We have
seen a steady downward trend in allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse, from 104 allegations in 2016 to
55 in 2018. Our continued vigilance remains the utmost
priority. We will continue to strengthen prevention and
accountability for misconduct and enhanced assistance
to the victims of sexual exploitation and abuse. But, of
course, if we are to achieve our goal to advance the fight
against sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping,
we also need the full cooperation of all troop- and
police-contributing countries.

(spoke in French)

Partnerships are at the heart of Action for
Peacekeeping. Such partnerships begin within the United
Nations itself. Progress in implementing the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which I mentioned, is the result
of close collaboration among the Department of Peace
Operations, the Department of Operational Support
and the Department of Management Strategy, Policy
and Compliance. I would like to thank my colleagues
Under-Secretaries-General Atul Khare and Jan Beagle,
as well as Catherine Pollard, and their teams for their
joint efforts in advancing Action for Peacekeeping. I
look forward to continuing to lead that effort with
those two departments, as well as with all those in the
Secretariat who help us achieve our objectives.

Our progress is also due to the collective action we
have taken more broadly within the United Nations,
in particular with agencies, funds and programmes.
A notable example is the intense and invaluable
collaboration in the fight against Ebola among the
World Health Organization, MONUSCO, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
partners. I should also mention the end of peacekeeping
in Haiti and the transition process under way, which
is taking place via very close cooperation among the
Department of Peace Operations, the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and many other
United Nations actors.

Nonetheless, the success of Action for Peacekeeping
depends on strong partnerships that extend well
beyond the United Nations system. My department's
close and deep cooperation with the African Union
Commission has proved invaluable and indispensable
in advancing political solutions and in implementing
peace agreements on the continent. Other partners play
a vital role in our collective efforts for peace through
their political commitment and action on the ground. I
would mention the European Union, for example, and
subregional organizations in Africa and beyond.

Above all, strong and tangible commitment on
the part of Member States is vital to ensuring the
full achievement of the objectives of Action for
Peacekeeping. We need their strong and united support
for political solutions. We also need their continued
commitment and cooperation to improve performance
across the board through our collective efforts.

(spoke in English)
The Secretariat remains fully committed to
improving peacekeeping and has made significant
efforts in that regard. Peacekeeping is changing for
the better. It is better prepared, more robust and more
reactive. But the journey has just begun; it cannot be
undertaken alone. For our part, I commit to further
strengthening our efforts to support political processes
and to ensuring that the processes we support make a
tangible difference in the lives of those we are mandated
to serve. I further commit to enhancing peacekeeping
performance, including by further strengthening
integration at all levels, including command and control
in particular. We are also redoubling our efforts to assess
progress on the basis of concrete evidence-based data.

As I already mentioned, we circulated to Members
earlier in today's meeting a document highlighting
some of the key achievements we have accomplished
thus far. I intend to circulate similar products on a
much more regular basis to keep everyone informed
of the concrete results we are achieving. We have also
provided guidance to our missions on how to report
on their contributions to A4P. That is an additional
measure to ensure that we are doing our utmost to track
and share with members the progress we are making in
the various contexts in which we are deployed. I would
also like to reiterate my requests for members to visit
our field missions and evaluate our progress in person.
We need their candid and field-based assessment to
help us move forward and change course, if needed.

I would like to express my thanks to all members
that have accepted our request to serve as champions
in the key areas relevant to peacekeeping. It is a clear
demonstration of their ongoing commitment to A4P.
We look forward to further discussing how we can
continue to work together to maintain that momentum
and strengthen our collective results on the ground.

Finally, we are grateful for the Council's
commitment to supporting our efforts to strengthen
peacekeeping and hope to be able to continue to count
on the Council's support for such efforts.

