Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.
I want to add my thanks to those of others to Special
Envoy David Nabarro, Special Representative Anthony
Banbury, and Thomas Mauget for their tireless work in
combating this epidemic. I do not want those thanks to
sound formulaic. They are deep and heartfelt. I would
also like, through the four ambassadors of the most-
affected countries, to convey our admiration for all
the national and international health workers who are
working in the most-affected countries and to offer
them our continued wholehearted support.

We heard today that Ebola continues to attack lives,
livelihoods, societies and economies. In some places
we are making progress in containing the disease,
but in others it continues to spread. The global battle
to counter that threat is also increasing, but not at a
sufficient pace. We must do more, not only to extinguish
the current crisis but also to lay the foundations for
tomorrow, for the recovery of West Africa and its
people. If we succeed in outpacing the disease, as is
our goal, tomorrow may come sooner than we think.
Preparations for that must start today.

The United Kingdom continues to play its part
in the global battle against Ebola. I am going simply
to list what we do, not for the purpose of saying how
much we do, but in order to say that much more needs
to be done. So far, we have committed $350 million to
combating the disease. Alongside civilian staff, 820
United Kingdom military personnel are currently on
the ground in Sierra Leone supporting national efforts.
Since our last such Council meeting (see S/PV.7279), the
United Kingdom has increased our package of support,
which includes 750 treatment beds for up 8,800 patients
over six months. The first United Kingdom-funded
treatment centre opened in Kerry Town, and five more
are being built.

We are also supporting others to deliver critical safe
burial work and World Health Organization training for
over 800 health workers a week. The United Kingdom
naval ship Argus and three helicopters are facilitating
greater mobility and logistical support for heroic
medical teams and aid experts. We are also working
critically to deliver 200 community health-care centres
across Sierra Leone over the next two months and
are rolling out our own command-and-control model
to districts. However, in the words of our Foreign
Secretary, who spoke from Sierra Leone last week, "We
are beginning to see early signs of impact, but despite
our and others' efforts, this battle has only just begun."

We thank those already making a critical
contribution, including Australia, Denmark and the
Netherlands, which are working so closely with us
in Sierra Leone, as well as Cuba, China, Venezuela,
France, the European Union more widely and the
United States and so many others for helping the people
of the countries most affected. We call on existing and
potential partners to explore whether they can help in
filling two key missing pieces in our contribution to
Sierra Leone. First, we need more health-care workers to
staff the six Ebola treatment centres that are being built.
We can provide pre-deployment training, in-country
training and guidance for any Member State able to
deploy a large number of staff on rotation. Second, we
need laboratory technicians and biomedical scientists to
help United Kingdom staff run the laboratories. Rapid
and accurate diagnosis of Ebola is critical to treatment
and containment.

We have heard today that the United Nations,
through the United Nations Mission for Emergency
Ebola Response (UNMEER), is ramping up efforts in
the three most-affected countries and Mali. It is right and
critical that UNMEER continues to buttress regional
preparedness while battling the current outbreak. The
challenges remain huge. David Nabarro highlighted the
need for a further $600 million in contributions. The
United Kingdom has contributed $30 million to the
United Nations multi-donor trust fund. We are grateful
to David and Tony for providing the strong political
leadership and operational direction that are necessary
to lead the international effort.

We all need to support UNMEER in its critical
functions. Those include, in particular, coordinating
the United Nations system, including the agencies
on the ground, and building partnerships with other
actors at the Headquarters, country and district levels;
harnessing the global supply chain with a platform
extending to the district level; rapidly mobilizing and
coordinating resources, including scaling up staffing;
communicating with all stakeholders so that we can spot
gaps together, share analysis and create solutions; and
focusing on all the most affected countries, including
preparedness and contingency planning for the longer
term.
By planning today for the reconstruction and
recovery efforts of tomorrow, the United Nations must
continue to play a key role. The Group of 20 underlines
strong global support for all actors playing their part.
Collectively, we must also move faster in supporting
the development of vaccines and stand prepared to
deploy them at scale should the circumstances require.
I would also like to join others in highlighting one
pressing need, which is the rapid scaling-up of skilled
health workers and other staff, not just in Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Guinea, but in those three countries in
particular and at the district level. We must reach every
person in need.

The Council must continue to keep the world's
attention on this threat to international peace and
security. Ebola's attack on West Africa is an attack on
all of us. The international community must continue
to fight it together.

