The President: I thank the representative of
Ukraine for his kinds words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Mauritius.

We would like to join previous speakers in
thanking Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and for his comprehensive and very useful briefing this
morning.

We congratulate the people of Kosovo on the
successful organization of the elections in their
province. We hope that the Assembly members will
soon elect their President and that the provisional
institutions of self-government can assume full
responsibility over areas under their authority. This is a
very crucial moment, when members of the Assembly
need to work constructively in a spirit of patriotism.
We call on them to show a stronger sense of
compromise and dialogue and to agree on the choice of
the President of Kosovo. The sooner the President is
appointed, the better it will be, because the institutions
of provisional self-government have to start operating
soon. Long and arduous work lies ahead of the
Assembly members to shape the future of their
province.

We commend UNMIK for the excellent work it is
doing to support the Assembly in avoiding any
legislative vacuum. We encourage the team for the
efficient manner in which it is operating. We also
understand that, once the provisional self-government
is in place, UNMIK will hand over authority to it,
while retaining some competencies for the Special
Representative, as specified in resolution 1244 (1999).

The issue of the security of minority communities
remains a priority at this point in time so as to
encourage them to return to their homeland. It is noted
that only 2,432 out of the 229,900 registered internally
displaced persons have returned to their homes in
Kosovo. Much work needs to be done to activate the
return and reintegration of these displaced persons.
While UNMIK and KFOR are carrying out their duties
of ensuring the safe return of the internally displaced
persons and refugees, we call on the political leaders to
create the necessary conditions to accelerate the return
of the minority communities to the province.

The return of internally displaced persons and
refugees will also depend on the availability of the
proper infrastructures and the restoration of public
utilities and community services in the province. This
will no doubt need further assistance from donors and,
in that regard, we urge donor communities to enhance
their support for the various projects that are being
carried out in Kosovo. The region, which is one of the
poorest in Europe, urgently needs investment for
sustained economic recovery.

Mauritius has repeatedly highlighted in its
previous statements that the security situation in the
Mitrovica region remains a challenge which should be
tackled with great care if we do not want a crumbling
of the whole process of peacemaking in Kosovo.
UNMIK has still not been able to fully enforce its
authority in that area, where the security situation
continues to be fragile. It is also a matter of concern
that KFOR members continue to be assaulted while on
duty in that part of the province. We reiterate our call
on the Serb political leaders to bring their influence to
bear on their supporters for the unhindered operations
of UNMIK and KFOR in the Mitrovica region. We also
encourage the posting of Kosovo Serb officers of the
Kosovo Police Service to the northern part of the
province so that the people of Mitrovica will show less
hostility to the police force and allow the proper
enforcement of law and order.

Mauritius welcomes the setting up of the
specialized units by UNMIK pillar I (police and justice) to combat organized criminal activities and
terrorism in the province. We encourage UNMIK and
KFOR to step up search operations, especially along
the borders, so as to limit the smuggling of weapons to
armed groups. We hope that the re-entry of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia into Interpol will ensure closer
police cooperation between Pristina, Belgrade and
other States in the region in order to bring down the
level of crime and other illegal activities and contribute
towards regional stability.

Like other speakers before us, we condemn the
murder of the Democratic League of Kosovo member
of the Assembly and we equally condemn the bomb
attack on the home of a Kosovo Albanian, injuring a
pregnant woman and a child. These irresponsible acts
must be reprehended and those responsible must be
brought to justice.

The problem of detainees and missing persons is
a crucial factor in the building of confidence between
Albanians and Serbs. This seems to have achieved
some progress, especially following the signing of the
Common Document between UNMIK and Belgrade.
We note with satisfaction that UNMIK will soon open a
sub-office of the Missing Persons Unit in Belgrade and
that it will be granted full access to post-mortem data
collected by the Serbian police. We also consider the
protocol on joint verification teams on hidden prisons,
though still in the drafting stage, to be a very positive
step forward. The handing over of Albanian detainees
from Serbia to UNMIK will further help to build
confidence in the relations between Pristine and
Belgrade.

It is up to the new Government of Kosovo to rise
to the challenge of building a democratic, secure and
multi-ethnic Kosovar society, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). I should like to echo the words
of the representatives of Mexico and Singapore when
they mentioned the importance of education in trying
to build a multi-ethnic society. Mauritius is another
multi-ethnic society where education has certainly
helped to establish better harmony between the
different ethnic groups.

Finally, we would like to pay tribute to the
important work carried out by Mr. Hans Haekkerup as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. We would like to express our best wishes to
his successor, Mr. Michael Steiner.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Guehenno to respond
to the comments made and questions raised.

