Mr. Mahendran (Sri Lanka): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month and to assure you of our full cooperation. I
would also like to record our deep appreciation for the
excellent work done by the representative of Bulgaria
during his presidency of the Council last month.

We thank you, Sir, for having convened this open
debate on the matter before us, at the request of the
Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Sri Lanka has long urged Iraq to fully comply
with all relevant Security Council resolutions and
respect its international commitments so as to avoid a
further escalation of tensions in the region. We believe
that Iraq should comply with Security Council
resolutions immediately and unconditionally and that
the hand of the Council should be strengthened, since it
is the Security Council that has the primary
responsibility under the United Nations Charter to
preserve the peace.

The Secretary-General, in his statement,
conveyed the same message and warned the Council
against division. It is therefore abundantly clear that
the time has come for all Members of the United
Nations to give the necessary support in the Security
Council for the weapons inspectors to return to Iraq
with all the powers they need for a thorough regime of
inspection. The Secretary-General said that Iraq's
decision to readmit the inspectors without conditions is
an important first step, but only a first step. Full
compliance remains indispensable, and it has not yet
happened. Iraq must implement the disarmament
programmes required by the Council's resolutions.

Sri Lanka welcomes the decision of the
Government of Iraq to allow the weapons inspectors
entry into the country without any conditions. We hope
that Iraq's decision will pave the way for the weapons
inspectors to resume, without further delay, their work
in that country towards the elimination of weapons of
mass destruction.

In order to have access to whatever the inspectors
may wish to look into, it may well be necessary - if
the Security Council deems it so - to pass a new
resolution, strengthening the inspectors' hands so that
there are no weaknesses or ambiguities, and the new
measures must be firm, effective, credible and
reasonable.

Therefore, the Sri Lanka delegation recommends
to the Council that we act in a way that removes the
lacuna that was present in the 1991 inspection regime
and strengthens the hand of the Council, as well as the
Secretary-General, by engaging in a cooperative effort
to establish guidelines in order for the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) to undertake the inspections
comprehensively.

We appeal to Iraq to cooperate fully with the
United Nations in order to make the Organization an
effective instrument in maintaining peace, as stipulated
very clearly and unambiguously by the Charter.

