Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): Mr. President, I wish to extend my
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. We
have full confidence that under your wise guidance, the
Council will make progress in dealing with the issues
on its agenda. Let me also extend felicitations to your
predecessor, Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani of
Singapore, for his skilful stewardship of the Council's
activities last month.

I would also like to say how pleased my
delegation is to participate under your presidency in a
Security Council debate on this important subject. We
believe that the complexities of post-conflict peace-
building and the challenges posed to the United
Nations and the international community in general
deserve thorough consideration.

In the post-cold war period, the dimension of
United Nations activities changed significantly. Most
new conflicts which started in the 1990s or continued
into that decade were considered to be complex
emergencies in development terms. Of the 27 major
conflicts recorded in 1999, 25 were civil wars,
generating a wide variety of problems for civilians and
puzzlement for peaceful activists. In this context,
peacekeeping operations stopped providing a buffer
between two countries in combat and merely reported
ceasefire violations after the opponents had decided to
make peace. In the new environment they had to
embark on a wide variety of complex tasks within State
boundaries. In the process of dealing with the new and
extremely complex situations, concepts such as
preventive diplomacy, post-conflict peace-building and
peace enforcement have emerged.

Extensive United Nations experience in
peacekeeping, especially during the past decade,
teaches us, among other things, that a ceasefire is not
sufficient to ensure peaceful development in a war-torn
society, and that a peacekeeping operation, even though
it may be quite successful, does not completely prepare
the ground and satisfy the requirements for building
peace once a conflict is over. Too often we have seen
hopes for a better future shattered. Too often the
vicious cycle of violence has proved stronger than
aspirations for peace.

Experience has also taught us how vital it is to
ensure that, after conflicts, all the following conditions
are met so that peace can endure. Every measure
should be taken to strengthen confidence among the
former parties to a conflict through dialogue, create a
new climate favourable to national reconciliation and
encourage the resumption of economic and social
activities that improve the daily lives of a population
by addressing the underlying causes of conflict.

Although each situation requires its own unique
solutions, my delegation believes that there are some
key principles that have general application in post-
conflict peace-building. We would place timeliness of
response at the top of any list of key principles. Given
the importance of eliminating any possibility of a
return to fighting, the effective implementation of
peace-building programmes should be treated as an
urgent matter. Thus, it is important to plan for post-
conflict peace-building from the outset. When armed
conflict is still ongoing, even before the start of a
ceasefire, the needs of the societies concerned should
be identified and the means for meeting them should be
explored.

Measures aimed at building peace should be
designed and implemented in close cooperation and
consultation with those directly concerned, taking into
consideration the specific conditions and needs in each
particular situation. Specific requirements of the
societies in question, together with their cultural
characteristics, as well as the right of every State to
freely choose and develop its economic, political,
cultural and social systems in full freedom and in
concert with basic international standards, should be
taken into account.

Post-conflict peace-building activities should be
carried out in full respect for the purposes of the
United Nations Charter, in particular the principles of
sovereign equality, political independence and non-
intervention in matters that are essentially within the
domestic jurisdiction of any State. As a rule, they
should be undertaken only at the request of and with
the full consent ofthe State concerned.

The international community should give
particular attention to the financing of economic
recovery as part of post-conflict peace-building.
Assistance in rebuilding the economic and social
infrastructure, assistance in reintegration into the world
economy, direct economic and financial assistance and
the provision of humanitarian relief assistance are
necessary for the successful reconstruction of societies
emerging from war.

The early involvement of the local population in
the reconstruction process and building local capacity
to sustain peace in the fragile conditions of the post-
conflict period should be an important focus of the
international effort.

Measures towards the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
and identifying appropriate post-conflict roles for them
is inevitably one of the most challenging tasks in
peace-building and one of the most important keys to
avoiding the recurrence of violence and to building
peace in post conflict situations. In this connection,
devising, funding and implementing quick-impact
projects aimed at improving quality of life and
providing former combatants with a legitimate
livelihood can help attain the objectives. The rapid
deployment of a sufficient number of civilian police
could also contribute to the return of law and order and
thus to the re-emergence of an appropriate climate.

Here I wish to stress the importance of demining
as one of the essential components of post-conflict
peace-building. It is self-evident that the impact of
anti-personnel landmines extends beyond an immediate
danger to life and property to a wide array of socio-
economic and developmental aspects in mine-affected
countries.

Together with the aforementioned measures, there
is usually an urgent need to help local communities
revive and/or strengthen related rule-of-law elements
and institutions. The re-establishment of a basic civil
administration and a functioning legal system in a post-
conflict environment, wherever the situation warrants,
is among the necessary steps towards shaping
governance institutions, civil society-building and
effective civilian governance.

The process of peace-building requires that the
United Nations play an integrated, multifaceted and
more action-oriented role in order to create a climate
conducive to political and economic stability in the
State concerned. To this end, it is important to maintain
close coordination between the two major organs of the
United Nations: the General Assembly and the Security
Council.

We believe that, in general, the key to better
management of peace and security lies in a shared
responsibility between the General Assembly and the
Security Council; but when it comes to peace-building,
it is beneficial to ensure a smooth transition from
peacekeeping operations, which are usually established
by the Security Council, to post-conflict peace-building
activities under the supervision of the General
Assembly.

Decisions on such activities should be entrusted
primarily to the General Assembly, which could
receive support from other principal organs of the
United Nations and from the specialized agencies.
There is no need to emphasize that the Security
Council and all other United Nations organs should
play a supportive role.

We also believe that the United Nations should be
considered the focal point for peace-building to
coordinate the many different activities and actors,
including financial institutions, regional organizations
and donor countries, that building peace entails. To this
end, we find merit in the recommendation contained in
the Brahimi report on the need for creating a
consolidated and permanent institutional capacity
within the United Nations system. We also support
efforts under way by the Department of Political
Affairs and the United Nations Development
Programme to jointly strengthen United Nations
capacity in this area.

We welcome the ongoing efforts ofthe Council to
enhance the effective implementation of the arms
embargoes already imposed by the Council on a
number of conflicting parties throughout the world. We
also commend the efforts undertaken recently aimed at
putting an end to the pillaging of the national resources
of nations and the diversion of the relevant benefits to
the acquisition of weapons and military equipment. We
believe that such measures not only facilitate
peacemaking and peacekeeping efforts, but also help
contain human losses and material damage in areas of
conflict, thus rendering subsequent peace-building
efforts less difficult and lengthy.

The Islamic Republic of Iran is following with
great interest the ongoing deliberations on peace
operations in the United Nations and is determined to
further develop its capacity to contribute to these
operations.

