Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French):
Resolution 2177 (2014), which we have just adopted,
describes the Ebola epidemic as a threat to international
peace and security. This is the first time in history that
the Security Council has defined a health crisis in that
manner.

On the one hand, the epidemic represents an
international threat due to its unprecedented scale;
several thousand people have already died, with the
possibly of tens or even hundreds of thousands more
deaths in future. West Africa has suffered dramatically,
but we know that the epidemic could spread far beyond
the region. Moreover, as a threat to peace and security
the health crisis has become an economic and social
crisis that could also generate a political crisis. Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Guinea are all on the path towards
peace after years of bloodshed. The Ebola virus is
threatening to erase the peace dividends and to reignite
chaos in those countries.

This is an emergency. It is our obligation to halt the
outbreak before it spreads out of control. Our collective
responsibility is focused on three priorities: to act, to
coordinate and to prevent. With regard to our action,
the President of the Republic has made combating
Ebola a priority. France stands side by side with African
countries in that fight. By unanimously adopting the
unprecedented resolution 2177 (2014), the Security
Council calls on all relevant stakeholders, in particular
States, to provide resources to combat the epidemic.

Since the outbreak of the Ebola epidemic, France
has taken the lead in supporting the actions of the World
Health Organization (WHO) and non-governmental
organizations in the affected countries. The French
laboratory experts of the National Institute of Health and
Medical Research and the Pasteur Institute identified
the presence of the virus in April and were the first
to be present on the ground in Guinea. Their experts
are today helping to diagnose and monitor the disease
and to train doctors. Today, the assistance of France in
combating Ebola amounts to more than €60 million,
that is, more than $90 million, through various relevant
channels.

Bilaterally, France willprovide atotal of€35 million,
that is, $45 million, to the affected countries and their
neighbours. The greater part of that assistance, that is,
more than €20 million or $26 million, will be provided
to Guinea. It will take a number of forms. We have
started to deploy 25 medical specialists on the ground
to help to strengthen health-care facilities, in particular
the Donka hospital in Conakry.

In Conakry, we have funded the establishment
of a centre of expertise by the Pasteur Institute. In
Guinee forestiere, we are financing the setting up of
a treatment centre and strengthening the entire health-
care system. In addition, the President of the Republic
has just announced that, within the next few days, a
military hospital will be set up in Guine'e forestiere, the
epicentre of the epidemic. The hospital will be provided
with military doctors and civilian protection, as well as
air resources.

On cooperation, we will not be able to contain the
epidemic without closely coordinating the resources
provided by all actors. At the European level, on
France's initiative, the European Union will very soon
have a mechanism for coordinating medical evacuations
for European nationals and the international teams on
the ground. The European Union will also allocate
more than €150 million, that is, nearly $200 million,
to the affected countries, in particular to support their
health-care services, to establish mobile laboratories
and to train health personnel. France will provide a
significant part of that assistance. At the level of the
United Nations, we are working in close cooperation
with the WHO and Dr. David Nabarro, Senior United
Nations System Coordinator for Ebola, by focusing our
efforts on Guinea, as he has requested. We will provide
our full support, including personnel, to the United
Nations Operations and Crisis Centre, based in New
York.

Regarding prevention, in the resolution that we
have adopted the Security Council sends a strong and
clear message that Ebola is not a divine scourge against
which humankind is powerless. We can contain Ebola
if the simple and strict health and protection guidelines
are implemented. Beyond that, we will find a lasting
solution only by helping the affected countries to
strengthen their health systems. As we know, those
countries that are already most vulnerable have been
struck.

The courage of the health personnel of the affected
countries and the international health workers who are
fighting against the epidemic on the ground commands
our admiration. I would like to commend, in particular,
the dedication of the Medecins Sans Frontieres teams,
to which the Security Council pays tribute in the
resolution. For months, those teams have been working

at the epicentre of the outbreak. We need to live up to
the courage of those men and women.
Mr. Albert Schweitzer, Nobel Peace laureate, who
devoted his life to saving the lives of others, described
our moral duty as follows:

"Everyone in his own environment must strive to
practice true humanity towards others. The future
of the world depends on it."

Today, we call on the humanity of all. Men, women and
children are suffering from and dying of Ebola. For
them, let us act now.

