Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Mr. De
Soto for his detailed briefing.

The question of the Middle East has been a
difficult issue for the international community for the
past 50 years or so. It is therefore extremely necessary
and timely, at the beginning of a new year, for the
Council to hold another open debate for a full
exchange of views on how to promote and reinvigorate
the peace process in the Middle East.

The situation in the Middle East has recently
shown some positive signs. On 8 February, following
arduous negotiations under the good offices of Egypt
and Saudi Arabia, the leaders of Hamas and Fatah -
the two main factions in Palestine - signed an accord
in Mecca in which they declared that they had reached
agreement on the establishment of a Government of
national unity, on the political platform for the new
Government and on the reorganization of the PLO.
China welcomes that development, and appreciates the
active role played by Saudi Arabia, Egypt and other
Arab countries. All factions in Palestine have,
therefore, finally agreed to cease all acts of violence
and provocation, halt inter-factional fighting and
achieve peace among themselves. That is indeed a
gratifying and encouraging development.

We sincerely hope that all Palestinian brothers,
regardless of which faction they belong to, can join
hands to preserve the long-term national interests and
cause, effectively implement the agreement that has
been reached to consolidate unity by finding common
ground despite existing differences and establish a
unity Government as soon as possible, so as to resume
peace talks between Palestine and Israel. For that is the
only way to bring about a bright future for the just
cause of the Palestinian people.

At the same time, however, we have taken note of
some worrisome trends in the situation between Israel
and Palestine. Recently, work by the Israeli Antiquities
Authority at the site of the site of the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque to build a new walkway to the Temple Mound
compound has given rise to strong reaction in Arab
countries. As we all know, what occurred at the site of
the holy Al-Aqsa mosque six years ago triggered large-
scale violence and conflict, which led to a serious
setback in the peace process in the Middle East. We
hope that all sides will learn the lessons of that event,
exercise restraint, respect the religious holy sites of
both sides and not take any hasty actions, so as to
avoid repeating history.

The situation between Lebanon and Israel is part
and parcel of the peace process in the Middle East. Six
months following the end of the conflict between those
two countries, gunfire once again erupted along the
Lebanese border. We believe that to be a regrettable
development. Both sides should carefully respect the
hard-won resolution 1701 (2006) and exercise
maximum restraint and calm, so as to effectively
implement their commitments to cease all hostile acts.

Tomorrow will be the second anniversary of the
death of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.
We hope that the International Independent
Investigation Commission can identify and bring to
justice the perpetrators of that assassination as soon as
possible.

We strongly condemn the bombings that occurred
today in Beirut. We also hope that the Lebanese people
can come together in order to find a peaceful resolution
to their domestic differences, while maintaining their
national unity, independence and territorial integrity
and achieving peace and development in their country.
The situation in the Middle East has not only
brought untold disaster to the region, it has also had an
impact on peace and development throughout the entire
world. China has always believed that the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, the principle of land

for peace, the Quartet Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative constitute the basis for the resolution of the
Middle East issue. The establishment through political
negotiations of an independent Palestinian State living
side by side in peace with Israel remains the only way
to resolve the question of Palestine. That is in keeping
with the basic interests of both Palestine and Israel, as
well as of all the countries of the Middle East region.
We hope that the Quartet will soon produce a new
initiative to promote the implementation of the Road
Map, so as to achieve peace and stability in the region
as soon as possible.

