Mr. Rajah Zaib Shah (Malaysia): At the outset,
allow me to join others in thanking the delegation of
Lithuania for convening this open debate. We also
take the opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for
providing a briefing on this important topic.

Just a week ago, the Council convened an open
debate on the state of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and how peacekeeping missions can
further enhance the protection of civilians who are
trapped in harm's way (see S/PV.7109). We believe
that an important element in making United Nations
missions effective, whether they be peacekeeping or
special political missions, is through the strengthening
and promotion of the rule of law.

Malaysia shares the View that the careful design of
peacekeeping and special political mission mandates
plays an important part in addressing the root causes
of conflict. The design of mandates is crucial in order
to ensure a good fit between the particular mission
and the challenges prevailing in the host country.
Mandates should not only be thematic in nature, but
must also be clear, measurable and achievable. The
Secretary-General's report (S/2013/341) recommends
that more must be done to measure the Organization's
effectiveness in the area of the rule of law, given the
weak existing monitoring and evaluation frameworks.
While Malaysia is not unaware of the complication of
such tasks, we believe nonetheless that it is imperative
for the Council to address the matter.

When designing mandates that promote the
strengthening of the rule of law, the principle of national
ownership must be seriously taken into consideration.
The process must be inclusive and take into account the
views of local authorities, civil societies and the public.
Whether the activities involve political dialogue,
reconciliation or peacekeeping, the involvement and
commitment on the part of local actors and authorities
cannot be put aside. That is important, as peacemaking
activities typically begin while the United Nations
mission is present and will eventually be led by local
stakeholders in later phases.

My delegation reiterates that there is no
one-size-fits-all approach to the process of designing
mandates. While the rule of law is paramount in
instilling public order in countries in conflict, mandates
must be specifically tailored to the challenges and needs
of the host country. We believe that consultations with
troop-contributing and police-contributing countries
are an important part of the process in the drafting of
mandates and would contribute to identifying relevant
sequences and methods in implementing activities.

My delegation understands that the development
of robust security, justice institutions and capacity-
building in countries in conflict has been difficult and
complex. We are encouraged by the work of the United
Nations Rule of Law Unit in streamlining the security,
justice and corrections sections in all United Nations
missions to support the rule of law activities.

Nevertheless, we would like to underline the
importance of reflecting cultural and religious
sensitivities when carrying out rule-of-law activities
in a host country. We must be mindful that the United
Nations has 15 ongoing peacekeeping operations and
37 special political missions, and the issue of cultural
and religious sensitivities is vital to the success of
those missions. To illustrate it simply, conducting
capacity-building courses during prayer time would
hit a sensitive nerve in certain communities; similarly,
convening meetings during religious holidays would
also have that effect.

The nexus between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
is undeniable, as reflected in resolution 2086 (2013).
Malaysia is of the view that peace and security can be
approached only through a balanced and integrated
approach, from the deployment of peacekeeping and
special political missions to the involvement of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Promoting the strengthening of the rule of law in
international peace and security must be done in an
integrated manner. We should not single out the rule
of law as the sole important pillar when supporting
countries in conflict. Often, countries in conflict
require that security and economic development be
established hand in hand. We must bear in mind that
developing justice, security and corrections institutions
requires that the host country has attained political
stability and economic growth. That is important, as
governance and the rule of law are interdependent and
not exclusive.

We are encouraged at the progress achieved
in the countries in transition on the Peacebuilding
Commission's agenda. As members ofthe Commission,
those countries have demonstrated political will and
commitment to transcend from conflict to stability.
With continued international attention, my delegation
believes that they could progress further. The synergy
between United Nations missions and the Commission
could also be further strengthened when undertaking
mandates to promote and strengthen the rule of law.

The rule of law accords all States equal respect in
international relations. Respect for the Charter of the
United Nations is paramount in ensuring international
peace and security. Without the rule of law there would
not be a United Nations and the world would fall into
the disarray of competing nation States. In that regard,
my delegation views the work of promoting the rule
of law as equally important at the international and
regional levels.

To conclude, my delegation is of the view that the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law remains
an integral part of the maintenance of international
peace and security. While the rule of law is not
exclusive, it requires United Nations missions and host
Governments not to overlook other equally important
fields in taking the process oftransition from conflict to
stability. Malaysia values this open debate and believes
that it advances our agenda on the rule of law. We will
continue to support the work to promote the rule of law
in maintaining international peace and security.

