Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me first of all join
previous speakers in thanking Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing.

My delegation also would like to associate itself
with the statement to be made by the distinguished
representative of Cuba, who will speak on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Conflict in the Middle East has continued for far
too long, taking the lives of countless civilians,
wrecking families and preventing its young population
from fully reaping the benefits of global economic
development. For sixty years, the region has been a
theatre of tension and violence, and on the Palestinian
side, the nation has continuously faced hardship and
has had to survive without a State. They have suffered
the worst.

This has been going on for far too long, so long
that it has tarnished our collective conscience. The
Middle East conflict continues to pose a threat to
international peace and security. Not because merely in
and of itself, but also because of the inability of the
Council to take concrete and resolute action.

The Council should play its own role in the
process of achieving comprehensive peace in the
region. It has moral and Charter responsibilities to
make a contribution to the solution of the Middle East
and should devote the same consummate political
energy to resolve this conflict as it has devoted to
conflicts in other parts of the globe. We call for the
same vigour and allocation of time in addressing the
Middle East conflict.

At present, prospects for peace in the region are
flourishing. We must seize this opportunity. We are
particularly heartened by the current surge in
diplomacy aimed at jumpstarting a comprehensive
peace process, as demonstrated by the ongoing
negotiations between Israel and Palestine, the
launching of indirect talks between Syria and Israel
and potential steps on the Lebanon-Israeli track.

We are also encouraged by the ceasefire between
Hamas and Israel, steps towards normalization of
relations between Lebanon and Syria, the swap of
prisoners between Israel and Hezbollah, as well as the
increasing stability in Lebanon after the election of its
President.

Also key to the establishment of a Palestinian
State and genuine peace for all Palestinians is inter-
Palestinian dialogue and reconciliation. We therefore
continue to attach great significance to the Yemen
agreement that outlined important avenues for dialogue
and reconciliation among Palestinians.

With those positive developments, we have
reasons to be hopeful that those achievements could
eventually crystallize into a new equilibrium, in which
all nations in the region share peace dividends and an
independent and viable State of Palestine stands side
by side in harmony with its neighbours. We, the
international community, have been waiting for that
moment.

Despite recent progress, we certainly cannot be
complacent. Much remain to be done. The Middle East
conflict will remain unresolved if all parties concerned
do not go beyond the ordinary in their efforts to ensure
a viable solution to the conflict. There is no better time
than now to act to resolve the conflict and broker a
peace. We welcome in that regard the unflagging
commitment and contribution of the Arab League, the
Quartet and countries in the region.

One challenge that now needs to be urgently
addressed is the problem of Israeli settlement activities
in the Palestinian territory. Those activities constitute
grave breaches of international law and a serious
obstacle to the establishment of a physically viable,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State and thus to
the achievement of peace itself. These illegal activities
must be terminated immediately. The Security Council,
for its part, should pronounce itself clearly and
vigorously on this very important matter.

Indonesia therefore fully supports the draft
resolution recently proposed by the members of the
Arab Group.
Similarly important to achieving sustainable
peace are continuous efforts in addressing other core
issues, including borders, the issue of Palestinian
refugees and the status of Jerusalem. The humanitarian
situation in Gaza, which remains dire, also warrants
continued response from the international community.

A viable Palestine State cannot be built in a day.
It will require continued preparation and planning.
Indonesia, therefore, attaches great importance to the

08-4326]
Paris donors conference, the Palestine Investment
Conference and the Berlin Conference in Support of
Palestinian Civil Security and Rule of Law.

For our part, Indonesia, in collaboration with
South Africa, has hosted the Asia-Africa Ministerial
Conference on Capacity-Building for Palestine in
Jakarta from 14 to 15 July 2008.

As a logical complement to the Annapolis
Conference, this initiative is aimed at, among other
goals, serving as a catalyst to the peace process in the
light of the anticipated establishment of an independent
and sovereign Palestinian State. Imbued with the
Bandung spirit, the conference resulted in a list of
commitments, including training assistance for as
many as 10,000 Palestinians, including in the fields of
law enforcement and administrative reform.

With regard to Lebanon, in line with the Doha
agreement on Lebanon, we welcome the election of
General Sleiman as President of Lebanon and we are
hopeful that the new cabinet will be established as soon
as possible.

We are concerned over the recent clashes in
Tripoli, which caused injuries and casualties. My
delegation therefore attaches primary significance to an
item in the Doha agreement underlining that all parties
will commit not to resort to arms or violence in order
to resolve political conflicts.

Unity is a key aspect to the achievement of
sustainable peace in Lebanon. Accordingly, we
welcome President Sleiman's efforts in promoting
dialogue and reconciliation in the country.

A peace process is not an easy venture. It never
has been. It is a long and arduous journey that needs
our outmost care and constant attention. As long as we
promote peaceful ways rather than violence,
negotiations rather than the use of military force and
dialogue rather than confrontation, we shall surely be
able to reach our end goal of comprehensive peace in
the region.

It is therefore our fervent hope that ongoing
efforts will yield results in the realization of a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East,
based on relevant resolutions of the Council, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003), the Madrid terms of reference and the
principle of Land for Peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

