Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2259
(2015). We believe that it is an important initiative
that expresses the entire Security Council's political
commitment to supporting the implementation of the
Libyan Political Agreement signed on 17 December in
Morocco - the fruit of mediation efforts supported by
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.

We would like to acknowledge the efforts undertaken
by the various parties representing the Libyan people,
and especially, by the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General representing the United Nations,
Mr. Bernardino Leon and, currently, Mr. Martin Kobler.
Our country harbours every hope that the signing of the
Political Agreement will promote a definitive political
solution to the armed conflict in Libya, which has been
submerged in chaos and violence since the 2011 military
intervention that adversely affected every aspect of the
country, in particular the political and security spheres,
in addition to economic and social development and the
enjoyment of human rights in that brotherly African
nation.

Venezuela has always supported a political solution
to the conflict. In that vein, we wish to express our
support for the establishment of a Government of
National Accord that will ensure peace and stability,
address the major humanitarian, economic and security
challenges, and uproot the terrorist groups operating
in that country and North Africa, in particular the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Ansar al-Sharia
and Al-Qaida, which continue to pose a serious threat
to international peace and security.

The Government of National Accord that will be
formed in Libya must take every necessary measure,
with the support of the international community, to
put an end to the illicit trafficking in arms to terrorist
groups and non-State armed actors operating in Libya
and throughout the African continent and stoking
conflict in Iraq and Syria. The Security Council has
adopted resolutions in that area that must be strictly
implemented. Furthermore, the new Libyan authorities
should work decisively to ensure the promotion and
protection of the human rights of their citizens. In that
regard, we urge them to strengthen their cooperation
with the International Criminal Court in order to
facilitate the handover of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, so
that he can be brought to trial in an impartial manner in
accordance with due process.

Our country is aware of the grat challenges facing
the new phase of the Libyan process. The international
community must therefore redouble its efforts to help
Libya resolve its grave institutional and security crisis

and thereby prevent an escalation of the conflict. We
urge the authorities of the new Government of National
Accord to guarantee the sovereign management of
its natural resources, in particular its oil, for the
benefit of its people, in order to help overcome the
country's grave social situation. We call on the
international community to provide the Libyan people
with the resources necessary to alleviate the fragile
humanitarian situation, which continues to deteriorate
as a consequence of the prolonged fighting among the
various factions. Unfortunately, smugglers and human
traffickers have taken advantage of the situation to
profit from the pain and desperation of Libyans seeking
to escape the terrible conditions in which they live.

To conclude, we call on all parties to the Libyan
conflict to show their sincere commitment and political
will to reach a political solution to the situation. We
urge the parties that have not signed the Agreement to
join this effort for peace, stability and development.
The priority should be the well-being of the people,
the preservation of their human rights, respect for their
self-determination, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
and national reconciliation among all Libyans, without
preference for any group and regardless of political,
ethnic or religious positions.

