Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
about the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. My written report provides details about
our activities and results during the reporting period
in relation to our usual three priorities (S/2018/1033, annex II).
Today I would like to highlight only a few important
issues. However, at the outset, I would like to take this
opportunity to recognize President Meron and express
my Office's appreciation for his service. President
Meron has led the Mechanism since its establishment,
in July 2012, and greatly shaped our institution during
its first years of operations.

My Office continues to focus on expeditiously
completing the limited number of trials and appeals
transferred from the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). In relation to the retrial
of the case Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanisic' and Franko
Simatovie, we completed the presentation of all our
witnesses, except for one. Our final witness is now
scheduled to be heard in January. Regarding the
Karadeic' appeal, my Office continued to litigate a high
volume of matters, including eleventh hour motions to
disqualify Judges from the case. We have taken note of
the revised schedule for the completion of that case and
look forward to the delivery of the judgment.

On 29 November, shortly after the end of the
reporting period, my Office completed the preparation
of our written appeals arguments in the Mladic' case,
in accordance with court-established deadlines. In
addition to that work, my Office also litigated a number
of other matters in that case, including motions to
disqualify judges. We will continue to take measures
within our control to expedite the completion of those
final proceedings.

Another of the Mechanism's residual functions is
the protection of Victims and witnesses. In addition,
pursuant to article 14 of the Mechanism statute,
my Office is mandated to investigate and prosecute
contempt of court. I can now report that, following an
intensive and confidential investigation conducted over
the past year, in June my Office confidentially filed an
indictment charging five suspects with three counts of
contempt of court and incitement to commit contempt
of court. That indictment was confirmed in August,
and Mechanism warrants of arrest were successfully
executed in September by Rwandan police, in close
cooperation with my Office.

That contempt proceeding, Prosecutor v.
Maximilien Turinabo et al., arose out of the
review proceedings in the Prosecutor v. Augustin
Ngirabatware case. My Office alleges that four of
the accused directly, and through intermediaries,
interfered with witnesses who had given evidence in
Ngirabatware's trial and interfered with witnesses
in the ongoing review proceeding. We furthermore
allege that two of the accused knowingly violated court
orders protecting witnesses. The purpose of the alleged
contempt of court was to overturn the final conviction
of Augustin Ngirabatware, and by doing so undermine
the facts of the genocide. My Office has not undertaken
that activity lightly, particularly as it has generated a
significant additional workload, which has stretched
our already lean resources. Nonetheless, we are fully
committed to defending the integrity of the proceedings
conducted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), the ICTY and the Mechanism. My
Office wants to send a clear message that our victims
and witnesses will be protected and that we will oppose
genocide denial in all of its manifestations.

As I previously reported to the Council, my Office
has been taking a number of important measures
to strengthen our efforts to locate and arrest the
remaining eight fugitives indicted by the ICTR. We
restructured our tracking team and adopted a more
proactive approach to our work. Those reforms have
been matched by a temporary increase in resources, on
the clear understanding that we have a limited amount
of time to demonstrate a successful track record.

Prior intelligence and our investigative activities
generated some actionable leads during the reporting
period. Accordingly, I travelled to Harare earlier
this year to seek the cooperation of Zimbabwean
authorities, who assured me of their commitment to
adhere to their international legal obligations and the
Council's call to Member States. We established ajoint
task force to coordinate further investigative activities
to locate a fugitive in Zimbabwe. The task force has
been very active and recently provided another report
to my Office showing that it is pursuing a number of
promising leads.

At the same time, based on information obtained by
my Office and confirmed by the INTERPOL National
Central Bureau for South Africa, in August I submitted
an urgent request for assistance from South African
authorities. Unfortunately, despite repeated contacts
and reminders, that request has not been answered
and no explanation been provided so far. My Office
trusts that South Africa, as an incoming member of
the Council, will provide the necessary cooperation.
Locating and arresting the fugitives is a priority for
my Office. In order for us to complete that residual
function as expeditiously as possible, State cooperation
remains most essential.

In relation to the countries of the former Yugoslavia,
my Office deeply regrets the continued glorification of
war criminals and the denial of crimes, including the
Srebrenica genocide. While my Office has repeatedly
called for urgent attention to that issue, developments
during the reporting period again demonstrated
that the challenge is severe. Some political leaders
in the region are working to overcome the legacy of
the recent past. Unfortunately, positive steps are
undermined by irresponsible comments from other
officials denying what has been established beyond a
reasonable doubt by international courts and portraying
as heroes men who committed the most serious
violations of international law.

Soldiers do not defend their country with honour by
murdering civilians, burning homes, raping women and
girls, and persecuting communities because of their
ethnicity or religion. Countries cannot build a future
together if they do not have a common understanding
and acceptance of the recent past. In Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia, my Office is committed to
promoting education and remembrance as key tools in
the fight against ideologies of discrimination, division
and hate.

As detailed in my written report, regional
cooperation in war crimes matters between the countries
of the former Yugoslavia is at its lowest level in years
and continues to head in the wrong direction. That
cooperation is essential to achieving justice for victims
from all communities. Today, suspected war criminals
too often find safe haven in neighbouring countries
because authorities fail to work together. Successful
regional efforts in the fight against organized crime,
corruption and other serious offences demonstrate that
such cooperation is possible. When it comes to regional
cooperation in war crimes matters, the challenge is
not inability but unwillingness. If for no other reason
than to secure meaningful justice for their own people,

my Office calls upon authorities in the region to take
concrete steps to remedy the situation, including by
bringing political interference in the justice process
to a halt and allowing the judiciaries to carry out their
responsibilities in accordance with the rule of law and
international and European standards.

The final topic I would like to address, briefly,
is the search for missing persons in the former
Yugoslavia. Significant results have been achieved,
with almost 25,000 missing persons having been
found and identified. Unfortunately, more than 10,000
families still do not know the fate of their loved ones.
I had a number of meetings with representatives of the
families of the missing during my recent missions to
the countries of the former Yugoslavia. Even today,
they suffer the immense pain of not knowing the
fate of their loved ones. Their message to all of us is
simple - we must intensify efforts, deepen cooperation
and finally return the missing to their families. During
the reporting period, my Office took important steps
to strengthen our support for the search for missing
persons. We signed a memorandum of understanding
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) to promote our cooperation. That important
agreement will enable the ICRC to access our evidence
collection in order to obtain information that may assist
in clarifying the fate and whereabouts of persons who
are still missing.

We have also continued to provide national
authorities with access to our records and expertise. In
the past months, we have hosted working Visits by the
Commission on Missing Persons of the Government
of the Republic of Serbia and have given extensive
operational support to the Missing Persons Institute of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the recent London summit
organized by the United Kingdom, all Governments
of the region pledged to increase their activities and
cooperation and prevent the politicization of the issue.
Achieving further progress is both a humanitarian
imperative and fundamental to reconciliation in
the former Yugoslavia. Victims from all sides of the
conflict must be located, identified and returned to
their families.

In conclusion, my Office is firmly focused on
completing its remaining functions efficiently and
effectively, including by investigating and prosecuting
interference with witnesses and contempt of court. We
also remain committed to providing our full support
to the continued implementation by national authorities
of the ICTR and ICTY completion strategies so that
more justice can be achieved for more victims. We are
grateful for the continued support of the Council in all
of our efforts.

