Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let
me first thank Special Envoy De Mistura for his clear
and comprehensive briefing. We very much appreciate
Mr. De Mistura's unwavering commitment in the
remainder of his term in office. I would like to focus
on the following three points today: the urgent need to
convene the constitutional committee, the continuing
need for sustained de-escalation in Idlib and northern
Syria and the future outlook.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
Istanbul summit communique of 27 October. The
constitutional committee should convene as soon as
possible, before the end of the year, and move ahead with
the establishment of a new constitution. The invitations
to the 150 committee members should be sent out as soon
as possible. It is the prerogative of the United Nations
to do so. Staffan de Mistura has been given a clear
mandate by the Security Council, through resolution
2254 (2015), and through the Sochi outcome document.
Now is the time to deliver. All parties, particularly the
Syrian authorities, should cooperate constructively
with the United Nations to prevent further delays in the
political process. Those with leverage bear a specific
responsibility in that regard. The committee is not a
goal in and of itself. It is, and should remain, part of
the broader United Nations-led political process, based
on resolution 2254 (2015). One can speak ofa credible
political process only when the constitutional committee
itself is credible. The convening role of the United
Nations ensures this. No one should be able to hold
the convening of the constitutional committee hostage.
The inclusiveness and representation of all Syrians are
key. The committee itself, and any subcommittees that
will be created, should at a minimum include 30 per
cent women.

That brings me to my second point - our concern
about the increased shelling in Idlib and the continued
need for sustained de-escalation in Idlib and northern
Syria. The increased shelling that we have seen in Idlib
over the past couple of weeks is reason for concern.
It is of key importance that the agreement on Idlib
between the Russian Federation and Turkey hold, and
that it is implemented by the parties through continued
cooperation. The alternative to sustained de-escalation
is a devastating humanitarian catastrophe. Let me also
stress the importance of stability in north-east Syria and
continued progress in the joint fight against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). Military actions in
that area should stay sharply focused on addressing the
threat of ISIS.

That brings me to my third and final point, with
regard to the outlook for the future. Syria currently is
not ready for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of
refugees. Voluntary return can be facilitated only when
the internationally agreed protection thresholds are in
place. It is essential that security and property rights
guarantees be established for refugees and internally
displaced persons seeking to return. In that regard, we
are deeply concerned about Law 10, which apparently
has been reincarnated into Law 42. We support the
United Nations in its call to suspend that law.

We need accountability for all the grave human
rights violations and atrocity crimes in Syria and to
bring those responsible to justice. The Conference of
States Parties to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons is currently under way in The
Hague. It is crucial that we achieve attribution for
chemical-weapons use as a step towards accountability.
Let me stress once again in that regard our support to the
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011. A referral of the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court remains the best path
forward to fight impunity.

In conclusion, we strongly disagree with the
premature calls for reconstruction aid. We reiterate
that the European Union will be ready to assist in the
reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive,
genuine and inclusive political transition is firmly
under way.

