Mr. D'Alotto (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Permit me to join previous speakers in thanking Lord
Paddy Ashdown, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for the comprehensive report
(S/2005/706, annex) that he has just presented to us
regarding developments in the situation in that country.
Given that it was his last report to the Council, we
should like to highlight Lord Ashdown's commitment
and dedication in carrying out his duties since he
assumed his mandate in May 2002 and to thank him for
his efforts to move the peacebuilding process forward
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

With regard to the information received, my
delegation appreciates the efforts made to ensure that
Bosnia and Herzegovina embarks on the path of full
Euro-Atlantic integration. In fact, as the report
indicates, the authorities have made progress in
meeting the requirements for the commencement of
negotiations with the European Union and with NATO.
Those actions, nearly 10 years after the implementation
of the Dayton-Paris accords began, demonstrate the
authorities' resolve to ensure the effective
implementation of the commitments undertaken in
those agreements.

Despite all that progress, however, we must once
again express the hope that full cooperation develops
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, particularly with regard to bringing
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic before the
Tribunal and the need to implement legislation in
keeping with the principles of community institutions
in specific areas, such as police reform.

In that connection, we have confidence in the
authorities' commitment to resolve outstanding issues
so that the transition can finally be made from the
country's "Dayton era" to its "Brussels era". We also
wish to highlight the efforts of the European Union-led
multinational stabilization force and its central role in
supporting the key objectives of the development
process. There is no question that, should the Council
consider the matter, we are prepared to renew the
authorization for the mission. Moreover, my delegation
agrees with Lord Ashdown's proposal to replace some
international arrangements established in the context of
Dayton with other arrangements that better reflect the
progress made in the past 10 years, which will enable
Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully develop its potential.

Argentina urges full compliance with the Dayton
Agreements and the effective implementation of the
relevant commitments, particularly cooperation with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia as one of the means of strengthening justice
and the rule of law in societies that, like Bosnia and
Herzegovina, have experienced conflict situations. We
appeal to the authorities to support the Tribunal's work
and to contribute to its efforts to ensure that accused
persons who have not yet been brought to justice
appear before the Tribunal. As my delegation has
indicated on previous occasions, it is only through
concerted action to combat impunity for grave
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law that we can promote the development
of judicial institutions and the reconciliation necessary
to achieve a sustainable society.

