Mr. Mendez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we
welcome the presence and participation of Judge Carmel
Agius, Judge Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz. We thank them for the valuable briefing
they have provided in compliance with resolutions 1534
(2004) and 1966 (2010).

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals in their efforts to bring to justice
the perpetrators of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes committed during the conflicts that
affected the territories of the former Yugoslavia and
whose Violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights led to many victims.
The work conducted by the tribunals reaffirms the
commitment of the international community to combat
impunity with respect to war crimes and crimes against
humanity in order to ensure that such acts are never
repeated. Such efforts contribute to strengthening the
rule of law at the international level, particularly the
international justice system.
With respect to the process of closing the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia at the
end of 2017, we support the progress made by that body
in the past six months in handling the cases under its
jurisdiction. We therefore encourage the Tribunal to
continue its work in compliance with the timetable set
for completing its mandate.

It is noteworthy that cooperation on the part of
the States is essential in ensuring compliance with the
goals set forth in resolution 1966 (2010).

These judicial organs have played a positive role in
expressing the will of the international community to
ensure justice on behalf of the victims of the heinous
crimes committed during the armed conflict that
affected the territories of the former Yugoslavia by way
of prosecuting those responsible for such regrettable
acts.

This year marks the twenty-third anniversary of
the establishment of the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia. Its significant contribution to the
rule of law, international justice and the fight against
impunity is important in the regional reconciliation
process. We urge those States to continue efforts to
strengthen the rule of law at the international level with
a focus on an impartial, transparent and independent
judiciary.

In that context, we welcome the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia's conclusion of
proceedings against 151 of the 161 indictees, including
two first-instance trials and two appeals still pending.
The results achieved clearly demonstrated the efficiency
and transparency of its working methods.

With respect to the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, we welcome the
judgment against Radovan Karadzic for genocide,
crimes against humanity and violations of the laws
or customs of war, by which he was sentenced to 40
years imprisonment. It is indeed a landmark decision
in the fight against impunity and the application of
justice in accordance with due process. Similarly,
on 31 March, the Tribunal acquitted Vojislav Seselj,
President of the Serbian Radical Party and former
member of the Assembly of the Republic of Serbia, of
all charges against him. The ICTY Trial Chamber and
the Prosecutor's Office appealed the decision. In both
cases the appeal procedures fall under the jurisdiction
of the Residual Mechanism to diligently and effectively
decide the issues, while maintaining the principles of
due process and judicial impartiality.
In reaffirming the independence and autonomy
of the international tribunals, we believe that the
politicization of the judicial process compromises the
transparency and objectivity of their decisions. The
prosecution of all of those, without exception, who
are responsible for committing crimes in Violation
of human rights and international humanitarian
law is necessary to strengthen the credibility of the
international tribunals.

We share the concerns expressed by the President
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
about staffing. We reiterate that the continued
employment of its officers is essential for the Tribunal
to complete its mandate within the set time limit in the
context of the application ofjustice.

However, in terms of progress in the cases under
the Tribunal's jurisdiction, we note some procedural
challenges related primarily to gaps in critical personnel
in achieving the mandate of that body. We hope that such
difficulties will be overcome in order not to impede the
conclusion of the ongoing trials within the set timeline.

Moreover, we note the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (S/2016/441), which conducted an
evaluation of the methods and work of the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in implementing the
completion strategy in accordance with resolution 2256
(2015), with a view to the Tribunal's implementation
of measures to achieve its objectives that will neither
divert resources nor weaken its functions. All of that
is necessary to facilitate the fulfilment of its mandate
in the smooth transfer of files and contempt cases, and
the Residual Mechanism's protection of Victims and
witnesses.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Theodor Meron
as President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, and we commend the work of
the Mechanism to date, including the development of a
legal and regulatory framework, procedures and work
practices that conform to the mandate ofthe Mechanism
and are based on lessons learned and best practices of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
and other tribunals.

Finally, we highlight the contribution of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in strengthening international criminal justice and
support the prompt and efficient completion of its work
in accordance with the agreed timeline and budget to
facilitate closure and complete the transition to the
Residual Mechanism - all in order to promote the rule
of law and end impunity in the fight against genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity, thereby
strengthening international peace and security.

