Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, and I thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Miroslav
Jenca, for his detailed briefing.

When we are at the end of the list of speakers, I
always find that a previous speaker has used some idea
or expression that I wanted to use. In this case, my
dear colleague the Ambassador of Japan started with
the exact opening sentence that I wanted. This is the
last time that Uruguay, as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council, will take the floor on this topic.
We plan to return to the Council for the period 2034-
2035, 17 years from now. We hope that by that time,
when we return to the Security Council, we will see
a peaceful and democratic Middle East whose peoples
are living together and cooperating in solidarity,
regardless of their pasts and their religions, united in
enjoying a decent life in which their human rights are
fully exercised and prioritized.

Until then, however, we have to live with a reality
that shows no prospects whatever for improvement.
On the contrary, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict has
continued, month after month, as the most significant
conflict affecting the region. However, in recent years,
in addition to that long-unresolved dispute, armed
conflicts and humanitarian crises of enormous impact
in Syria, Iraq and Yemen have emerged and have
totally destabilized the region, with unavoidable global
consequences. Perhaps one day the Council will have
the political will to prevent such catastrophes more
effectively and tackle their root causes. As that is not yet
possible, we have to play our part by attempting to stop
these crises as quickly as possible and design effective
processes for providing humanitarian assistance and
political solutions to them.

The Council's history with regard to the Middle
East has not exactly been a series of success stories.
Indeed, it has encountered serious difficulties thanks
to multiple factors that include non-compliance with
Council resolutions by the Governments of the region
and the other groups they are dealing with, as well as
ongoing violations of international law, in terms both
of international humanitarian law and the human rights
of the populations involved, who have already suffered
too much. However, that should not lead us to throw up
our hands in despair but rather to redouble our efforts
to achieve our objectives.

Just one day after our most recent meeting on the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict (see S/PV.8011), terrorism
claimed the lives of three Israeli victims who fell at
the hands of a Palestinian attacker. As we have done
on previous occasions, we firmly condemn that attack.
Violence will never lead to peace; it will only make
it more difficult to achieve a two-State solution. It is
worrying that the President of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, confirmed at the beginning of
the month that he will continue to pay the families of
terrorists. Once again, we reiterate our condemnation
of incitement to violence and its glorification.

We also categorically reject the Israeli leadership's
explicit support for the settlement policy, which
continues to move full steam ahead, despite the
provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) and the persistent
remonstrations of Mr. Mladenov and the international
community. We emphasize the full legitimacy of
resolution 242 (1967) and the principle that seizing
land by force is unacceptable. We emphasize that the
settlements are illegal under international law and
constitute a serious obstacle to peace and a two-State
solution. The settlement policy is also supported by
constant demolitions of Palestinian housing in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem. Such actions clearly
do not contribute to defusing tensions. There are other
necessary gestures and measures that we have not seen
so far.

As it has done since the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), in 1947, Uruguay
reaffirms its unfailing support for the right of Israel
and Palestine to live in peace, within secure and
recognized borders, in a atmosphere of restored
cooperation free from any threat or act damaging to
peace. We also reiterate our support for a solution based
on the existence of two independent States, which we
firmly believe is the only option that will enable Israel
and Palestine to peacefully coexist. In that regard,
Uruguay once again points out that it is essential that
direct negotiations between the two parties be resumed.
If that is to be done, the current trends on the ground
must be reversed, or it will be extremely difficult for
the Palestinians to consolidate the territory of their
State. We regret the fact that no progress has been made
on the implementation ofresolution 2334 (2016), almost
10 months after its adoption.

We thank and commend the Arab Republic of Egypt
for its efforts leading to the signing on 12 October of
a reconciliation agreement between the Palestinian
groups Hamas and Fatah, which is an important step
towards achieving Palestinian unity. In that context,
we commend the return of the Palestinian Authority's
control over the Gaza Strip after a decade of absence.
Palestine's reunification under a single, legitimate
and democratic Government is essential to addressing
the aspirations of its people and enabling it to
substantially improve living conditions in Gaza, whose
worrying situation could deteriorate into a serious
humanitarian crisis at any moment. For the agreement
to be successfully implemented, its measures should be
supported by agreements on security, the disarming of
Hamas and the renunciation of policies of violence and
the destruction of Israel as declared objectives.

I would like to briefly mention the conflict in Syria.
While the Astana peace process has led to a decrease
in violence in some areas of the country, September
was one of the most deadly months of the year in terms
of victims, with more than 3,000 deaths. We are still
witnessing sieges, starvation, indiscriminate attacks on
civilians, the use of chemical weapons, terrorist attacks
and gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

We are very pleased with the recent progress in the
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and other terrorist organizations. However, we reiterate
that only a Syrian-led political transition process,
mediated by the United Nations in accordance with the
road map outlined in resolution 2254 (2015), will make
it possible to end this horrible war.

We should take a moment to discuss the situation
in Yemen. The armed conflict and paralysed peace
process continue to cause the Yemeni people great
suffering. The violence must end immediately. Both
parties to the conflict should return to the negotiating
table without further delay and resume dialogue under
the auspices of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, without preconditions and in good
faith. They must agree to end the armed conflict.
It is also vital for countries that have influence over
the parties concerned to collaborate in the quest for a
peaceful solution to the conflict. The devastating war
has left the world's poorest Arab country on the brink
of humanitarian collapse and famine, and enduring a
cholera epidemic that is wreaking additional havoc.
Yemen's people are desperately seeking the help of the
international community. Who will restore the lives of
these thousands of children, men and women, young and
old, or heal the damage caused by such a bloodthirsty
conflict? We reiterate that those responsible for the
abhorrent atrocities committed in Yemen - both those
who pull the trigger and those providing logistical
assistance - must sooner or later be brought to justice.

With regard to Iraq and the possible destabilizing
effects of the recent referendum on independence
in Kurdistan, we emphasize that Iraq's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity are paramount. The
progress made in the fight against terrorism must be
consolidated. We cannot permit those achievements
to be jeopardized by the possibility of sectarianism
dividing the country once again. Iraq must move
forward on its path to peace and stability.

Lastly, let me briefly mention of the situation in
Lebanon. In August, the Council renewed the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon with
the primary goal of strengthening its role and enabling
it to have a more proactive and visible presence on
the ground in order to detect possible threats to peace
and stability along the Blue Line and in the south of
Lebanon. In the coming year it will be essential to count
on an ongoing assessment of the mission's capabilities
and weaknesses so that it can identify ways to fulfil
its mandate more effectively and avoid any incidents in
such a sensitive area.

