Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Bintou Keita for her statement and for being with
us today.

At the outset, I would like to state that Belgium
deplores and condemns the attack in Benghazi this
morning against personnel of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), and to offer our
condolences for the deaths of three mission personnel
and the suffering of the others wounded. It is the
responsibility of the local authorities to identify and
convict the criminals responsible for this attack.

Moreover, international humanitarian law has
again been flagrantly violated in recent days in Libya,
with civilians being the principal victims. I therefore
denounce recent renewed attacks against Tripoli
airport and the air attack in Murzuq in the far south
on 5 August - further evidence that fighting has
spread far from the capital. It is the responsibility of the
parties to protect civilians, and I wish to reiterate my
country's commitment to ensuring that these crimes do
not go unpunished, whether in domestic courts or the
International Criminal Court.

Belgium welcomes the truce proposed by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and strongly supported by the Security Council, and
insists that the agreement between the Government of
National Accord and the Libyan National Army must
be respected. Belgium calls on the parties to refrain
from resuming military operations once the truce is
over, and to transition instead to a lasting ceasefire. At
the same time, political dialogue must resume, without
preconditions and under the mediation of Special
Representative Salame', with a view to free Libya from
the military mindset. It is now undeniable that a such an
approach leads nowhere.

It is also crucial that the arms embargo be
respected, arms transfers stop and the recruitment of
fighters, including foreign mercenaries and terrorists
and criminals listed by the Security Council, cease.
Belgium would like the Council to take an explicit
position in this regard at the end of the meeting.

In conclusion, I should like once again to
recognize, at this painful moment, the courage and
determination of all UNSMIL staff, especially Special
Representative Salame'.

