Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela for convening this
meeting and thank the briefers - Ambassadors Kamau,
Skoog and Rosenthal.

In the past two decades, our understanding of what
makes for effective peacebuilding has grown markedly.
It is now accepted that effective political transitions
and national reconciliation processes, the reform and
strengthening of security and rule of law institutions
and the creation of employment and economic
opportunities can all be critical for sustaining peace.
Similarly, as Ambassador Rosenthal again reminded us,
and notwithstanding our post-conflict focus in the title

of the agenda item, peacebuilding is now recognized as
something that underlies every step in the conflict cycle,
not only as something that follows at the end of conflict
resolution and peacekeeping activities. We also better
acknowledge now the central importance of national
ownership to the long-term success of peacebuilding
efforts. At the same time, we have learned a great deal
about what not to do, and have identified areas where
we need to do better. Today I will highlight four areas
where New Zealand believes that we, as the Council,
need to improve our collective performance.

First, we support the call by the Advisory Group
of Experts for the Council to play a more active role
in peacebuilding. In our View, the Council must focus
on key areas of comparative advantage and integrate
peacebuilding objectives into mission planning from
the earliest stages. While the Council is not best-
placed to provide overall leadership of United Nations
peacebuilding efforts, it plays a critical role in mandating
early peacebuilding tasks and mobilizing the necessary
resources in many immediate post-conflict settings.

Secondly, there needs to be more consistent and
meaningful engagement between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. New Zealand has been one
ofmany countries to call for that since the Commission's
establishment, in 2005. It should not be a question
of powers or prerogatives; both the Commission and
the Council benefit by sharing their knowledge and
expertise. Making doctrinal distinctions between the
two bodies' respective competencies is a barrier to the
integrated, joined-up approach that should be our aim
and should be the norm. We have been pleased to see
positive examples, such as the briefing by the Chair
of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific configuration
during our discussions on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
last week (see S/PV.7624). We strongly support his
involvement in the Council mission to Guinea-Bissau
next week. We want to see greater engagement between
the Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Additionally, the Council could benefit from the
Commission's advice on issues such as designing
meaningful benchmarks to measure the completion of
peacebuilding mandates.

Thirdly, as all of the briefers emphasized, the
Council needs to better recognize the essential role of
partnerships in achieving and sustaining peacebuilding
gains, particularly in regard to institutional capacity-
building. We still have some way to go to consistently
achieve national ownership in practice. We support
the recommendation of the Advisory Group to use
mechanisms such as peacebuilding compacts to
foster improved understanding and more meaningful
ownership of programmes by national stakeholders.

New Zealand has seen such agreements benefit regional
peacebuilding missions in our own region.

Equally important is the need for better coordination
with other peacebuilding actors - including United
Nations agencies, international financial institutions,
non-governmental organizations and bilateral donors -to
promote coherence in international assistance. United
Nations country teams have a central role to play in this
regard, particularly during peace operation transitions,
when coordination with longer-term development
partners is critical for ensuring that peacebuilding gains
are sustained beyond the life ofthe mission. We support
the Advisory Group's recommendation to strengthen
the offices of the Resident Coordinators during such
transitions, even on a temporary basis, to assist with
taking forward and reallocating the peacebuilding
tasks of departing missions.

Fourthly, as others have also emphasized, the
fragmentation of peacebuilding efforts across the United
Nations system needs to be addressed. Competing
mandates, funding sources and accountabilities can
pose enormous challenges for achieving and sustaining
unity of vision and effort across different United
Nations entities.
The Advisory Group has outlined a range of
recommendations to address this, including more
integrated strategic planning, more accountable senior
leadership and stronger peacebuilding expertise in
critical areas. We encourage the Secretary-General to
take these forward.

Let me conclude by commending the efforts
of Australia and Angola as co-facilitators of the
intergovernmental consultations on the 2015 review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We look
forward to considering a Security Council resolution in
response to the review in the near future.

In the coming year, important decisions are expected
with regard to the transitions in Liberia, Haiti and cote
d'Ivoire that will strongly influence the prospects for
sustaining the hard-fought peacebuilding gains in those
countries. Let us ensure that we draw on the lessons we
have learned when making those decisions.

