Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
We thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for having
presented the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan. We would also like to
welcome here Mr. Kai Eide, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Afghanistan
and we would like to encourage him in the new
responsibilities that he has taken on.

The report highlights that despite the weakness of
the political and socioeconomic institutions, which is
clear, the trend is towards an improvement in the
political process and the economic situation. With
regard to the political aspect, the upcoming presidential
elections that the Afghan authorities plan to organize
will certainly be a decisive test in entrenching
democracy in the country, as long as the executive and
legislative powers manage to reach a consensus as
quickly as possible on the draft electoral law, currently
being reviewed in the national assembly, and on other
practical modalities such as the census and the drawing
up of voter lists. The regional environment should also
help to contribute to the normalization of the political
situation.

In the economic sphere, the diligent finalization
of the Afghanistan National Development Strategy has
become a priority in order to allow the Government to
take on the fight against poverty and, more generally,
the question of development. From that point of view,
the generous offer made by the French authorities to
host a conference in Paris for the support, launching
and financing of the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy should be welcomed.

All of those encouraging facts, which are to the
credit of the Afghan authorities, would obviously be
more productive if the security context were more
conducive to that end. Unfortunately, there are serious
obstacles preventing that progress. As the report points
out, there has been, first of all, a rise in terrorist
activities, in particular suicide attacks and the use of
explosive devices against the civilian population,
politicians, convoys and humanitarian workers. There
is also the scourge of drugs, which constitutes the main
source of funds for terrorist groups and is consequently
linked to the rise in terrorist activities, and there is the
scourge of organized corruption. The Security Council
must therefore welcome and support the establishment
of the National Drug Control Strategy.

We must add to the list of elements undermining
the development and stability of Afghanistan the
inability of the Afghan forces to respond effectively to
these threats, due to a lack of troops and adequate
resources. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the International Security
Assistance Force must therefore provide effective
support to the Afghan forces, particularly in terms of
professional and operational supervision. That would
help them to maintain a balance between law and order

and the fight against the insurgency, especially since it
is true that security and stability are crucial to
establishing and guaranteeing the rule of law. In order
to enable UNAMA to continue to play its decisive role,
we favour the extension of its mandate.

The Government is still unable to administer
justice. Summary executions and the stripping of
fundamental freedoms remain common, and we must
therefore strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of
Justice. We believe that the outcome of the July 2007
Rome Conference on the Rule of Law in Afghanistan
will be of assistance in that regard.

These are all challenges that must be faced, and
the international community must continue to provide
cooperation and assistance to the Afghan authorities, in
particular as regards implementation of the
Afghanistan Compact, signed in London. Clearly, we
reaffirm our full support for the recommendations that
the Secretary-General has made with a view to
achieving a permanent solution to the Afghan problem.

