Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report on the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We also would like to thank his
Special Representative and head of UNMIK,
Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation in the region.

I would also like to thank the President of the
Coordination Centre of Serbia and Montenegro and of
the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija,
Mr. Nebosja Covic', for his participation in today's
meeting.

Greece associates itself fully with the statement
that will soon be made by the Ambassador of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.

We agree with the analysis of the Secretary-
General that, in the aftermath of elections and the
creation of a coalition Government in October 2004,
the international community is witnessing encouraging
signs of commitment by the leadership of the
Provisional Institutions to the implementation of the
standards. We also share the Secretary-General's
overall assessment that, while concrete steps have been
taken in some areas, the progress is uneven.

The transition from the elections to the
installation of the new coalition Government was held
in a smooth and democratic manner that showed
increasing maturity on behalf of the Provisional
Institutions and the Kosovar political parties. That
maturity has, however, to be extended to all parts of
Kosovar political life and especially to the
implementation of the standards.

The new Government has indeed undertaken
serious efforts to accelerate the implementation of the
standards, prioritizing those most affecting minority
communities. A number of elements from the
Standards Implementation Plan are reportedly
complete. A number of new mechanisms have been set
up and a number of measures taken or are envisaged to
be taken.

And yet, we have to note with concern that, as the
report recognizes, none of the standards has been fully
implemented, while there is a discrepancy between the
progress reported in the implementation of the
standards and the equally verified widening of the gap
in the ethnic divide among the two communities. In the
months to come, we should therefore ensure that due
attention be paid not only to the observance of the
listed actions and recommendations under the
standards Plan, but also on how that translates in the
reality of the lives of the communities on the ground.

Encouraged though we may be by the early signs
of progress, now is the time to focus on the obvious
shortcomings. Progress, as amply demonstrated in the
report, is for the most part limited to the central power
institution structures, with the rest of the system
unwilling or unable to follow. The report also rightly
points to the fact that the Provisional Institutions have
failed to embark on the crucial undertaking of
rebuilding the confidence and trust of the minorities.
The new notion, set out in the report, of differentiating
between the reality and the perception of security for
the minorities can be misleading. And in any case
winning the battle against perception is sometimes
winning half the war.

A serious effort to revitalize the returns process
and to improve freedom of movement and the public-
sector employment rates of members of minorities,
and, in general, a robust outreach to minorities by the
provisional authorities at all governmental levels,
would go a long way towards ensuring real and full
progress.

As the Secretary-General several times
emphasizes in his report, there cannot be full progress
in standards implementation without the participation
of the Kosovo Serbs and, thus, without a resumption of
the dialogue with Belgrade. In that spirit, we welcome
the recent letter from Mr. Covie to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General calling for a
resumption of the meetings of the working groups on
missing persons and energy, and we join the Secretary-
General's call to the Kosovo Serbs for engagement in
the local reform process.

A key challenge in the whole process remains
addressing the problems of the Kosovo economy.
Progress in privatization is essential, along with the
strengthening of institutional capacity and
infrastructure. This is necessary in order to
successfully tackle the explosive unemployment
plaguing the society, particularly among young people,
and potentially undermining efforts for stability and
development.

The restoration of all religious sites and property
should be a priority for the provisional authorities.
Cultural monuments are part both of the history and
identity of the communities in Kosovo and of the
common heritage of the region. Their preservation is
not only a sign of respect, but a duty as well. We are
certain that, with the assistance of the international
community, the right framework of protection will be
formulated and that reconstruction programmes will be
promptly implemented.

The road ahead for Kosovo has been clearly
defined, within the parameters of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). As we are nearing the time of
the comprehensive review, progress has to be taken
forward beyond the first encouraging signs and uneven
results. A lot is still expected from the provisional
authorities, as indeed the people of Kosovo expect a lot
from the international community. But the goal of a
stable, multi-ethnic, democratic and prosperous
Kosovo is a prospect worth all the effort.

