Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of all,
we would like to thank Mr. Annabi for the very
comprehensive information he gave us in his introduction
of the latest report of the Secretary-General.

We are also grateful for the first-hand information that
Ambassador Greenstock shared with us. That information
gave us an eloquent and precise picture of the overall
situation in Sierra Leone.

We cannot conceal the fact that the content of the
report of the Secretary-General is a source of concern to us.
What emerges from it is a lack of commitment to the Lome
Agreement on the part of Foday Sankoh, the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) and the rebel forces in general. That
lack of commitment takes specific forms: first, continued
attacks on the civilian population by the rebel forces;
secondly, not only hostile rhetoric against the presence of
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL),
but also serious acts of violence against its personnel and
equipment; and thirdly, slowness in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, largely due to
the rebels' lack of cooperation.

We wish to reaffirm categorically our absolute
condemnation of violations of human rights carried out by
the rebel forces. The amnesty agreed in the Lome
Agreement does not cover crimes committed since its
signature. Moreover, crimes against humanity cannot be
exempted because they are offences against the collective
conscience of mankind.

Attacks against the personnel of UNAMSIL are
unacceptable. We have been aware since the beginning
that the personnel of UNAMSIL could face a hostile
environment. In that context, we believe that Chapter VII
of the Charter and the rules of engagement should be
applied very rigorously. Otherwise, UNAMSIL will be
prevented from fulfilling its mandate. We do not call for
absolute security assurances, but neither do we believe
that UNAMSIL personnel should be exposed to
disproportionate risks. This could ultimately affect the
viability of the Mission.

Given the situation described, the sanctions regime
imposed by the Security Council should be applied firmly.
In this regard, we agree with what is said by the
Secretary-General at the end of paragraph 49 of his report
concerning the possibility of considering measures to put
an end to illegal diamond sales. In this connection, the
exceptional work done by Ambassador Fowler in the
context of the sanctions regime imposed on UNITA might
serve as a valuable model.

Notwithstanding the difficulties that it indicates, the
report of the Secretary-General also shows that the
expansion of UNAMSIL has begun to have positive
effects. The distribution of humanitarian assistance has
improved within its area of deployment, as has the human
rights situation. We hope that the deployment of the
11,000 members of UNAMSIL throughout the country,
and particularly in those areas under rebel control, will
have a significant stabilizing effect. We once again
reiterate that for that deployment to be possible it is
necessary for the very parties that in the Lome Agreement
called for the presence of UNAMSIL - and I refer to the
rebels - comply fully with the commitments they
undertook in July 1999 and that they guarantee the
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel.

Finally, we wish to express our agreement with the
priorities set out by the Secretary-General in part VII of

 

his report: rapid implementation of the disarmament
process, the extension of State authority throughout the
territory of Sierra Leone, the national reconciliation process
and the creation of a professional army and police force.
However, in order to achieve this there is a need for a clear
commitment to peace on the part of all the parties, in
particular the rebel forces.

In closing, I would like to raise two points. First, we
agree with the request made by Mr. Annabi that the report
of the Secretariat be presented every 60 days, instead of
every 45. We know that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has too few personnel to carry out the tasks we
have given it. We also know that it does remarkable work,
for which we are very grateful.
Lastly, we approve the elements for a statement to the
press proposed by Ambassador Greenstock.

