Mr. Tenya Hasegawa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru welcomes the presidency's convening of this
meeting and would like to reiterate its commitment
and full support for the Security Council's robust
efforts aimed at promoting dialogue and cooperation
to confront the threat posed by the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery.

Since the founding of the United Nations, the
international community has promoted the building
of a comprehensive international legal regime
on disarmament, specifically nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons. The ultimate solution for
preventing proliferation lies in achieving the goal of
total elimination and prohibition. With respect to the
international legal regime, we note a synergy among the
mandates of the main international instruments on the
subject. Specific conventions accord with the provisions
of resolution 1540 (2004) in seeking to prevent access
by terrorists to weapons of mass destruction.

The adoption ofresolution 1540 (2004) was a historic
milestone in addressing new threats to international
peace and security associated with the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons to non-State
actors. Peru was a sponsor the resolution because we
believed that it was necessary at the time, as it is now,
to act urgently to promote the international and full
universalization and implementation of multilateral
treaties to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, as well as to encourage States to
adopt effective national legislation to control the
illicit transfer of such weapons, their delivery systems
and related materials. We believe that it is necessary
that States continue along the path towards adopting
measures to prevent the financing of prohibited
activities related to weapons of mass destruction, their
delivery systems and related materials, including with
regard to the physical protection of, and accounting for,
materials related to weapons of mass destruction, all
the while ensuring their safe production, use, storage
and transport.

My country is firmly committed to efforts
aimed at achieving complete disarmament and the
non-proliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons, as well as their delivery systems. We therefore
support the enhancement and universalization of legally
binding multilateral agreements in that area, having
taken various administrative and criminal measures
to effectively fulfil the obligations under resolution
1540 (2004), mainly in the areas of border and customs
control, controlling air and maritime spaces, and
intelligence, in order to prevent the illicit production
of, and trade in, weapons of mass destruction. In that
regard, Peru has adapted its domestic legislation to
the standards set out in resolution 1540 (2004), as was
shown in the latest reports submitted by my country
on its level of compliance with it. My country urges
all States to support international efforts to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction
and calls for taking and strengthening national
measures, as appropriate, so as to prevent non-State
actors from acquiring weapons of mass destruction,
their delivery systems and materials and technologies
related to their production.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
maintenance ofpeace and security is a task that requires
the participation of the international community as a
whole. In that regard, Peru remains firmly committed
to the overall architecture of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We call upon all Member
States to intensify their efforts in that area. You can
count on Peru, Madam President, to continue to do its
part in this collective effort.

