Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): Please allow me, first of
all, to convey our deepest condolences and sympathy
to the people and Government of France at this difficult
moment.

(spoke in French)
We are all Parisians.
(spoke in English)

Cyprus aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like,
however, to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

In 2001, in its presidential statement S/PRST/2001/5,
the Security Council underlined that security and
development are closely interlinked and mutually
reinforcing, and are key to attaining sustainable
peace. Their relationship was recognized as complex,
multifaceted, and case-specific. The statement also
called for an approach to building a sustainable peace
that incorporates and strengthens coherence between
political, security, development, human rights and
rule-of-law activities, and addresses the underlying
causes of each conflict. That vision is now included in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) adopted in September by our
leaders.

While, on the one hand, we have adopted an
ambitious Agenda, on the other we have been
witnessing ongoing turmoil, extremism, sectarianism,
civil war and terrorism in many parts of the world,
resulting in death, persecution, property dispossession,
displacement, the destruction of cultural heritage and
forced migration. In order to reverse such worrying
developments, we should direct our efforts so that the
countries and regions in conflict zones are turned into
places in which sustainable development becomes a
reality. That can be achieved only by tackling the root
causes that have led to this unprecedented situation
with its political instability and economic insecurity.

The marginalization of communities and groups
based on racial, ethnic, social, gender, religious, cultural
and/or economic grounds undoubtedly contributes
to the destabilization of societies and underlies many
conflicts today. Social, ethnic and religious divides
have been a critical factor in creating conflict in many
regions of the world.

Exclusion, discrimination and deprivation are
causes of poverty and inequality that threaten social
cohesion. Dealing with the imperatives of peace
and security means reaching those who are most
vulnerable, including women and girls, children
and the elderly, people with disabilities, migrants,
refugees, the internally displaced and indigenous and
minority groups. An inclusive society should provide
equal opportunities for all citizens regardless of their
background, and in particular should ensure women's
equal participation at all levels, since they play a crucial
role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Tolerance and sound democratic governance are the
best ways to ensure peaceful coexistence and welfare.
At the same time, strong and effective institutions
that are transparent, corruption-free, accessible
and accountable, along with democratic forms of
participation, are essential ingredients for inclusive and
sustained economic growth and peaceful and stable
societies.

Establishing peace, security and respect for
fundamental freedoms, and combating discrimination
and all forms of violence, are critical conditions
for development, but they are also the outcomes of
development. Addressing the sources of conflict
requires a multidimensional approach that must take
into account the interrelated areas of development,
human rights, peace, security and the rule of law. We
firmly believe that the 2030 Agenda provides us with
a unique opportunity to act together in order to shape
a safer, more peaceful, just and prosperous world for
ourselves and for our children and future generations.

