Mr. De Villepin (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the President of the Republic, Jacques Chirac,
I am pleased to bring France's message to the Council.

In the face of discouragement and violence, our
world needs unity more than ever before. It requires
resolve and a collective endeavour. Such resolve can
serve only the general interest and justice; that is the
condition for our legitimacy. Such an effort can be
undertaken only by all the nations gathered together;
that is the condition for our effectiveness.

With 80,000 Blue Helmets, the Security Council
is already committed on the ground to ending conflicts,
preventing them from spreading, helping with
reconstruction. But let us be clear: much remains to be
done if we are to meet people's expectations
effectively and swiftly. In every crisis, we must affirm
true political will to achieve lasting settlements, from
Cote d'Ivoire to Darfur to Haiti. Let us collectively
have the courage to shoulder our responsibilities at
every stage.

That is also true for the Iraq crisis. The Council,
together with the Iraqi authorities, will again have to
consider that issue, taking the current realities into
account. So much is at stake - particularly the unity
of the country, the stability of the region, our collective
security.
At the same time, the Security Council must
respond to new threats - terrorism, first of all. The
attacks that have struck London, Sharm el-Sheikh,
Turkey and Israel this summer remind us of that. None
of our States is sheltered from that; none has the means
to respond to this scourge alone. Our cooperation will
be our strength.

The day after 11 September 2001, the Security
Council met and took the first measures necessary to
track down the terrorists, to combat their financing and
to prevent them from possessing weapons of mass
destruction.

Today, in the spirit of the global strategy
proposed by the Secretary-General, we must go further,
with one principle - full respect for the rule of law -
because the example set by democracies is our
strongest asset in confronting terrorists. We must go
further, with one requirement: resolute action with
respect to everything that fuels terrorism, including
inequality, ongoing violence, injustice, conflict and
cultural misunderstanding. Force alone will never
defeat terrorism, for it does not address people's
frustrations or go to the roots of evil.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
also calls for a determined response on our part. In the
nuclear sphere, we have all put our trust in the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). There
are rights to uphold, in particular the peaceful use of
nuclear energy, but there are also duties to enforce, for
the security of all. If a State fails in its obligations
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, it is legitimate, once dialogue has been
exhausted, to refer it to the Security Council. It is in
that spirit that France urges Iran to conform to the
resolutions of the IAEA and to comply with its
international commitments, first and foremost the Paris
Agreement.

The Security Council has a key role to play in
international peace and security. Let us strengthen it.
Let us be bold enough to enlarge the Security Council
to make it more representative. France supports the
balanced and realistic proposal presented by Germany,
Brazil, India and Japan. In the higher interest of the
United Nations, it would like to see an agreement
reached on enlargement before the end of the year.

Let us make no mistake: In the face of threats that
ignore State borders, the only security is collective
security. In the face of scarred identities, the demand
for respect and justice is not only a political
imperative, but a condition for peace. In the face of the
growing inequalities between rich and poor countries,
solidarity is a condition for our security. It also
requires a commitment from all to promote sustainable
development.

Lastly, in the face of the trouble in the world, we
need a common vision. The United Nations must act
apace with a rapidly changing world; the pain of men
and women confronting health or political crises does
not wait. It must also remain the forum for dialogue
and decision that shapes the destiny of our world.

It is an honour and quite a responsibility to sit in
this Council. Before our peoples, all peoples, let us not
give in to division and inaction. Let us embrace debate
and criticism. Each of us affirms his vision, defends his
interests; each has his history and culture. Here,
however, something goes beyond us and brings us
together: an aspiration, shared by every individual, to
justice, dignity and freedom. Those are the ideals we
pledged to serve 60 years ago. Let us keep our
promise.

