I thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his valuable briefing and his ongoing efforts. I should like to add my voice to those that preceded me in paying tribute to the memory of the Palestinian fighter and leader Saeb Erekat, Secretary of the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization, member of the Fatah Central Committee and head of that organization's Department of Negotiations Affairs. The late Mr. Erakat and an entire generation of fighters and activists who put their faith in peace were unable to see their efforts and steadfastness crowned by an end to the occupation and embodied in the establishment of an independent Palestinian State. The question remains, how long will the plight of the Palestinian people continue and when will justice be achieved and security and stability prevail throughout the region? The answer is clear to all. It lies in implementation of the resolutions of the Security Council and the realization of a two-State vision based on internationally agreed terms of reference and agreements between the two sides. That is the way to bring about an end to the occupation and establish an independent and sovereign Palestinian State along the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, and to reach fair and lasting resolutions of the final-status issues. The international community has been engaged with the just Palestinian cause. It has demanded that the Palestinian people should exercise their legitimate and inalienable rights and that the occupation authorities should end their repressive practices and expansionist and racist policies that contravene international law. Unfortunately, what reality reflects is a blatant challenge to the international community and the Security Council by the occupying Power and a disregard for international conventions and United Nations resolutions, in the complete absence of any kind of accountability or punishment. There can be no greater testament of this than the record high number of housing units included in Israeli West Bank settlement plans for 2020, which reflects a systematic strategy to make Israeli annexation plans a fait accompli that threatens the integrity of Palestinian territory. In the face of this dangerous situation, Tunisia reiterates its condemnation of the colonial policy being pursued by Israel, its absolute rejection of annexation plans and its insistence that such plans must be abandoned once and for all. Tunisia also emphasizes the need for the Security Council to carry out its responsibilities in this regard, in particular by ensuring the implementation of its relevant resolutions, the most recent of which was resolution 2334 (2016). In the face of continued provocation, demolition of homes and schools, economic sanctions and the targeting of unarmed civilians, Tunisia warns that the continuation of such practices will serve only to exacerbate feelings of despair and injustice and increase the levels of tension and strain. Tunisia renews its call for protection for the Palestinian civilian population in accordance with the principles of international law in implementation of General Assembly resolution ES-10/20 of 2018. Tunisia also welcomes the call issued by a number United Nations agencies and international organizations on 5 November 2020 for protection for Palestinian farmers from violence by Israeli settlers, against both their persons and their crops, and for perpetrators to be held legally accountable. At the same time, in the face of the magnitude of the suffering being undergone by Palestinian citizens in the Gaza Strip as a result of the continued unjust siege and the policy of collective punishment being implemented by the occupation authority against some 2 million Palestinians, we call on the international community and the relevant actors to make every effort to bring about an end to the siege that has been imposed on the Gaza Strip for some 14 years and to put a stop to the humanitarian suffering, which has only been magnified by the coronavirus disease pandemic. In that regard, we salute the extraordinary efforts of health and relief workers in the face of the pandemic and call on the international community to act to make up the budget shortfall at the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East so that the agency need not curtail its vital activities. As we celebrate the thirty-second anniversary of the declaration of the State of Palestine, Tunisia reaffirms its firm belief in the justness of the Palestinian cause, its admiration for the sacrifices of the Palestinian people and its unwavering and principled support for their inalienable rights - which carry no statute of limitations - and, above all, their right to the establishment of an independent State with Jerusalem as its capital. The international community has once again demonstrated its embrace of the just Palestinian cause with the adoption of a package of draft resolutions on Palestine at the closing of the proceedings of the Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) during the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly. It must now translate its robust efforts of the past few months into a revival of the peace process and the launch of earnest and credible negotiations between the two sides to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. In that regard, Tunisia supports efforts to advance the initiative of Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas to convene a full- fledged international conference attended by all the parties concerned to engage with the peace process on the basis of international law, international legitimacy and the agreed terms of reference. We reiterate that Tunisia stands ready to contribute to any constructive attempt to end the occupation and restore to the Palestinian people their full legal rights. We once again stress that the inclusion of the Palestinian side in any efforts or initiatives aimed at resolving the Palestinian question is a prerequisite for ensuring that a fair and lasting solution for this crucial issue is arrived at. We also reiterate that we welcome the good-faith efforts of our brothers in Palestine to support national reconciliation, which we consider a necessary step towards consolidating internal ranks to help bring about the desired settlement in accordance with the two-State solution.
