The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I welcome today's briefing on cooperation between
the United Nations and the European Union, in the
presence of its High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy. I once again salute her presence
among us.

The general tone of the statements around the
table shows, I believe, the extent to which cooperation
between the two organizations is both natural and
essential, as their shared values and joint fields of
action are many and growing. The European Union is
indeed a major player in the maintenance of peace and
a partner of the United Nations at the highest level level
in this area. Like other regional organizations, its role
is becoming increasingly central in the implementation
of peacekeeping operations, be it in funding, military
contributions or political support. More broadly, the
European Union intervenes in favour of peace and
security by using all its instruments in the context of a
comprehensive approach.

Thus, the many missions deployed by the
European Union, both military and civilian, under its
Common Security and Defence Policy, contribute to
the implementation of or support for the decisions of
the Council in various regions of the world. That is
particularly the case on the European continent, where
the Union contributes, for example, to the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the strengthening of
the rule of law in Kosovo, in Africa, including Mali,
the Niger, the Central African Republic and Somalia,
where the Union supports the structural reinforcement
of African capacities to respond to crises and provides
vital funding to African peacekeeping operations; or in
response to transnational threats through the action of
the Union in the fight against the smuggling of migrants
in the Mediterranean or against maritime piracy off the
Somali coast.

We should also recall the contribution of European
countries to various peacekeeping operations both
financially - with its funding of nearly one-third
of the general peacekeeping budget - and in human
terms, as for example in Mali, where more than 1,000
peacekeepers are engaged in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, with unprecedented resources. The European
Union is also a strategic partner ofthe Security Council
in the search for lasting solutions to the major crises on
its agenda.

That is the case first and foremost with the peace
process in the Middle East, where the European Union
recalls tirelessly that a just and lasting solution can
be achieved only through respect for the law and that
our common priority must be to preserve the viability
of the two-State solution. The Union fully supported
the French initiative for peace in the Middle East.
The 3 June meeting in Paris brought together many
actors, including of course the European Union, with
the aim of laying the foundations for a new momentum
for peace that enjoys the active support of the entire
international community, with the ambition of holding
an international conference by the end of the year.

That is also the case on the Syrian track, where
the European Union has added its voice to those who
rightloy stress the urgent need to resume inter-Syrian
negotiations for the establishment of a political
transition in line with the provisions of the Geneva
communique (S/2012/523, annex), endorsed by the
Council, while stressing that it can reasonably occur
only in a context of a lasting cessation of hostilities
and the open, continuous and unhindered access of
humanitarian aid to all in the need.

It is also true in Libya, where the European Union
and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya are
engaged in a massive effort to empower the Government
of National Accord to fight the threat posed by the
growing presence of terrorist groups in its territory.
The European Union has particularly expressed its
willingness to contribute, through its naval mission
Operation Sophia, deployed in international waters off
the Libyan coast, to strengthening the implementation
of the arms embargo on Libya without prejudice to
possible exemptions for the benefit of the Government
of National Accord. To that end, we are working with our
European partners on the Council on a draft resolution
that would strengthen deep-sea intervention procedures
against ships carrying weapons or associated equipment
in violation of the arms embargo.
It is also the case with regard to the crisis in
Ukraine, where the European Union is conducting
a policy that combines dialogue and firmness. The
sanctions are meant not to punish but to encourage the
stakeholders to implement the provisions endorsed by
the Security Council to resolve the crisis, including
the package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements.

The European Union is also a leading player in the
response to the global migrant crisis. Let us see the
situation for what it is. Faced with what amounts to the
largest crisis of displaced persons and refugees since
the end of the Second World War, in respect of which
the entire international community shares an equal
need for solidarity and responsibility, the determined
action of the European Union is too often undervalued
or misunderstood. It remains by far the largest purveyor
of aid to refugees in the world. Its member States hosted
more than 1 million refugees in 2015 alone.

Operations headed by the European Union, first
and foremost Operation Sophia of the European
Union military operation in the Southern Central
Mediterranean, have saved thousands of people
drowning in the waters of the Mediterranean and
helped to combat migrant-trafficking networks in the
region. The European Union is also addressing the root
causes of this phenomenon, as demonstrated by the fact
that it is the primary donor globally of financing for
development, in the framework of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, as well as by the substantive
financing it provides to countries of origin and of
transit. While the EU cannot resolve the migrant crisis
alone, it is shouldering fully its responsibility on the
political, security and financial fronts, as well as the
moral and humanitarian fronts, so as to provide an
effective response.

Today we are marking the anniversary of the
Normandy landing, one of the key events that opened
the way for the liberation of Europe and for the eventual
creation of the EU.

I should like to conclude by once again highlighting
a key point of convergence between the EU and the
United Nations. The two organizations are strategic
partners to each other, united by a shared vision of the
world in which right must prevail over might, and by a
common vision of multilateralism. This is what makes
the European Union, beyond its role as a regional
organization, one of the central pillars of the current
international system.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.

I give the floor once again to Ms. Mogherini to
respond to the comments made.

