Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Ithank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to
speak before the Security Council on the situation in
Afghanistan. The reaction we witnessed today in this
open debate clearly shows how preoccupied the
international community is with the well-being of the
Afghan people and with the need to find a lasting
solution to the endless crises that beset that country.

Canadians are very concerned by the unstable
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan and the need to
protect the Afghan civilian population, including
persons internally displaced and refugees abroad.

The United Nations - in particular its
representatives on the ground, under the guidance of
Mr. Brahimi and Mr. Fisher - has shown enlightened
leadership in its efforts to meet the challenges of
governance, to respect security imperatives and cope
with urgent humanitarian needs. We can only pay
tribute to their leadership and urge them to persevere
along this path.

(spoke in English)

We welcome the excellent report of the Secretary-
General on the situation. It is clear, timely and detailed.
The Interim Administration is laying important
foundations for peace through building representative
government structures, seeking to ensure the rule of
law, promoting respect for human rights and looking to
the implementation of sound economic policies. Much
has been done in the first three months of the
Administration, and while the task ahead is an onerous
one, we congratulate the Interim Afghan
Administration on the progress that it has made to date
under very difficult circumstances. In particular, it is
most gratifying to see that the schools are open and that
the children are attending, including the girls.

The preparations for the emergency Loya Jirga in
June will be key to installing a broadly representative
administration to oversee the reconstruction of
Afghanistan. The continuing work of the Special
Commission is critical to its success, and we urge the
Commission to ensure that the process remains
equitable and transparent.

We are pleased that Afghan women are included
in the Administration. We encourage the
Administration and the United Nations to ensure that
women are full partners in their respective decision-
making processes and to ensure that resources are
devoted to this important facet of the work. We say this
not for reasons of political correctness, but for very,
very practical reasons: old boys with old approaches
will prolong the old problems, not generate new
solutions. Let Afghanistan draw on the proven models,
for example Turkey and Bangladesh, in involving
women in public life and in the professions.

We urge that every effort be made to establish the
independent human rights commission and the judicial
commission called for in the Bonn Agreement. It is
also important to continue to ensure that the civil
service be transparent and that it represent all tribal and
ethnic groups.

On the drug problem, the most recent poppy crop,
due to be harvested in March, is another challenge. It is
essential that the Interim Administration do what it can
to reduce the incentives for poppy production and
provide alternatives for farmers, including reformed
rural credit systems. It goes almost without saying -
but not quite - that the international community and
the United Nations must support these particular
efforts.

Canada is contributing to the stability and peace
in Afghanistan in various ways, including military
contributions to the coalition, direct support for the
Interim Administration and the provision of additional
humanitarian assistance and funds for longer-term
reconstruction. Militarily, as part of the international
efforts to ensure security, Canada has deployed 900
ground troops, plus or minus, to Afghanistan to work
with the United States forces in Kandahar, through
Operation Enduring Freedom. This brings the total
Canadian contribution of forces to this Operation to
something approximating 3,000.

As chair of the G-8 group of nations this year,
Canada is also promoting discussions on the challenge
of reintegration, disarmament and demobilization of
Afghan soldiers. The G-8 Summit in Kananaskis will
seek to address these issues and to catalyse support.

Financially, Canada's support for the Interim
Administration is part of our ongoing commitment to
the people of Afghanistan and to the long-term stability
of that country. In January, we deposited with the
United Nations Development Programme our first $1.5
million contribution to support the Afghan Interim
Authority Fund, and last week we announced a further
contribution of $1.5 million to that Fund. That brings
our total contribution to $3 million, an amount that is
in addition to the $24 million in assistance that Canada
has provided to Afghanistan during our current fiscal
year, which ends in another week's time - $16 million
since September. I think those figures are in Canadian
dollars.

In the recent federal budget, Canada allocated a
further $100 million for the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan and the region. Last week, the first $30.2
million of that commitment was allocated to United
Nations agencies and other partners in support of
activities such as demining, health, refugee integration,
humanitarian assistance, education, security, peace-
building and women's initiatives.

The United Nations clearly has the central
coordinating role to play in the international support
that is being offered to Afghanistan. Canada fully
supports the leadership of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi in his
capacity as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. We welcome the recent appointments of Nigel
Fisher and Jean Arnault as Deputy Special
Representatives to assist Mr. Brahimi.

It is our hope that the proposed structure for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan as
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General will
ensure a coordinated approach to this complex task.
The United Nations role in channelling financial
support and providing advice to the Interim
Administration is key. It is essential that United
Nations agencies work together in an efficient,
effective and coordinated way. Effective coordination
between the agencies and the mission's pillars will
avoid duplication and ensure that every dollar of
international assistance that is spent goes to benefit the
Afghan people. Obviously, donor coordination is also
important. The Interim Administration can, and should,
play a critical role in programme development and in
funding allocations.

Finally, let me convey a word of sympathy to the
Afghan people with regard to the terrible earthquake
tragedy that has afflicted them. It has caused terrible
devastation, exactly not what the people of Afghanistan
needed at this time.

