Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking Mr. Zannier for introducing
the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(S/2009/497). We salute his leadership and that of the
mission in Kosovo. Costa Rica also welcomes the
presence of Mr. Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, and of Mr. Hyseni, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo. We also welcome the presence of
the Vice Federal Minister for European and
International Affairs of Austria.

Costa Rica recognizes the successful
reconfiguration of the Mission in Kosovo and the
ongoing coordination and complementarity of its work
with the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). We also welcome the improvement
of the overall security situation in Kosovo, as well as
the reintegration of Kosovo Serb police officers into
the Kosovo Police Service, because we believe that an
inclusive police force will be more successful in
addressing the ongoing ethnic tensions, in particular in
the northern areas of the country. We believe that the
strengthening of the Kosovo Police Service will serve
not only to maintain security, but also to improve the
operations of local security committees so that they
may better address security incidents that arise within
communities, including ethnically motivated
confrontations.

Costa Rica hopes for the peaceful continued
implementation of reconstruction projects and the
creation of economic, social and security conditions
conducive to the return and sustainable reintegration of
internally displaced persons (IDPs), including the
Roma, Ashkalis and Egyptians from the North. We also
recognize the efforts undertaken to facilitate the return
and reintegration of IDPs and call for continued efforts
to promote security conditions that will help the
greatest number of people to return.

Costa Rica underscores the importance we attach
to the legitimacy of the democratic process with a view
to the establishment of a peaceful State. In that context,
we believe that the strengthening of institutions
capable of holding transparent and fair elections is
essential if the results are to be accepted by all parties.
We hope for broad participation in the upcoming
municipal elections and believe that a successful
electoral exercise will contribute to the strengthening
of local governance and the consolidation of a Kosovar
State that is prosperous, democratic, multi-ethnic and
respectful of human rights.

Costa Rica reiterates its support for the
declaration of Kosovo as a sovereign and independent
Republic. We believe that a definitive and
internationally recognized solution on the status of
Kosovo is today more necessary than ever to the
internal domestic development of the nation and to
greater stability in the Balkan region.

While this recognition is in progress, we hope
that Kosovo's relations with its neighbours continue to
be based on respectful and peaceful coexistence. We
call on the authorities in Kosovo to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights,
including measures to ensure respect and protection of
minority groups. We also urge the international
community to support the socio-economic development
of Kosovo and its active integration into the regional
economy and the broader context of the international
community.

