Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): At the outset, I should like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your country's accession to the
presidency of the Council for the month of October. My
delegation and I assure you of our full support in your
work. I also pay tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Gary
Francis Quinlan, and his country, Australia, for their
leadership last month.

On 14 August in this very Chamber, I spoke of
the suffering and pain of my countrymen and pleaded
for help in saving the perpetual crisis in the Central
African Republic from oblivion (see S/PV.7017). I called
for the Council, which is the voice of the international
community, to be seized of the question of the Central
African Republic and to make it a priority. Today, this
has happened.

Just a few days ago, we heard statements made in
the General Assembly by representatives of several
friendly States and the Secretary-General, and a high-
level meeting on the humanitarian situation was held
at the joint initiative of France, the European Union
and the United Nations. On the heels of those events,
resolution 2121 (2013), which was submitted by France
and whose adoption a moment ago we welcome,
represents a fresh start for the men and women of the
Central African Republic. It represents the beginning
of the end of their ordeal. The resolution retraces the
evolution of the situation, sets a position, provides
guidance, points to the road to follow ahead, indicates
the means for reaching our objectives, and reflects
perfectly the expectations of my fellow countrymen.

My fellow Central Africans are fundamentally
concerned about the the reaffirmation of the full
sovereignty of the Central African Republic, which
must live in symbiosis with its neighbours; the issue of
protecting civilians, including children and women; the
phenomenon of the Lord's Resistance Army; the issue
of rape and, more generally, the human rights situation;
the transition; an electoral process leading to the
establishment of constitutional law; the strengthening
of the mandate and capacity of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic; and the Mission internationale de soutien
a la Centrafrique sous conduite africaine and its
contribution to security to Bangui and to peace in the
interior of the country. These are the concerns that they
wish to share with the Council.

The Council's vote offers a glimmer of hope to the
4.6 million men, women and children of the Central
African Republic and to those who have chosen to live
within the country. They have been disoriented, live
in constant uncertainty about the immediate future,
and mistakenly feel forgotten by the international
community in their hiding places in the bush, in their
places of worship or just in their homes.

Today, as Ambassador ofa failed State, as recalled
by the resolution, I am not proud of that unfortunate
situation, but wish simply, along with my countrymen,
to offer a heartfelt thank you in every language spoken
here. The men and women of the Central African
Republic rightly recognize the scope of the Council's

resolution, which restores their lost the freedom
and dignity, and will pass this knowledge on to their
children. That is Why the men and women of the
Central African Republic, who are forever indebted
to the international community - of which they are
grateful members - and having reclaimed their State,
will make every effort to share and consolidate the
dividends of peace. They stand ready to do so when the
duty of international solidarity calls them one day to
the side of another member in distress.

I wish to thank all our bilateral and multilateral
partners: the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in
the Central African Republic, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the African Union, the
European Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie, the United Nations and all its agencies,
and the non-governmental organizations, whose
personnel serve every day in difficult conditions,
sometimes risking their life, providing aid and
assistance to thousands of Central Africans in distress.

To conclude, the Central African Republic would
like to thank by name each of the 15 members of
the Security Council represented in this Chamber:
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, China, France,
Guatemala, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan, the
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, the Russian Federation,
Togo, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland amd the United States of America.
I thank them for their crucial vote, which restores
to a people, including its women and children, their
humanity and, quite simply, hope for the future.

