Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for mentioning the two letters we sent to the President
and members of the Security Council on the chemical
issue and the very serious risk concerning the possible
use of chemical weapons again in Idlib.

You asked me some questions, Madam President,
and I hope that the presidency will be patient enough
and listen to my responses for several minutes, given
that I have listened to all the members of the Council
for over an hour and a half. There are several important
points requiring explanation that I shall mention before
reading out my statement.

First, during the period in which the report of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) was written, the Foreign Ministry approved
2,700 requests from the World Food Programme
to provide assistance to liberated areas and others.
The Foreign Ministry confirmed that it approved
2,700 requests.

Secondly, this month we have provided a detailed
explanation to the members of the Council and
Member States about the meaning and purposes of Law
Number 10, which clearly refutes all the prejudiced
and fallacious claims and information made by some
about that Law. Hence, this topic should be withdrawn
from circulation.

Thirdly, the Syrian Red Crescent continues to work,
repeatedly and daily, with its local and international
humanitarian partners to provide assistance. Dozens of
convoys have arrived in areas where the inhabitants are
in need of such assistance. Our problem with OCHA is
as follows. Mr. Ging said earlier that only four convoys
had been given approval by the Government. That is
not true. Our problem with OCHA is that it counts only
its own convoys. For example, it does not count convoys
from the World Food Programme or the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. It
does not count Red Cross convoys either. Therefore,
thousands of convoys and tons of assistance are being
delivered to areas where it is needed without being
counted by OCHA. Again, according to OCHA only
four convoys were given access this month. That is not
true. This erroneous information misleads the members
of the Security Council.

We have warned numerous times about the presence
of a huge, unruly elephant in the Chamber that imperils
our joint work and steps with its huge feet over many
facts in order to cover the violations perpetrated against
the Charter of the United Nations and international law
by certain permanent members.

Apparently, the policies and practices of Western
Governments against my country still contiue. Instead
of shouldering the political and legal responsibility for
waging a terrorist war against Syria and its people, and
instead of correcting the disastrous policies against
our region in general, and against my country, Syria,
in particular, those Governments are insisting on their
policy of aggression while using their black banners,
White Helmets and red lines. They are currently
preparing another staged bloody chemical-weapons
incident in the north-west of Syria. The goal is to hinder
the current political process and justify aggression by

Western countries in the Council against my country so
as to occupy parts of our territory and strengthen the
remnants of terrorist groups operating in certain areas.
My Government condemns the statement made a
few days ago by the United States, France and the United
Kingdom. It rejects both the content and format of that
statement. Syria has repeatedly underscored that it
considers the use of chemical weapons as immoral, and
condemns their use anywhere, under any circumstances
and against whomsoever. Syria once again reiterates
that it does not possess any chemical weapons, and has
lived up to all its obligations with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, which has
informed international bodies and the Council that
Syria has lived up to its obligations in that regard. It is
futile to have to repeat at every meeting that the Syrian
chemical stockpiles were destroyed on the United
States vessel MV Cape Ray in the Mediterranean Sea.
Meanwhile, we await the approval of the Council for
the destruction of Israeli stockpiles of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons.

I would like to make available to the Security
Council documented information about preparations
by terrorists from the Al-Nusra Front and affiliated
groups to use chemical weapons against civilians in
Idlib in order to then accuse Syrian forces and thereby
justify military aggression by the Governments that
support those terrorist groups - as was the case during
the American aggression against Al-Shouayrat airport
on 7 April 2017, and the tripartite American-British-
French aggression on 14 April 2018.

As to the preparations for committing this crime,
we strongly call on those countries with influence over
the terrorist groups to forbid them from committing it.
I would recall that eight containers of chlorine were
transferred to the village of Hallouz in Idlib as part of
preparations for this new staged incident of chemical
aggression. Terrorists related to the Islamic Party of
Turkistan and the Al-Nusra Front, whom the drafters
of the Secretariat's reports refer to as "non-State
military opposition", are planning to use toxic chemical
substances against Syrian civilians, including dozens of
children who were kidnapped few days ago in Aleppo
and Idlib countryside in order to then accuse the Syrian
Government and justify an aggression against it.

Any act of aggression against my country, if it
happens, is an act of aggression against a founding
Member of the United Nations, as well as aggression
against international peace and security. It would
constitute support for terrorism and target the efforts
we have made with our allies to combat it. Of course,
what goes around comes around.

I shall limit my statement to that, given your request,
Madam President, although this is a very important
meeting that concerns my country. Yet everyone else
took the floor for quite a long time.

