Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for putting this item on today's agenda as the culmination of your presidency. I must say that I was very impressed when I heard the remarks of the Secretary-General with respect to the achievements of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) over the years, in particular in economic terms, but also in other areas. At this stage, I would like to welcome all ASEAN Ambassadors present in the Chamber. The development of ASEAN was always very important to Germany. After the Second World War, it was key for Germany to integrate into the European Union (EU) in 1957. That was perhaps the best thing that happened for us. On the basis of the experience of European integration, we always promoted ASEAN cooperation. As a young diplomat, I remember working with the German Foreign Minister at the time, Hans- Dietrich Genscher, whose close friend was later the President of Indonesia, Mr. Habibie, who, as Minister of Research and Technology of Indonesia, was one of the promoters of ASEAN and of cooperation between the EU and ASEAN and Germany and ASEAN. President Habibie passed away last year. He was a very close friend of Germany. According to ournotes, today we- Germany - have been the primary development partner of ASEAN since 2016. We signed the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia in November 2019. We therefore happily remain a strong ASEAN partner. Turning back to the European Union, at the same time, we have always promoted cooperation between the European Union and ASEAN. That cooperation developed over time. We now seek a strategic partnership with ASEAN. I listened closely to the contributions of ASEAN to the United Nations. I think that it has become increasingly clear from our many discussions that regional partnerships are important. We talk at length about the partnerships between the African Union and the United Nations and the EU and the United Nations. The ASEAN-United Nations partnership is also very important and can still be strengthened. My Indonesian colleague mentioned some of the areas in which cooperation can be strengthened, from security to climate change to disaster management. I would like to make a couple of points and start with the remarks of the Secretary-General pertaining to commitment to the United Nations and to the Charter of the United Nations. Germany also firmly believes in adhering to the United Nations Charter, the international rules-based order, human rights and accountability for violations of international law and international humanitarian law. We encourage ASEAN to embrace the universality of human rights in its regional policy. Germany and the European Union stand ready to work with ASEAN to share lessons learned. In his statement, the Secretary-General also mentioned the situation in Myanmar and the challenge posed by the Rohingya crisis. We take note of a very encouraging statement, which was released on the occasion of the ASEAN Foreign Ministers retreat a month ago, in which ASEAN acknowledged "the need for ASEAN to be more visible and to play an enhanced role in supporting Myanmar".We welcome ASEAN's growing commitment to finding solutions to the Rohingya crisis. We encourage and support ASEAN in capacity-building at the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management. I would again like to pay tribute to my Indonesian colleague, who has been very active in that area. With regard to upholding international law and the United Nations Charter, in the light of the decision of the International Court of Justice with regard to the case Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (The Gambia v. Myanmar) and the report of the Independent Commission of Enquiry, which were both released last week, we again urge ASEAN member States, the Government of Myanmar and the Myanmar military to ensure full accountability for all crimes and severe human rights violations that took place in 2016 and 2017. Impunity for those crimes must end. Returning to the statement by the ASEAN Secretary-General, in which he mentioned several times the promotion of women, an issue that I would also highlight and support. During our presidency of the Security Council last year, we worked together with the members to adopt resolution 2467 (2019), on sexual violence in conflict and accountability for perpetrators of sexual and gender-based violence. We believe that accountability must be ensured and that a survivor-centred approach to justice has to be adopted. Accordingly, we strongly support the Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar, established by the Human Rights Council, and its important work. We would also respectfully encourage ASEAN member States to seek further avenues, by way of regional cooperation, to effectively address such events in their region and to prevent their recurrence. Speaking of conflict prevention, which was also highlighted by the Secretary-General of ASEAN, I would like to pick up on what the Secretary-General of the United Nations mentioned, namely, the situation in the South China Sea. As a party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), Germany underlines its interest in the universal application of UNCLOS, which sets out the comprehensive legal framework for the conduct of all activities in the oceans and seas, including the implementation of arbitration rulings.
