Mr. Hill (Australia): The Australian Government
is committed to strengthening international peace and
security. Multilateral organizations, and in particular
the United Nations and its Security Council, play a
vital role in this regard. We welcome the Costa Rican
initiative to sponsor this open debate of the Council on
collective security and armament regulation, an
important element of the Security Council's work.

Given the time constraints, I want to focus this
afternoon on the armaments regulation issue. We have
made progress in that regard over the past 60 years. We
have seen significant achievements, including the
conclusion of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), conventions on biological
and chemical weapons, five protocols to the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, the
universalization of the Geneva Conventions and the
08-60947
emergence of a number of regional security
agreements. However, more must be done.

The international community now stands at a
crossroads. We cannot accept anything other than a
successful outcome from the 2010 NPT Review
Conference, not only in order to ensure progress on the
non-proliferation i both horizontal and vertical - of
weapons of mass destruction, but for regional and
global security more broadly. The Review Conference
offers us an opportunity to re-energize the
non-proliferation and disarmament regimes for the
greater security of all. That opportunity cannot be lost.

As members of the Council will be aware,
Australia and Japan have joined together to establish
the International Commission on Nuclear
Non-proliferation and Disarmament. The Commission
promises a fresh and imaginative vision. It is aimed at
helping to change the formulaic and unproductive
nature of much of the current nuclear debate. The
Commission seeks to help shape a global consensus in
the lead-up to 2010 and beyond. Commissioners from a
broad range of countries, including members of this
Council, will work towards that goal. We encourage all
States to support the work of the Commission and to
draw on the formidable expertise of its membership in
our cooperative efforts on non-proliferation, peaceful
use and nuclear disarmament.

We cannot discuss progress on nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation without
acknowledging the need for conventional armament
regulation. Australia hopes that the encouraging steps
we have seen in the area of conventional weapons in
recent years can continue. While we see many potential
opportunities for further global action, we particularly
urge States to continue the momentum, recently
demonstrated by the resounding majority of member
States in this year's First Committee, to work towards
an arms trade treaty.

A legally binding, multilateral arms trade treaty
would bring much-needed transparency and
accountability, codify existing best practice in the
responsible transfer of conventional weapons, and
prevent human rights abuses and the destabilizing
accumulation of arms.

