Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Ambassadors
Gary Quinlan, Mohammed Loulichki and Oh Joon
for their informative briefings and for the capability
and dynamism with which they have been leading the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council under their
respective terms. We also appreciate the collaborative
spirit that they embody in making a joint presentation
covering their respective spheres of action. I would like
to make a few brief remarks on each of Committees,
beginning with the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities.

The sanctions against Al-Qaida play an important
role in the fight against terrorism by targeting the
operatives of the various factions or chapters of
Al-Qaida, depriving them of weapons and restricting
their ability to travel, which limits their ability to carry
out terrorist acts. In order for that regime to work
effectively, the process of including names on the list
and of removing them must be guided by the principles
of equality, due process, credibility and transparency.

Likewise, sanctions should be applied in a diligent
manner.

We believe that the Office of the Ombudsperson
is of fundamental importance as an element of
impartiality in the implementation of the sanctions
regime. Further improvements to the authority of
the Ombudsperson and reforms to the procedures for
removing names from the list are important measures
in that regard. The Ombudsperson is now better placed
to assist persons in the process of having their cases
reviewed. We need to ensure that that is done in a way
that strengthens counter-terrorism capacity. We hope
that the positive contribution of the Ombudsperson
will create an example for other sanctions regimes,
and we congratulate Kimberly Prost for the degree of
independence, professionalism and courage with which
she has carried out her work.

We also believe that the list of persons and
entities subject to sanctions should keep pace with
the changing nature of the threat. In that regard, we
would like to applaud the role of the Monitoring Team
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) to address the need to express the changing
nature of the threat; the Team has recommended
ways for us to update the sanctions established under
that resolution. That sanctions regime is one of the
international community's most important multilateral
tools in the fight against terrorism. Mr. Evans and his
team have our full support for effective discharge of
their mandate.

With respect to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, also known as the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, we support the efforts
of that Committee to enhance the capabilities of
States to implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), and that includes its activities of dissemination
and outreach. We appreciate the Committee's focus
on the use of new communications technologies and
technical assistance in the Sahel region during its
special meetings earlier this year. We also found useful
the recent presentation by former Prime Minister Tony
Blair on the role of education in combating extremism.

We take note of the report of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee on its work and that of its Executive
Directorate. We are in the midst of carefully reviewing
that report. We await with interest the forthcoming
negotiations to renew the mandate of the Committee,
which will also provide an opportunity to strengthen
it. We salute Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde for his leadership
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which deserves special recognition for
keeping States apprised of developments in the risks
and threats posed by terrorist acts. The close interaction
between the Executive Directorate and Member States
is a prerequisite condition for the effectiveness of the
Committee's work and for the full implementation of
commitments made in the fight to combat terrorism.

In that light, we encourage the Executive Directorate
to continue to promote capacity-building activities and
to propose technical assistance mechanisms to countries
that request it. We are particularly interested in seeing
greater emphasis placed on addressing the conditions
that favour the existence and spread of terrorism. We
believe that the effectiveness of our counter-terrorism
efforts is closely linked to our ability to successfully
confront the economic, social and political conditions
that often give rise to that phenomenon.

Finally, with regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the terrorist threat
is accompanied by the risk that weapons of mass
destruction might fall into the hands of terrorists. In
the current context of international peace and security,
it is more urgent than ever to make concrete progress in
our fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Guatemala is committed to the complete
elimination of such weapons, and we believe that that
should also be the goal of the international community.
In that context, resolution 1540 (2004) is an important
complementary tool in that fight.

The excellent work of the Group of Experts of
the 1540 Committee deserves mention at this point,
along with its efforts in the area of dissemination and,
in particular, its country visits. Without the support
that the Experts give Member States, particularly
developing countries, it would be difficult for many of
them to comply with the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004). The Group of Experts also provides essential
support to the Committee's four Working Groups, to
which we can testify directly, since we have the honour
of coordinating the Working Group on Monitoring and
National Implementation.

My delegation considers the two elements that are
key to full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
are assistance and information exchange. In that regard,
we urge the Committee to continue to seek ways to
facilitate communication between donor countries and
Member States that request assistance. Beyond that,
transparency and information exchange are equally
crucial. We consider it essential that the recently begun
work on effective practices within the Committee
be continued and intensified with the aim of posting
compilations of them on the Committee's website and
eventually producing a technical reference guide on the
subject. In that regard, we welcome such initiatives as
the recent peer review exercise undertaken by Croatia
and Poland, which, in our view, could serve as an
exemplar of effective practices and urge all Member
States who are interested to share with the Committee
other examples of experiences and practices that could
be useful.

As others have done, Guatemala welcomes the
interim agreement reached in Geneva on 24 November
between the Islamic Republic of Iran, the European
Union and the E3+3 countries on Iran's nuclear
programme. It is an encouraging development and we
urge the international community to redouble efforts to
take advantage of that first step.

Lastly, we reaffirm our unequivocal commitment
to the cause of a safer world in which weapons of mass
destruction no longer exist, and our determination to
continue to work constructively and positively with
the Committee, both now and after our two years as
a non-permanent member of the Security Council are
over.

