Mr. Kawamura (Japan): Japan, too, offers its
deep condolences to the families of the victims of
the terrorist attacks in Egypt on Sunday. We join our
colleagues in condemning these despicable acts and
in expressing our solidarity with the people and the
Government of Egypt.

I would like to thank Sandra Honore, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
highly informative briefing. As the conclusion of the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) approaches after 13 years,
Japan reiterates its appreciation for the dedication and
accomplishments of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Mission in support ofa more
stable, prosperous future for the Haitian people.

Japan is proud to have contributed to MINUSTAH
by dispatching approximately 2,200 Self-Defense Force
personnel for post-earthquake reconstruction. We pay
tribute to the brave men and women from all troop- and
police-contributing countries for their efforts.

Japan has followedthe Haitian elections and political
process with great interest, and at times with concern.
We are pleased that elections have finally been held
successfully, despite the impact of Hurricane Matthew,
and commend Haiti's ownership of this process.
This election is a milestone for Haiti's strengthened
democracy and its return to constitutional order.
Now is the time for Haiti to build on this political
progress to create more effective and accountable
rule-of-law and justice institutions. We are pleased
by the Haitian National Police's increased capacity
to provide security independently from MINUSTAH.
But the police is only a single component of the justice
sector and the penal chain. Haiti's justice sector overall
demands further reform, carefully balancing capacity
development with enhanced civilian oversight.

Japan greatly appreciates the work of the recent
strategic assessment mission as we consider the shape of
future United Nations involvement in Haiti. We support
its recommendations, including on the importance of
enhanced police capacity. We must support Haiti now
to ensure its self-reliance in the future. It is Haiti's
progress and MINUSTAH's success that have allowed
the Council to transition to a smaller, new United
Nations mission. We underline the need for a clear,
highly focused mandate to consolidate gains through
justice support, including by strengthening the rule
of law.

Haiti has made commendable progress in highly
challenging conditions, but the road ahead is still
long. Japan is committed to its continued support for
Haiti's development, including by improving basic
social services, supporting post-disaster reconstruction
and fighting cholera. We look forward to working
with the international community to ensure that
recent improvements provide a lasting foundation for
Haiti's future.

