Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to express our thanks for the briefings
by Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Ambassador Omar Hilale,
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission; and you, Mr. President,
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013).

Uruguay recognizes that the events that have
occurred in the Central African Republic over the
past four months reflect the fact that while in many
ways the Government, with the support of the
international community, is working very hard to
achieve stability and sustainable development for the
country, it is still dealing with serious challenges. We
should emphasize that the Government's efforts have
resulted in considerable and noteworthy progress.
The agreement between the Government and most of
the armed groups on a disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration strategy, together with the adoption
of a national security policy and development of the
internal security forces, is a significant step accepted
by most of the Central African stakeholders, with
the exception of some armed groups. In addition,
the adoption in November of a national programme
for reconciliation and social cohesion will provide a
direction and strategy in areas such as social cohesion,
transitional justice, dialogue with armed groups and
the return and reintegration of internally displaced
persons and refugees.

We realize that such efforts are designed to deal
with the underlying causes of the conflict, which must
be properly addressed if relapses are to be avoided.
However, we note that unfortunately these advances
have not yet been translated into progress that is
concrete enough to meet the country's challenges. In
that regard, Uruguay is concerned about the recent
increases in violence mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/94), including sporadic
incidents in the capital of Bangui and attacks on
peacekeepers, along with increasingly frequent and
intense clashes between armed groups outside the
capital, which have killed an estimated 287 civilians.
Another reason for concern is the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. According to the report, half of
the estimated 4.6 million who make up the population
of the Central African Republic remain dependent on
humanitarian assistance. Of those, about 2 million are
facing extreme food insecurity, a significant increase
over the 1.4 million who were in that situation in 2014.

It is therefore crucial to ensure that the international
community continues to encourage and support the
efforts of the Government of the Central African
Republic to achieve peace and stability. In that regard,
the mobilization of the international community at
the Brussels conference in November was a strong
expression of international solidarity and a commitment
to learning the lessons of the past and not pulling out
prematurely. We urge the international partners to
make good on their commitments and remain actively
engaged on the issue. Morevoer, the presidential decree
of 5 November establishing the institutional structure
for implementing, overseeing and assessing the Mutual
Engagement Framework and the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan will be a great help in channeling
the efforts of international partners and maintaining a
high-level political commitment between the country
and the international community.

Lastly, I would like to commend the entire staff
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
who play a fundamental role every day in protecting
civilians, promoting and protecting human rights
and international humanitarian law and supporting
development of the country's national capacities, all in
extremely demanding working conditions.

