The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security

Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Following consultations among the members of the

Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern regarding the deteriorating security and
humanitarian crisis in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo due to ongoing military and other
destabilizing activities of the 23 March Movement
(M-23) as well as other armed groups.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
M-23 and all its attacks on the civilian population,
United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian
actors, as well as its abuses of human rights,
including summary executions, sexual and gender-
based violence and large-scale recruitment and
use of child soldiers. The Security Council also
condemns the attempts by the M-23 to establish
a parallel administration and to undermine State
authority. The Security Council demands that
the M-23 and other armed groups, including the
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda
(FDLR), cease immediately all forms of violence
and other destabilizing activities.

"The Security Council calls for perpetrators,
including individuals responsible for violence
against children and acts of sexual violence,
to be apprehended, brought to justice and
held accountable for violations of applicable
international law. The Security Council expresses
its intention to apply targeted sanctions against the
leadership of the M-23 and those acting in violation
of the sanctions regime and the arms embargo and
calls on all Member States to submit, as a matter
of urgency, listing proposals to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004).

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern with the increasing number of displaced

persons and refugees, with 320,000 people
displaced from their homes in North Kivu province
since the M-23 mutiny started in April 2012. It
calls on all parties, in particular the M-23, to allow
safe, timely and unhindered humanitarian access
to the areas under the control of M-23 and in the
wider region in accordance with international law,
including applicable international humanitarian
law and the guiding principles of humanitarian
assistance. It expresses concern about the shortfall
in funding for humanitarian assistance and
reiterates its call on the international community to
provide appropriate humanitarian support. It also
expresses concern at the possible negative impact
of the prevailing situation in North Kivu on the
security and humanitarian situation in South Kivu.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and emphasizes the need
to respect fully the principles of non-interference,
good neighbourliness and regional cooperation.
It reiterates its strong condemnation of any and
all external support to the M-23. In this regard,
the Security Council expresses deep concern at
reports indicating that such support continues to be
provided to the M-23 by neighbouring countries.
The Security Council demands that any and all
outside support to the M-23 as well as other armed
groups cease immediately.

"The Security Council calls upon all countries
in the region to condemn the M-23 as well as
other armed groups and to cooperate actively
with the Congolese authorities in disarming and
demobilizing the M-23 as well as other armed groups
and dismantling the M-23 parallel administration.

"The Security Council emphasizes the primary
responsibility of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to reinforce State authority
and governance in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, including through effective security
sector reform to allow army and police reform, and
to end impunity for abuses of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law, and
urges the Government of the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo to address issues of illegal exploitation
and smuggling of natural resources.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
of the United Nations Secretary-General as well
as of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR), the Southern African
Development Community and the African Union,
to restore peace and security in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It also stresses the urgency
of constructive engagement and dialogue between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours, especially Rwanda, and the need to
address the underlying causes of the conflict in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. It calls
on the United Nations Secretary-General to continue
his good offices and to explore, when appropriate,
further high-level diplomatic mechanisms to
facilitate enhanced dialogue between relevant
parties, including on the underlying causes of the
conflict.

"The Security Council welcomes the
establishment of the Expanded Joint Verification
Mechanism (EJVM), which was launched by the
ICGLR on 14 September as an important starting
point for rebuilding confidence between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. It
further welcomes the support provided by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to the EJVM. and encourages, in coordination with
ICGLR members, the participation of MONUSCO,
as appropriate and within the limits of its capacities
and mandate, in the activities of the EJVM. and the
reporting on any flow of arms and related materiel
across borders of eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

"The Security Council takes note of the
decisions by the ICGLR and the African Union
regarding the deployment of a 'Neutral International
Force' in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and takes note of the ongoing coordination efforts
between these organizations and the United Nations
to clarify the objectives, modalities and means of
the proposed Force in relation to MONUSCO.

"The Security Council expresses its full support
to the United Nations Group of Experts of the 1533
Committee and calls for enhanced cooperation
between all States, particularly those in the region,
and the Group of Experts, encourages further that
all parties and all States ensure cooperation with
the Group of Experts by individuals and entities
within their jurisdiction or under their control and
reiterates its demand that all parties and all States
ensure the safety of its members, and unhindered
and immediate access, in particular to persons,
documents and sites the Group of Experts deems
relevant to the execution of its mandate.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support to MONUSCO and commends the active
measures it has taken to implement its mandate
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
especially protecting civilians, and encourages
the continuation of these efforts. The Security
Council requests the Secretary-General to present
to the Security Council a special report on possible
options, and their implications, for reinforcing the
ability of MONUSCO to implement its mandate,
including to protect civilians and report on flows
of arms and related materiel across borders of
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
focusing in particular on force multipliers. It calls
on all parties to cooperate fully with the Mission
and reiterates its condemnation of any attacks on
its peacekeepers. The Security Council recalls
that the Congolese Government bears the primary
responsibility for ensuring security in its territory
and protecting its civilians. The Security Council
recalls the importance of close consultations with
troop- and police-contributing countries."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/22.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.30pm
