Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): It is indeed a
pleasant duty to submit to you, Sir, on my own behalf and
on behalf of the current Chairman of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, whom I
have the honour of representing here, my heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council.

The convincing results that this body has achieved
under the direction of Ambassador Peter van Walsum
promise to make this debate on Africa, organized at the
initiative of your country, a great success.

I would like to pay a well-deserved tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Martin Andjaba of Namibia, for
the elegance and competence he showed in leading the
work of the Council during a month when the world
continued - the summer season notwithstanding - to be
rocked by crises, tensions and armed conflicts.

I would also like to welcome the presence here
among us of several Ministers for Foreign Affairs from
Africa and other friendly countries. Their presence attests
to the importance that the international community
attaches to Africa and its recovery.

I would like, finally, to express our great joy at
seeing Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-General of the
OAU, taking part in this debate and having him share
with us his sound knowledge and consummate experience
of African affairs.

Two years ago the Security Council met at the
ministerial level to consider the possibility of international
action to promote peace and security on the African
continent. In so doing, the Council assessed for the first
time the scope of the challenges facing Africa. At the
same time, the Council showed its readiness to assist in
the struggle for peace and development on that continent,
which has been able to rid itself of colonialism but not to
rid itself entirely of the weight of colonialism's heritage.
This heritage is quite often the source of conflicts that
tear the continent apart and of the poverty with which it
is afflicted.
Since then, the Secretary-General of our
organization, who has just presented to us a useful and
exhaustive report, has endeavoured, with his well-known
courage and tenacity, to gradually make Africa the focus
of United Nations concerns. His statement here before the
Council this morning is just another striking illustration of
this. But it is from Africa itself that the most powerful
message of hope has come.

Realizing that its salvation depended first and
foremost on its own efforts, Africa has, with unexpected
vigour and vitality, undertaken to get back on its feet. To
fully accomplish this, however, it needs the support of the
international community, and especially of the United
Nations, which Africa has greatly helped live up to its
original ideals. Indeed, in emerging on the scene of
history, African countries have been responsible for
priority being given by the United Nations to the major
redemptive projects that go by the names of
decolonization, development, disarmament and
democratization.

In establishing the OAU as a crucible for their
solidarity and a channel of their aspirations, the African
countries were able to preserve their independence in the
face of the demands of the prevailing bipolar structure of
international relations and, further, to find in the

 

principles of non-alignment the tools for unity of action to
ensure for themselves a significant say in the course of
events within the United Nations, which had become the
object of great hopes.

Since then, the OAU has belied speculation on its
obsolescence and defied the challenges posed by internal
problems and external interference. The OAU thus
developed a faithful partnership with the United Nations in
its quest for peace and development, implementing a
doctrine whose soundness was amply confirmed by its
hard-won aloofness from the East-West confrontation and
by its emphasis on the North-South gap, which it had
constantly warned against.

The remarkable developments in the course of history,
with the victory of Africa and the United Nations over
colonialism and apartheid and the disappearance of
ideological confrontation in international relations, have
established conditions propitious for work on economic and
social development and for the building of democratic
political systems.

But the legacy of the twentieth century is as heavy as
it is uncertain. Considerable, swift and inadequately
controlled changes have exposed the restructuring of
international relations to the opposite phenomena of
fragmentation and globalization. The asymmetry between
Africa and the developed world has become structural in
relation both to the problems of peace, security and stability
and to economic development and integration. Africa
continues to suffer from a chronic deterioration in the terms
of trade, the external debt burden, heavy unemployment and
the effects of pandemics, as well as the many torments
brought on by human and natural evils.

It is a tragic demonstration of Africa's isolation from
the rest of the world that our continent is the only region
where education is declining at a time when the developed
countries are moving at full speed into the information age
and waging a technological revolution that is having an
unimaginably positive impact on the quality of life in their
societies. Indeed, our continent is home to two thirds of the
least developed countries and to three quarters of those at
a low level of human development, and almost half of its
inhabitants live in absolute poverty.

With a continually declining level of official
development assistance; a suffocating debt burden; a still
meagre flow of direct foreign investment; a heavy
dependence on, and thus a significant vulnerability with
regard to the commodities that are often its sole exports; an
insignificant level of participation in world trade; and
among the lowest social development indicators, Africa
today is a continent afflicted by serious handicaps that
further hinder the development efforts it has made to
recover from the most unfavourable and adverse
conditions. In brief, Africa, striving and sacrificing to
reform itself and thus take its place in the management of
world affairs, is unjustly penalized and blocked in its
efforts to recover.

Nevertheless, in spite of the picture of suffering and
contrasts which the continent presents to the world; in
spite of the upheavals that wrack its civil societies; and in
spite of all the difficulties draining its capacity to steer its
own way through a troublesome environment, Africa has
taken the costly and demanding road of renewal that is so
necessary if it is to assume control of its own destiny and
to achieve a balanced world situation in the future.

This year, the OAU heads of State and Government,
meeting in Algiers, participated in unprecedented numbers
to make their thirty-fifth annual Summit a particularly
outstanding event. The Summit was also a milestone in
the fruition of major changes deeply affecting Africa,
which has come to learn that its renewal calls inescapably
for the satisfaction of the demands of democratization and
good governance, the promotion of social justice and free
economic enterprise, and the protection of all human and
national rights.

The Algiers Summit proved that all Africa has met,
assembled and set off, with a sense of responsibility and
realism, down the road to peace, unity and work - in a
word, to recovery. A new spirit calling for concord and
peace prevails from the North of our continent to the
South. Aware that only a peaceful, stable and unitary
Africa can hope to meet the challenge of recovery,
African leaders decided to strive with renewed vigour to
settle the conflicts that have cast their peoples into
mourning and wasted their precious resources. They
would do so by addressing the underlying causes of these
conflicts and establishing conditions for implementing
African solutions informed by African values.

Africa emerged from the Algiers Summit serene,
unified and strong. Africa has perceptively drawn lessons
from past failures and refined its vision and its quest for
future successes. Africa has undertaken to overcome
difficult problems within its borders and, beyond, to take
its place among the architects and beneficiaries of
collective security and globalization. In this regard, the
Algiers Declaration, which the thirty-fifth OAU Summit

 

crafted as an expression of Africa's determination and
expectations on the threshold of the twenty-first century,
illustrates a sound and ambitious concept of the universal
partnership for which the African countries are calling in
the enlightened self-interest of us all.

In this respect, the Declaration adopted by the heads
of State and Government in Sirte laid down new rules for
facilitating the evolution of Africa towards the unity which
the OAU charter set as its ultimate objective.

Africa has made its major priority the strengthening of
its capacity to prevent, manage and eliminate conflict,
inspired by the conviction that the loss of human lives and
the squandering of resources can never be justified by the
false claims and illusory solutions that underlie so many
internal and inter-African confrontations. Nevertheless,
Africa has resolutely endeavoured to eliminate these
counterproductive tensions and to shed the burdens of
fratricidal conflicts. To that end, the Algiers Summit, in a
very timely manner, worked to consolidate and expand the
doctrinal bases for African joint action, both enshrining
principles that have well served inter-African relations -
such as that of the inviolability of the borders that existed
at independence - and rejecting unconstitutional changes
in the political life of the States of the continent.

Against this background and in the light of the efforts
undertaken and results achieved to date in managing various
conflict situations, the Algiers Summit reiterated the
validity of the peace plans that the OAU has painstakingly
developed in consultation with the parties and supplied
operational resources to implement them more speedily.

Whether in the conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia
or the situation in the Great Lakes region and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, breakthroughs have
been achieved in the search for peaceful, just and lasting
solutions. The OAU, in cooperation with the United Nations
and with the goodwill which the Organization elicits in its
work for peace, will methodically pursue its activities,
which will intensify with the involvement of the
protagonists, whose active cooperation is indispensable to
a positive outcome.

The stabilization of the situation in Liberia and Sierra
Leone continues, with the praiseworthy assistance of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
member States, while the good offices of the OAU in the
Comoros are gaining ground, as Comorans rally around
democratically elected institutions to preserve the country's
national unity and territorial integrity.

In Angola, the OAU is firmly at the side of the
United Nations, which has quite rightly said that UNITA
is solely responsible for the continuation of the crisis.
Similarly, in Western Sahara the OAU is sparing no effort
to assist the United Nations to organize, in July 2000, the
referendum on self-determination for the Sahroui people,
in accordance with the peace plan and the Houston
agreements, accepted by both parties to the conflict and
endorsed by the Security Council.

Africa has thus taken control of its affairs, showing
its determination to put an end to conflicts that have
weakened it and to free itself to conduct the only battle
worth waging, that of development. It has in that way
shown everyone that it does not intend to remain a
continent that is taken for granted, and that no one should
henceforth doubt its capacity to rise again and take its
rightful place in the emerging new world order.

At the same time, Africa realizes that peace is a
long-term endeavour. It also knows that development is
another name for peace, and that as long as there is still
poverty and misery the work of peace will remain fragile
and the progress realized will be reversible.

Finally, it realizes that the way to eradicate the
causes of dissension and instability is to meet the
legitimate aspirations of its peoples, especially their
aspiration to live in democratic societies, free of injustice
and arbitrariness, with the rule of law well established,
and with their rights and freedoms respected, in full
harmony with their age-old values and heritage.
However, the Algiers summit did not just commit
itself to ending the tragic phase of conflict in Africa. It is
also intended to be a new point of departure for the
continent's economic development and its integration.

The Abuja Agreement, which created the African
Economic Community, is now being implemented, based
on regional and subregional regroupings whose interaction
and cooperation will gradually and in practical ways lead
to the final unification of the continent.

When they are completely free of the formidable
burdens imposed by inter-State and intra-State conflicts,
the African countries, which have been behind those of
the other continents, will also be able to devote
themselves fully to rebuilding their economies, meeting
the enormous needs of their populations and making their
contribution to the overall recovery of Africa. Indeed,
many of our countries that are committed to ambitious

 

structural adjustment programmes, which are socially
costly, are now beginning to see the fruits of their efforts
and to renew economic growth.

However, in order to meet the challenge of recovery,
Africa, which can be self-reliant, must also be able to count
on the international community and its support. Africa
generally expects the rest of the world to accept it as a
partner equal in rights and duties and a credible and
responsible interlocutor - that is, a fully fledged
participant in the conduct of international affairs and the
restructuring of the world order.

This means that Africa must be an active party in
decision-making concerning major international issues
which involve the future of humankind, and therefore its
own future, be they issues of international peace and
security or economic cooperation and development.

From this standpoint, the OAU wishes to establish a
sound and fruitful relationship with the United Nations
going beyond existing schemes for cooperation and taking
the form of a new contract, comprehensive and ambitious,
covering all areas of common interest. Together we must
think about identifying the various areas where close
cooperation between the two Organizations is desirable, if
not necessary, and the ways of organizing it, building it and
implementing it.

One of the essential areas where obviously the OAU
and the United Nations can and must develop a special
relationship is that of peacekeeping, where, thanks to its
irreplaceable knowledge of African problems and its now
well recognized experience in this area, the OAU can help
to manage conflicts in cooperation with the United Nations.
The United Nations would also, in forms and circumstances
to be determined by common agreement, give not only
political support, but logistical, financial and training
support.

We regard it as essential in this respect that the United
Nations commit itself in Africa with the same weight and
determination as it has shown in other regions of the world,
as regards conflict prevention and settlement, peacekeeping
operations or assistance to refugees, since the international
community must extend a hand to all those who are
suffering and show generosity towards them, whatever
region of the world they come from, as suffering knows no
colour.

Another area where the OAU and the United Nations
must create new forms of cooperation is the humanitarian
sphere, a sensitive issue for all. If we are not careful, this
could lead to all kinds of excesses. It seems to me
essential that the two Organizations together define, in a
clear and transparent manner, rules for managing
humanitarian issues, so that, on the one hand,
humanitarian assistance is not used for political or media
purposes, and, on the other hand, is not conceived as an
alternative to the prevention or settlement of conflicts or
used as a pretext to violate the sovereignty of States or
even as a substitute for development assistance.

From this viewpoint, the right or duty to interfere,
which some now wish to make an international norm
applying everywhere, automatically and in all situations,
is a cause of major concern for our countries, because of
the risks of interference in the internal affairs of States
inherent in it and the unacceptable threats it brings to bear
on national sovereignty. It would be particularly
dangerous, under the pretext of exorcising painful
emotions or absolving the international community of its
past inaction or its inability now and in the future to
prevent or settle crises, to risk acting without the consent
of a State, or even against its desire, with excesses as
serious as regrettable endangering the collective security
system so painstakingly built around the Security Council.

The final area of importance where the United
Nations has a role to play, and responsibilities to assume,
with regard to Africa, is that of development, which
should be at the heart of the new relationship to be built
between the two Organizations.

There are rather contrasting results of the many
United Nations initiatives on Africa and the efforts made
by some of our partners, particularly through official
development assistance, alleviating the debt burden or
opening up markets to African exports. It is therefore
important to reformulate the relationship between the
OAU and the United Nations on a new basis and to open
up the way for the establishment of a genuine partnership
for the development of Africa.

In order to succeed, this partnership should take into
account, coherently and comprehensively, the issues of
investment, official development assistance, external debt,
trade and the negative effects of structural adjustment
programmes, and it should involve all the financial
institutions and agencies of the United Nations in a
concerted and coherent effort.

The developments and changes characterizing today's
world, which show quite clearly the interdependence

 

among nations and which, paradoxically, also Show that
Africa is clearly being left on the sidelines, require a
partnership of this nature and of this scope. This alone
would allay the fears that the international community will
go back on its consensus regarding the need for Africa's
economic recovery.

Similarly, at a time when world economic models are
converging in their orientation to the market and the
universal impact of global environmental factors intertwine
the objective of lasting sustainable development with that
of social development, the international community must be
sensitive to the urgent and imperative needs of Africa with
regard to the elimination of hunger, the eradication of
pandemics, especially AIDS, the alleviation of poverty, the
universal immunization of children and basic education for
all.

So it is that the objective of collective security of
States, associated with the new horizons opened up at the
end of the cold war and serious progress towards general
and complete disarmament - which should involve first
and foremost weapons of mass destruction - will be
expressed in the new terms of physical well-being and
quality of life for citizens.

Africa, which has declared itself to be a nuclear-
weapon-free zone, could serve well as an area for the
deployment of efforts to propagate a culture for the security
of peoples with the aim of cultivating the civil, political,
cultural, social and economic rights of Africans.

The debate on Africa is being held at a time like no
other, since it brings us together at the dawning of a new
era with so many challenges, promises and opportunities, an
era that, if only we wished it, could foster the birth of a
new ethic of international relations, based on universally
shared peace and prosperity. This new ethic would fully
restore the ideals and principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, while repudiating for ever the upheavals,
aberrations and torments of the twentieth century, which
has been especially trying for the human race.

Thus, it is important that the substantial results of our
Organization provide the impetus for a new beginning, with
even greater ambitions in terms of preventive diplomacy,
peaceful settlement of disputes among States, the
maintenance of peace and international security and
international cooperation for development.

It is also important that the acceleration of history,
which began to give some substance and consistency to the
idea of an "international community", lead to a network
of renewed international relations, where the higher
interests of humankind be seen as indivisible and
encompass the political and security spheres as well as
the economic, financial and monetary spheres. It is also
important that globalization extend naturally its benefits
to the developing countries and not give rise in any way
to increased marginalization or exclusion.

From this point of view, Africa has value as a
challenging test of credibility for the professions of faith
over a future of solidarity that is qualitatively better for
all humankind. Africa must no longer be a vast area that
is prey to uncertainty, dire poverty, pandemics and
disorder. Africa is, in fact, the continent whose recovery
requires the greatest external support in order to mobilize
all of its energies to the maximum extent. Africa must, of
course, count on its own resources, but it is entitled to
expect special assistance from the international
community as a whole.

This means that now more than ever, the United
Nations has a unique mission to carry out and special
responsibilities to take on for the benefit of Africa. This
also means that the United Nations must resolutely put
Africa at the focus of the problem of building a peaceful
and harmonious world order for future generations.

Precisely at the end of a century that has seen
Africa, the cradle of humankind, go through a revival and
a rehabilitation after such a cruel history, Africans are
entitled to become active participants in the prodigious
promises of the third millennium. This would be the best
way to raise over the new era the banner of promoting
respect for the dignity of the human individual and of all
human beings.

