Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important and very
welcome debate today. I say "welcome," because
peacebuilding remains at the heart of the Security
Council's work. The thematic debate we held here in
May on post-conflict peacebuilding, which colleagues
have referred to, pointed to the shortcomings in
stabilization and recovery efforts that exist here,
particularly in the immediate aftermath of conflict.

That debate back in May also highlighted the
critical role of the Peacebuilding Commission,
particularly for sustaining international engagement to
ensure that countries do not lapse back into conflict.
The year ahead offers an opportunity for us to address
collectively the critical gaps that still hamper our
peacebuilding efforts.

Let me first commend the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission over the past year. I would
particularly like to single out the leadership offered by
our colleague, Ambassador Takasu of Japan, Chairman
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and also the
chairing roles of our colleagues from Belgium, Brazil,
El Salvador, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden. I
should like to thank the Peacebuilding Support Office
for its role, and we warmly welcome the appointment
of Jane Holl Lute as the new Assistant Secretary-
General.

The annual report describes the Peacebuilding
Commission's achievements, and also the challenges
we still face. We have heard in this Council over the
past year briefings on drug trafficking, elections,
security sector and justice reform, transitional justice
and land reform. To help a country out of conflict and
into sustained stability, all those issues frequently have
to be addressed. As Ambassador Takasu said, the
Peacebuilding Commission has to ensure that it is
making a real difference on the ground.

I look forward to the Peacebuilding
Commission's continued briefing on the situations in
the four countries on its agenda and its advice on what
action the Council, as well as the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, should consider
taking. To achieve that, I hope that the practice of
holding monthly meetings between the Commission
Chair and Security Council presidencies can be
sustained to ensure that our respective work is aligned.

It is important that the interaction between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
not become purely mechanistic. We need to be alive to
new threats to peacebuilding and address them quickly.
That includes being alert to the impact that the oil and
food price crisis, and now the financial crisis can have
on peacebuilding.

We should also be more creative at soliciting the
Peacebuilding Commission's advice and support. To
date, the Security Council has been largely reactive. It
has referred to the Commission only those countries
that have requested to be on the Commission's agenda,
but the Security Council and the Commission itself
could take more of the initiative and explore - with
the agreement of the country concerned - whether the
Commission could rapidly marshal resources to help
address a new threat to recovery in a country that is not
on the Commission's formal agenda.

Finally, we look forward to the Peacebuilding
Commission feeding in its views to inform the
Secretary-General's report that was requested at the
20 May debate on how the United Nations can improve
its support for early recovery. The report provides an
opportunity for the United Nations system to tackle the
gaps of leadership, deployable civilian capacity and
rapidly available funding that currently impede the
international community's work on early recovery. The
test will be whether, over time, we can reduce from the
present level of 30 per cent the proportion of conflicts
that break out again within five years of a peace
agreement.
But it does not end there. At the recent debate on
mediation and the settlement of disputes that was
chaired by President Compaore of Burkina Faso, we
noted that peace agreements have fallen apart because

of the lack of an implementation plan and because we
do not have the right linkages between mediation
processes and the critical recovery and peacebuilding
phase. As the reports commissioned from the various
Security Council debates are taken forward, it is
imperative that we build coherence across the conflict
spectrum so that effective peace agreements are forged,
implemented and sustained.

