Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing. I also welcome
Mr. Tanin's presence in the Council. I endorse the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union.

A strategic review of the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
has been carried out, and we are entering a new phase
of our presence in the country that is now 10 years old.
Since the aims and the format of the international
coalition in Afghanistan are evolving, it is natural for
the United Nations to adapt to the progress made in the
transition process, as well as for the progressive
handover to Afghan authorities by 2014 of civil and
military tasks to be fully reflected in the mandate of
the Mission, as Mr. Rassoul requested of the Council in
his letter of 1 March 2011 (see S/2011/118, annex).
The mutual commitments taken in Bonn for the so-
called transformation decade that will follow the
transition decade, from 2015 to 2024, have also been
integrated, as has the regional cooperation process
launched in Istanbul last November.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/l33)
contains recommendations from the comprehensive
review of UNAMA's activities in Afghanistan, which
was also conducted in response to Mr. Rassoul's
request. France fully endorses the three areas identified
as constituting the heart of the Mission over and
beyond 2014, namely, political good offices, human
rights, in particular the rights of women, which must
remain a priority, and international aid coherence.

The gradual adaptation of the United Nations
presence to those tasks and to the new environment
created by the transition process will be the main
challenge facing the Special Representative, bearing in
mind the implementation of the reforms stipulated in
the Kabul process, possible progress in inter-Afghan
reconciliation and the development of both the regional
context and political dialogue among neighbouring
States.

The situation in Afghanistan is volatile and each
week seems to provide its share of tragedies. France
has, along with many other nations present in the
Chamber, made the ultimate sacrifice. At the same
time, there are grounds for optimism. Regular contact
has been established with the various sectors of the
insurgency. We hope that it will lead to a political
solution to the current conflict via a peace process led
by the Afghan authorities that will unite all sectors of
Afghan society.

Secondly, following the attacks targeting Shiites
on 6 December 2011, Afghans reacted with a
remarkable display of solidarity, thereby illustrating
their commitment to national unity.

Thirdly, the security transition is now a reality for
50 per cent of Afghans - as it will soon be for 80 per
cent - without deterioration in security in the areas
involved.

Fourthly, my Minister has just co-chaired the
third Ministerial Conference of the Paris Pact with his
Russian counterpart in Vienna.
Finally, security questions were given a boost at
the regional level during the Istanbul Conference on
2 November 2011. In that context, we will continue to
stand alongside Afghans and our allies for as long as
necessary and as long as long as the Afghan
Government asks us to do so. It is in that spirit that we
will participate in the NATO Chicago summit in May
and at the economic conference that will take place in
July in Tokyo.

As for France, we will gradually reduce our troop
numbers and bring an end to our combat missions in
2013, in accordance with NATO's force planning, while
maintaining our trainers beyond 2014. We will continue
to work with the entire international community to set
up professional, credible and sustainable Afghan
security forces. Our commitment alongside Afghans, in
particular in civil terms, will be framed by the
friendship and cooperation treaty, signed by President
Karzai and the President of the French Republic in Paris
on 27 January. That treaty will be fulfilled by a
significant increase in our civil commitment in the areas
of health care, education, agriculture, cultural
exchanges, mining resources and infrastructure.

France's only objectives for Afghanistan are for it
to achieve sustainable stabilization, eliminate safe
havens for international terrorism and for Afghans to
gain control of their national destiny.

The success of the transformation will broadly
depend on the success of UNAMA. We are therefore
convinced that the United Nations and, in particular,
UNAMA will have a key role to play in Afghanistan in
the years to come.

