Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, we would like
to extend a warm welcome to you, Sir, as well as our
thanks for presiding over this debate. We also thank
Mr. Mladenov for his insightful briefing and extend our
support for his work.

We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

We are deeply disappointed at the lack of any
meaningful progress in the resolution of conflicts
affecting the Middle East. As the political, economic
and social situation across the region continues to
deteriorate, the Security Council remains unable
to present a unified front in tackling these issues.
Certainly, the Security Council achieved unanimity in
endorsing the agreement concluded by the permanent
members, Germany and the European Union with the
Islamic Republic of Iran 4 a remarkable diplomatic
achievement, above all if we take into account that
diplomacy in the Middle East has a deplorable record
of defeats in the past 20 years or more. As we stated
(see S/PV.7488) in the debate following the adoption
of resolution 2231 (2015), now our best expectation is
that the agreement on the Iran nuclear programme will
trigger a game-change by creating new dynamics in
the whole region and ending the extreme and stressful
conditions of war, terrorism, sectarianism, intolerance
and oppression.

It is high time that the permanent members of the
Security Council uphold their privileges as great Powers
as entrusted in the Charter of the United Nations and
take full advantage of the psychological and political
boost afforded by the treaty concluded with Iran by
decisively reaching out to other regional Powers and
countries of the Middle East, with a view towards
addressing and resolving proxy wars and serious crisis
situations affecting the region, namely, the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and its terrorist
affiliates, the Syrian war, the conflict in Yemen, the
Palestinian issue and the extreme sectarianism between
Sunni and Shia communities in the region.

A lack of consensus among Council members
prevails on all Middle East crises, weakening
the Council's ability to find solutions to intricate
international problems and undermining its credibility
as the main organ in charge of international peace and
security. The consequences of such a state of affairs
are bleak, with the proliferation of armed groups and
terrorist organizations across the region carrying out
deadly attacks against civilians and religious and ethnic
minorities, destroying universal cultural heritage and
committing the most egregious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law.

The conflict between Israel and Palestine remains
in a deadlock, with the parties - even with assistance
from the international community 4 unable to
disentangle the deadly web that keeps both peoples
unable to reach out to one another and start a new era
in their relations. It is clear that international public
opinion despairs at the hesitation and lack of purpose
that the Security Council has demonstrated over the
years on this extremely sensitive issue. Nonetheless,
there has been consensus for quite some time - in the
Security Council and in the international community
at large - that a peaceful and lasting solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict should be based on the
two-State solution, the State of Israel and the State of
Palestine within the 1967 borders, living side by side
as good neighbours in peace and security, as the only
viable option for a comprehensive peace settlement
between Israelis and Palestinians.

The great Powers, the permanent members of the
Security Council, should commit to their leadership
status by pushing the parties to the conflict, and the
entire international community as a whole, to support
a solution to the Palestinian question based on one
resolution, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Oslo
Accords. We believe that the permanent members, being
vested with special priviliges in the Security Counicl
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
have the inalienable right to do so. We furthermore
believe that such privileges should not be upheld merely
for the defence of national interests and circumstantial
alliances, but should be used instead for strengthening
peace and security and, in this case, to make a meaningul
contribution to solving the Palestinian question.
More than 20 years have elapsed since Israelis
and Palestinians were close to a comprehensive
peace settlement through mutual concessions and
political will, permitting both peoples to live together
in freedom, peace and security. It is our conviction
that, in the present circumstances, only the Security
Council 4 if united 4 can play the role of an honest
broker, provide political and security guarantees to the
parties, engage the international community and the
countries of the region, play a leading role in putting
Israelis and Palestinians on the right track and make a
decisive contribution to the attainment of peace.

