Mr. Wittig (Germany): I thank Jean-Marie
Guehenno and Under-Secretary-General Susana
Malcorra for their comprehensive briefings. I would
like to commend Mr. Guehenno and the Senior Advisor
Group for their excellent review of civilian capacity in
the aftermath of conflict (see 8/2011/85). I am also
happy to see Ambassador Gasana, the Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission, here among us, and I
thank him for his contribution.

This is a welcome opportunity to start a collective
effort. The key challenge, particularly in the period
immediately following a ceasefire or a peace
agreement, is this: how to secure the best civilian
capacities needed to build sustainable peace. This
includes the re-establishment of institutions of
government, rule of law, respect for human rights and
economic revitalization.

The response of the international community and
the United Nations in this field is still too fragmented
and often too late. We need to do better to enable
national ownership, to work in partnership and to
improve the effectiveness, appropriateness and
timeliness of United Nations support to conflict-
affected countries.

We therefore welcome the findings of the
independent report, including the recognition of the
critical role of women in peacebuilding. We also
welcome and support the leadership of Under-
Secretary-General Malcorra to take forward the
implementation process with the Steering Group.

When considering the next steps in the follow-up
to the report, I would like to highlight three priorities.

First, all efforts should aim at the leanest system
that works and is needs-based, flexible and results-
oriented. This also includes working towards leaner
and more flexible missions in terms of civilian staff
wherever possible. Duplication within the United
Nations system and gaps need to be identified and

addressed. Recruitment procedures for civilian experts
need to be streamlined and simplified. As the report
points out, the United Nations can implement many of
the recommendations without legislative changes. I
would like to encourage the Secretary-General to take
all the necessary steps to that end, and to welcome the
intention to develop a prioritized road map on the way
ahead, which should also indicate where action by
Member States is required.

Secondly, instead of setting up new and costly
structures, focus needs to be on making better use of
existing resources and systems already in place.
Partnerships are an essential element in this context,
including South-South cooperation. The European
Union has a broad set of instruments and expertise
through its Common Security and Defence Policy and
its civilian crisis management missions. We encourage
the Secretariat to pool the efforts to deliver and train
resources, as proposed by the European Union in
yesterday's debate in the General Assembly.

Building on partnerships between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
will also be vital, as is making use of the tools and
instruments provided by the international financial
institutions, notably the World Bank, and engaging the
private sector.

Germany stands ready to provide expertise
through our Center for International Peace Operations,
to assist the compact support team to be established by
Under-Secretary-General Malcorra. The Center
maintains a national stand-by roster of trained experts
who are ready to be deployed in peace operations of
the United Nations, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The Center also offers to provide in-mission training,
and we look forward to discussing this in detail with
the compact support team.

Thirdly, it is important to draw on lessons
learned, best practices and evaluation results. The
cluster approach of the humanitarian system was
recently evaluated in 2010, and the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee is currently working on
implementing the recommendations. Existing reform
processes, such as the implementation of the global
field support strategy, need to be taken into account.

We should start to take concrete steps without
delay. South Sudan could be, as was pointed out, the
first test case and starting point. Critical needs, notably
the establishment of Government institutions and
justice, will have to be addressed swiftly. Attention
should therefore be paid to identifying and supporting
effectively national capacities, including the capacities
of the diasporas. Furthermore, the Security Council
will have to consider the initiation of peacebuilding in
mandates and, from the outset of a mandate, how best
to integrate the building of partnerships.

It is not for the Security Council alone to follow
up on the process. Joint action is required by the
Secretary-General, the Secretariat and United Nations
bodies, including the Peacebuilding Commission and
the General Assembly. Creating effective ways to make
civilian capacity available to support peacebuilding in
conflict-affected countries is the best way to secure
national ownership and make peace and reconstruction
sustainable. My country is willing to work with the
United Nations and all partners to that end.

