Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
The United Republic of Tanzania joins others in
welcoming the report presented by Ambassador
Holbrooke on the visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo by the Security Council mission. The visit
itself was, for us, a clear determination by the Council
to make a real difference in the aspirations and hopes
of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for peace and stability for development.

The report demonstrates that the mission has
succeeded in three ways. First, it has vindicated the
continued significance of the Lusaka Peace Agreement
as the only viable framework for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Secondly, it has
underscored the urgency on the part of the United
Nations of the deployment of military observers, as
provided under the terms of Security Council
resolution 1291 (2000). Lastly, in spite of some
setbacks, the commitment of all the parties to the
Lusaka Agreement and resolution 1291 (2000) was,
without exception, reaffirmed.

These were no small achievements in the span of
one week. Those who had questions on whether such a
visit was really needed would undoubtedly find
comfort in the mission briefing. It all comes down to
one critical undertaking: deployment of phase II of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) should
not be delayed any longer.

Quite rightly the mission report notes that the
events in Sierra Leone have cast a shadow over the
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
However, it also makes a valid observation which we
cannot lose sight of: the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has its own unique
characteristics, and the peacekeeping operation there
must be judged on its own merits. Unlike Sierra Leone,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo does not have a
Foday Sankoh. All warring parties have supported,
indeed urged, the presence of the United Nations. In
this regard even in Sierra Leone we should act firmly
to suppress the likes of Mr. Sankoh and his wayward
rebels who have violated the will of the people of
Sierra Leone, of Africa and of the international
community.

Consequently, what underlines the broad support
for the United Nations Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region is the need for
swift and determined action to ensure implementation
of the Lusaka Agreement. Without a doubt, the mission
has noted some fragile aspects. But we do not, and we
must not, see these aspects as undermining the
relevance of the Agreement. Setbacks ought to have
been expected from the outset. Our challenge is to
continue urging the parties to walk down the road to
peace and security for the people and countries of the
region to which they are all committed.

In that context we note, and welcome, the parties'
reaffirmation of their support to MONUC. The United
Nations needs, therefore, to speed up its contribution in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The meeting of
the visiting mission with Congolese civil society,
religious groups and political parties vindicated the
support of the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for rapid deployment of phase II of
MONUC. That the mission to Kananga, comprised of
Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia, Ambassador van
Walsum of the Netherlands and Ambassador
Greenstock of the United Kingdom, was "struck by the
great warmth of their reception by the citizens and their
clear desire for peace" is foretelling of the expectations
of the United Nations on the part of the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The mission was rightly concerned about the
recent fighting in Kisangani. We welcome the fact that
the mission had the opportunity to raise their concerns
with Presidents Kagame of Rwanda and Museveni of
Uganda and managed to broker an agreement between
them to stop the fighting. We also welcome that the
two Presidents agreed to institute measures designed to
begin a phased withdrawal in accordance with the
disengagement plan of 8 April. As a result of a follow-
up summit meeting by Presidents Kagame and
Museveni, hosted by my President, His Excellency Mr.
Benjamin Mkapa, in Mwanza, northern Tanzania, on 14
May, we are now even more optimistic about the
commitment of the two Presidents to the
disengagement plan. Needless to say, the urgent
deployment of MONUC in the area is of critical
importance.

We will not tire in our calls for continued and
sustained support of the office of the facilitator.
President Sir Ketumile Masire's noble effort should not
fail for want of support or assistance. In a similar vein,
we urge the Congolese people to embrace his efforts in
the interests of comity and peace for their people and
country.

Our delegation cannot hide its deep concern about
allegations of serious human rights violations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly in
eastern Congo. The apparent acknowledgement of an
instance in which a number of persons - indeed,
women - were buried alive is in itself shocking, to say
the least. That what was at dispute was not the factual
incident but the number is horrifying. That "it only
concerned three women" and that "the other side did it
too" is an admission that this body cannot condone. We
must condemn it as we continue to demand a thorough
investigation and ultimate culpability. We have often
enough demanded that impunity should not go
unpunished. Our reported outrage at the victimization
of innocent and unarmed civilians, especially women
and children, must be matched with firm action.

The Lusaka Peace Agreement and the United
Nations process set in motion by Council resolution
1291 (2000) can interact effectively. It would be a
tragedy if the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo were led to believe that a weary international
community on peacekeeping cannot be counted upon in
their hour of need. A legitimate peace process is in
motion. If this Council and the United Nations are to
continue to be relevant to Africa, then it is imperative
that the needs of people of Sierra Leone, Angola and,
in this particular case, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to mention but a few, must be taken on board.

A ray of hope is on the horizon. We urge the
Security Council to translate hopes into concrete
action.

