Mr. N'Douro (Benin) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to warmly congratulate you once
again, Sir, on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February 2012. My country, Benin, welcomes the
particular attention that the Security Council, under the
presidency of Togo, is devoting to security problems in
Africa, as security is an essential precondition for the
sustainable development of our countries.

Mr. President, I should also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Ambassador of South Africa, for his outstanding
leadership during his term and for the praiseworthy
results achieved for both the international community
in general and for Africa and its strategic partnership
with the United Nations. I also pay tribute to the
contributions made by the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe; the representative
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Mr. Abdel Musah; and Mrs. Florentina
Ukonga, Deputy Executive Secretary of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission.

Last Tuesday, in this very Chamber, the President
of the Republic of Togo, His Excellency Faure
Gnassingbe, personally led a high-level debate on
transnational organized crime in West Africa and the
Sahel region (see S/PV.6717). The objective was to
identify the synergies necessary to wage a
comprehensive war against this faceless enemy, which
is inflicting such suffering on the extremely vulnerable
countries of that region of the African continent.

Today's debate, during which the Council is
considering the report (see S/2012/45) of the
assessment mission dispatched by the Secretary-
General of the United Nations to the countries of the
Gulf of Guinea, in particular to my country, Benin, is a
logical follow-up to the debate of 21 February 2012 on
transnational organized crime. Indeed, those two
phenomena are closely interrelated, in terms of both
their modus operandi and their very nature. They
represent a real challenge to the Governments of the
region in the exercise of their sovereign functions.

The Government of Benin aligns itself with the
conclusions of the United Nations assessment mission.
We agree with the analysis contained in the report
under consideration, which eloquently sets out the
links among transnational organized crime, piracy and
armed robbery at sea. These phenomena are fuelled by
rock-solid criminal solidarity combining lucrative
fraudulent activities, such as oil bunkering and
trafficking in children, cocaine, counterfeit medicines
and cigarettes.

In 2011 alone, 21 attacks were reported on
vessels off the coast of Benin. From January to October
of that year, 58 maritime attacks were carried out off
the coast of West Africa, including 18 in Nigeria, seven
in Togo, two in Ghana and one in C6te d'Ivoire. These
attacks have dire political, economic, environmental
and security consequences for our countries. Pirate
attacks are disastrous for the security and economies of
the Gulf of Guinea region in general, and in particular
for the activities of the autonomous Port of Cotonou,
which is the economic lung of Benin. Indeed, the
economy of Benin depends to a large extent on the fees
and transit permits raised from the autonomous Port of
Cotonou. The port's activities represent 70 per cent of
the country's gross national product; they generate
80 per cent of the revenue of a national budget that
depends on tax income and represent 90 per cent of
trade with the interior. The autonomous Port of
Cotonou is a natural port for the landlocked countries
of the hinterland - Niger, Burkina Faso, Mali and
Chad - which engage in the export and import of their
products there.

Since the first attacks recorded off the coast of
Benin, the number of vessels entering the Port has
fallen by 70 per cent and insurance premiums have
soared. In the face of the doubling of insurance
premiums, a number of vessels have decided not to use
the Port of Cotonou, whereas the revenue drawn from
the Port is essential to ensuring the functioning of the
State of Benin. The situation has arisen at a time when
we had been hoping to see dividends from the major
investments made to modernize the Port's
infrastructure, with the assistance of the United States
of America within the framework of the Millennium
Challenge Account.

The President of the Republic of Benin, Mr. Boni
Yayi, therefore acted speedily to alert the international
community and the Security Council to the issue of
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. I am pleased to report that
Benin's appeals for assistance received a prompt and
useful response from Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and the Security Council through the adoption of
resolution 2018 (2011). The dispatch of the United
Nations assessment mission to the field has allowed us
to identify the measures necessary to design and
implement a coherent national and regional strategy.

National and bilateral efforts have been stepped
up to address the scourge. I should like to highlight in
particular the positive impact of the joint patrols

conducted by the navies of Nigeria and Benin off the
coast of Benin. The joint patrols are a component of
Operation Prosperity, launched on 28 September 2011.
Four hundreds sorties have been carried out, including
316 by the Benin navy. The sorties represent 3,668
hours at sea, of which 1,278 have been conducted by
the Benin navy.

In the context of the Operation, the Chief of Staff
divided part of Benin's coastline into holding areas for
vessels, which are invited to drop anchor close to the
coast in an area that is accessible to the patrol boats
participating in the Operation. This measure has
allowed them to be grouped together in order to ensure
their greater security. These measures are supported by
enhanced joint patrols conducted 24 hours a day close
to the anchorages. Similarly, a permanent radar and
radio watch has been established, allowing immediate
responses to distress calls. Since the operation was
launched, no further has been reported in the territorial
waters of Benin.

Beyond these very expensive joint patrols, the
Government of Benin has made substantial efforts,
drawing on its own domestic resources, to enhance its
naval capacities, with the support of its partners and in
particular France, the United States of America, the
European Union and China. Other Member States,
including the Netherlands, have indicated their intention
to provide support. Through me, the Government of
Benin expresses its deep gratitude for their active and
spontaneous solidarity.

A second semaphore system has been installed,
complementing the existing semaphore in Cotonou. It
allows us to sweep the entire coast of Benin and a good
part of the Togolese coast. With the deployment in
March 2012 by the Government of Benin of patrol
ships commanded by the Benin naval forces, 10 to
15 people will be able to patrol the high seas 24 hours
a day over a 10-day period to dissuade attacks on
vessels off our coast. Benin is also implementing an
import-control programme aimed at ensuring the
effective control of cargoes by scanning containers,
which will also ensure transparency in the handling of
maritime cargo and limit the opportunities for
malfeasance during customs formalities. Furthermore,
we have established a canine brigade of sniffer dogs to
detect drugs, explosives and all other forms of
contraband subject to piracy and armed robbery at sea.
With the help of the United States of America, the
Government of Benin has formulated and enacted a
national maritime security and safety strategy, which
will promote the growth and development of the
maritime economy, allow for the free movement of
persons and goods along major strategic maritime
routes off our coasts, enhance security in ports and port
installations, and combat illicit transnational activities
and maritime crime, such as armed robbery in
territorial waters and piracy on the high seas.

The strategy is supported by a participatory
approach involving all stakeholders in its formulation. It
is based on the following measures: the definition of
measures to protect the coasts; the delimitation of
maritime borders and the establishment of partnerships
with neighbouring countries; the involvement of
strategic partners in the training of human resources and
the provision of the logistical support necessary to
strengthen our national capacities; and the enhancement
of our cooperation with the United Nations and bilateral
partners to safeguard the free movement of persons and
goods through that important maritime route.

Efforts are under way at the regional level, as
represented by the meeting of experts from ECOWAS
and the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), organized in January in Abuja to
consider the draft integrated regional strategy for
maritime security and safety. The meeting set the stage
for the regional economic communities to play a
leading role in coordinating efforts to combat maritime
threats in the Gulf of Guinea, in line with the
integrated maritime strategy adopted by the African
Union. The Abuja meeting took place in the context of
the preparations for the regional summit mentioned in
resolution 2018 (2011). A second meeting of ECOWAS
and ECCAS experts will be held in Cotonou in March.

Benin welcomes France's decision to support the
efforts to be made by Benin, Togo and Ghana to
preserve maritime security along their coasts through the
maritime security sector reform project in the Gulf of
Guinea. The support will be provided through an initial
€800,000 in funding, which France has put at the
disposal of our three countries in combating maritime
piracy and armed robbery at sea.

Combating maritime piracy and armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea entails significant stakes. Maritime
insecurity poses a threat to the exclusive right of
coastal States to comprehensively exercise sovereignty

over their territorial waters. That also serves to
underscore the need for clearly delimiting borders. In
addition to those basic political requirements, we must
also not underestimate what is at stake economically.

The Gulf of Guinea is an extremely important
maritime route for international trade. The area is
estimated to contain enormous petroleum resources,
which are now estimated at 14 billion barrels. That,
along with its natural gas deposits and fishing
resources, makes this a first-rate strategic zone for the
global economy.

Fishing resources continue to be subject to
unchecked poaching owing to illegal undeclared
fishing. That represents an annual loss of $20 billion to
the countries of the Gulf of Guinea, according to a
study published in 2007 by the Food and Agriculture
Organization.

We fear that, if the region's public authorities are
not able to carry out their functions consistently, the
growing number of oil companies, along with their
increasing activities in the region, could lead to a
global environmental catastrophe.

Ensuring security in the Gulf of Guinea is
essential to promoting investment and restarting
development for the countries of the region, making it
a dynamic area for renewal and growth at the global
level.

There is a need for the international community
to respond, while there is still time, to the new threats
affecting the region by piracy and armed robbery at
sea. There is also a need to face the problems posed by
junked ships and decommissioned vessels abandoned
along our coasts, which provide transit points for
criminal groups, pirates and all sorts of traffickers. I
should like to draw the Council's attention to a threat
report prepared by our navy's Chief of Staff, which has
been transmitted to the Council.

There are currently a dozen abandoned vessels
along Benin's coasts. Their existence is a genuine
threat to Benin, which has neither the means nor the
necessary expertise to deal with them. I should like
here to urgently appeal to our partners to help us to get
rid of these ships that, above and beyond threatening
security, pose a major risk of pollution. Several of
those vessels harbour toxic substances, which have
already produced victims among some of the people in
their vicinity.

The threats to the Gulf of Guinea are enormous

and pose a threat as well to international peace and

security. They should be addressed as such by the

international community, which would benefit from

developing an anticipatory approach to contain the
damage.

The international community should resolutely
support the efforts of the countries of the Gulf of
Guinea to control piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea. Relenting in those efforts will have an
immediate and direct effect on the frequency and
ferocity of such attacks.

Benin believes that combating this scourge call
for resources that are largely beyond our reach. We
therefore hope that the Security Council, which very
early on grasped the real scope of this threat, will adopt
the recommendations contained in the assessment
mission's report before it, with a view to scrupulously
implementing them at both the national and regional
levels as part of a commitment to synergistic efforts to
combat damaging activities to maritime safety and
security. The stability of our countries is at stake.

