Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate Ambassador Osorio on
his appointment as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and to thank him
for his first quarterly report.

Once again, the report emphasizes the increasing
number of violations. At its previous meeting on this
issue (see S/PV.6442), the Council discussed two
incidents of violations of the arms embargo. Since
then, the Council has been notified of two new
incidents, which show that Iran is persisting in its
attempts to acquire materials for its ballistic missile
programme and its heavy water-related activities.

Beyond incidents that have been brought to the
Committee's attention, we wish to express our grave
concern over last week's interception by Israeli
authorities of a new shipment of Iranian weapons, in
violation of resolution 1737 (2006). We hope that the
Panel of Experts will investigate the matter in
accordance with its mandate. We also note with
concern the seizure of an Iranian weapons shipment to
the Taliban early in February in Afghanistan, as
reported by the United Kingdom.

Lastly, we note with concern Iran's recent
announcement that it had again launched a rocket into
outer space. Space launch vehicles and ballistic
missiles use similar technologies. We recall that
resolution 1929 (2010) prohibits Iran from conducting
launches using ballistic missile technology. We
therefore hope that the Committee and the Panel of
Experts will investigate that test, as well as Iran's
space and ballistic missile programmes and the recent
weapons seizures.

Over time, a real pattern of Iranian violations has
emerged before our eyes, affecting all regions of the
world - yesterday, Africa and Europe; today, Asia and
the Middle East - and involving significant flows of
weapons and other illicit and dangerous materials.
Entities well-known to the Council, such as the
Revolutionary Guards, have been implicated. We
cannot overemphasize the seriousness of those
violations, which threaten our collective security and
security and stability in regions that are often already
quite vulnerable. They require our utmost vigilance.

As Ambassador Osorio did his briefing, I wish to
commend the States that have sent their notifications,
because they give the Committee and the Panel
valuable and detailed information on the methods used
by Iran to circumvent sanctions. We also welcome the
fact that the Panel of Experts has launched an in-depth
investigation into those cases, in accordance with its
mandate. We hope that it will make specific
recommendations to address the vulnerabilities
highlighted by those cases, particularly in the areas of
transport, export controls and banking. In that regard,
the Committee must take the necessary measures in
response.

I wish to commend the Panel for the excellent
quality of its quarterly report on its activities. In its
eight weeks of activity, the Panel, led by
Ms. Zurabishvili, has spared no effort. We fully support

her initial observations and her first recommendations
to help States meet their obligations under the
resolutions, especially in submitting their national
reports. We hope that she will make regular
recommendations to substantively improve sanctions
provisions. It is imperative that the Panel receive the
full support of all Member States and of the
Secretariat. In particular, we call on all States to
provide the Panel as much information as possible so
that it can have the most precise picture possible of the
implementation of resolutions. We welcome the
intention of the Chair of the Committee to continue
with outreach efforts, in particular by regularly holding
meetings open to all interested Member States.

The 1737 Committee has not been alone in noting
the alarming situation whereby Iran continues to violate
its obligations. Our concerns regarding the Iranian
nuclear programme are further heightened by the latest
report of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), of 25 February. The
report, the first to be issued following the meetings
between the six and Iran held in Geneva and Istanbul,
unfortunately shows no improvements. On the contrary,
Iran continues to reject its international commitments
and to refuse to meet the requirements of the Security
Council and the Board of Governors of the IAEA. Iran
continues its enrichment activities, accumulating, in the
absence of credible civilian purposes, 3.5-per-cent- and
20-per-cent-enriched uranium and fuelling an ever
greater number of centrifuges, which now total more
than 5,000. Iran continues its activities relating to
heavy water, in violation of Security Council
resolutions.

Moreover, the report deplores Iran's continued
failure to cooperate with the IAEA. In its report, the
Agency also states that its knowledge of Iran's
enrichment activities continues to deteriorate. For
example, Iran has not provided the clarification
requested by the IAEA as to the background and
purpose of the F ordow plant, it has not provided design
information regarding several installations, it is
denying the Agency access to its heavy water
production and storage installations; and it is not
implementing the Additional Protocol.

Finally, and above all, Iran is refusing to respond
to the Agency with respect to the very serious signs of
the militarization of its programme and the
development of a nuclear payload for a ballistic
missile. The Agency notes, however, that it has
received supporting information since 2008, including
recently. In this context, we encourage the Director
General of the IAEA to continue his efforts to
investigate these matters.

In that regard, it is regrettable in our view that
Iran, during the recent meetings in Geneva and
Istanbul, did not wish to seriously consider the offers
of cooperation made by the six or our specific
proposals aimed at building trust and promoting
dialogue. On the contrary, Iran has set out
preconditions, which goes against Security Council
resolutions and is unacceptable for the six.

By refusing to respect its international
commitments and undertake genuine negotiations to
address the concerns raised by its nuclear programme,
Iran is further isolating itself from the international
community. The door to negotiations is of course still
open, but it is up to Iran to demonstrate its desire to
undertake serious negotiations. It is up to Iran to show
that it is a responsible member of the international
community.

