Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Japan and the United Kingdom
for having convened this informative briefing. I also
thank Mr. Stephen O'Brien for having shared with
us his assessment of the situation in the region in the
wake of his May visit, and in particular for sharing his
recommendations as to how we avoid a humanitarian
catastrophe in that region. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing in the area of
security, and specifically on the progress made and
the challenges that still lie ahead in the fight against
Boko Haram.

I am not going to repeat the chilling information
that we have already heard. I think that we are all
very aware of the extreme gravity of the situation.
For my part, however, I would initially like to make
two comments.

The first is that the humanitarian crises in the Lake
Chad Basin happen so often not that they are becoming
a chronic phenomenon. If those humanitarian crises
are no longer timely, the response of international
cooperation must also not be timely. That is why
emergency humanitarian aid should be combined with
development activities that promote the resilience of
the region.

The second comment is that the humanitarian
crisis in the Lake Chad Basin requires a comprehensive
response, as it is the result of a combination of factors:
fragile State authority with limited control of the
territory, poverty, migration, climate change, terrorism
and violent extremism, among other factors. I would
like to focus on those issues.

First, with regard to violent extremism, many
delegations have already referred to the fight against
Boko Haram through the Multinational Joint Task
Force. Spain also joins in recognizing the efforts being
made by Chad, Cameroon, theNiger and Nigeria in
that regard. We also echo the call for closer regional
cooperation to combat this terrorist group. I would also
like to point out the importance of ensuring that those
operations take into account the specific protection
needs of women and girls. It is crucial to provide
medical and psychosocial services for survivors. It is
also important to dismantle the trafficking networks, as
women and girls often end up as victims. Guaranteeing
security in and around the camps for internally
displaced persons is also important. As has already
been stated, military actions are not enough. There
also needs to be a relevant component in the fight
against violent extremism, which fuels the terrorism
threat. Boko Haram substantiates its acts with rhetoric
that squarely opposes education and fundamental
rights and freedoms, particularly of women and girls.
Winning the communication and awareness-raising
battle - especially with regard to youths - in order to
counter terrorist groups is a pending task.

The second issue to which I would like to refer is
climate change. During our meeting on the challenges
in the Sahel region (see S/PV.7699), convened barely
two months ago under the Egyptian presidency,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ibn
Chambas identified climate change as being one of the
main challenges confronting the region. Lake Chad is
disappearing, thereby exacerbating the already very
difficult conditions being experienced by the people of
the region. That is causing forced internal displacement
and migration and compounding threats such as
terrorism, organized crime and violent extremism.
In that regard, I would like to draw attention to the
interesting proposal made by the Executive Director of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee to analyse whether
the effects of climate change worsen the fragility
of certain populations and whether they are making
them even more vulnerable to violent extremism and
recruitment by terrorist groups. That seems quite
timely to us when it comes to the area we are discussing,
namely, the Lake Chad Basin.
Migration is the third issue I want to discuss.
One of the consequences of the terrorism perpetuated
by Boko Haram is the tragedy resulting from the
massive displacement of populations, with the parallel
emergence of camps with enormous needs for basic
services. Many of the displaced opt to migrate, often
becoming victims of human trafficking networks.
As proof of that challenge we need only look to the
thousands of deaths in the Mediterranean Sea and the
desert, including as well the exisitng links between
terrorism and trafficking in migrants.

I would like to conclude by saying that today's
meeting is a good example of how early-warning
mechanisms are functioning correctly. The Security
Council is being informed in a timely manner about
the situation the region, and on recent occassions it has
expressed itself on the matter - the most recent being
on the eve of the security summit held in Abuja in May.
Nevertheless, ifwe want to Change the course of events,
there will have to be greater political will the part of
everyone. Early warning will serve little purpose ifit is
no accompanied by an early response.

