Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China thanks Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu and Ambassador Zlauvinen, President-designate ofthe Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), for their briefings. The NPT is the cornerstone of the international nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime, an important component of the post-war international security system and a key institutional guarantee for advancing nuclear disarmament, preventing nuclear proliferation and promoting greater benefit from nuclear energy for humankind. This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty and the twenty-fifth anniversary of its indefinite extension. On the eve of the tenth NPT Review Conference, Council members must recall the historic role of the Treaty and to look forward to its continued significance for international peace, security and development, with a view to ensuring the success of the Conference. At present, challenges in the field of international security are mounting and the competition among the major Powers is intensifying. That has had a serious impact on global strategic stability. Differences have intensified in the field of nuclear disarmament, unilateralism is running amok in the field of non-proliferation and the politicization of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy has become a prominent trend. In these new conditions, the ongoing strengthening of the NPT mechanisms and the balanced advancement of the Treaty's three pillars - nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - are of the utmost importance to the maintenance of international peace and security and the promotion of human progress and development. To that end, China proposes the following. First, we must adhere to multilateralism and safeguard the international order based on international law. We should maintain a common, integrated, cooperative and sustainable security concept, taking into account the legitimate security concerns of all parties and seeking common and universal security. We should safeguard the existing multilateral arms-control and disarmament mechanisms, including those of the United Nations and the Conference on Disarmament, and oppose treaty withdrawals and violations. We must work together to set up rules and regulations in new areas, such as outer space, cyberspace and artificial intelligence, in order to meet the new challenges to strategic security. Secondly, we must stay the course when it comes to progressive nuclear disarmament and effectively reduce nuclear risks. The nuclear-weapon States should take effective measures to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in national security strategies, reiterate the concept that a nuclear war cannot be won and must not be fought, and exercise restraint in strategic capacity-building and deployment. Nuclear disarmament should be guided by the principles of maintaining global strategic stability and undiminished security for all. The countries with the largest nuclear arsenals should extend their bilateral nuclear disarmament treaties and make further drastic and substantive reductions of their nuclear weapons so as to create conditions for other nuclear-weapon States to join the nuclear disarmament process. Thirdly, we must strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime and eliminate the risk of nuclear-weapons proliferation. The proliferation of nuclear weapons has complex root causes and requires an integrated approach to tackle the symptoms and the root causes. The authority and universality of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime must be strengthened. We must abandon double standards and selectivity. We must promote political solutions to regional nuclear hotspot issues and support the full and effective implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, the dialogue process between the United States and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, the implementation of the outcome documents of successive NPT Review Conference, and the decision to establish a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. Fourthly, we must fully tap the potential to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and related international cooperation. The peaceful use of nuclear energy is an inalienable right conferred upon the States parties by the Treaty. Preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons should not undermine the legitimate right of all countries, particularly developing countries, to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The International Atomic Energy Agency should play an active role in promoting exchanges and cooperation among countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in promoting common development and prosperity. China has earnestly implemented the provisions of the Treaty and the outcomes of previous Review Conferences. At the third session of the Preparatory Committee for the tenth NPT Review Conference,we submitted a national compliance report that comprehensively expounds on our policy propositions and compliance achievements in connection with the Treaty's three pillars. We will update and improve the national compliance report and submit it to the tenth Review Conference. China actively participates in cooperation among the nuclear quintet - the Council's five permanent members (P-5). At the annual P-5 conference in Beijing in 2018, we urged the parties to clearly define the future direction of cooperation. At this year's P-5 conference in London, China held in-depth discussions with the other four nuclear-weapon States, the NPT Bureau and other relevant parties on the issue of maintaining the Treaty mechanisms. The P-5 working group on nuclear Terminology, led by China, has made important progress and will submit a new version of the nuclear glossary to the tenth Review Conference. The P-5 reached a series of cooperative initiatives to help the tenth Review Conference achieve success. As a party to the NPT, China has always firmly upheld the universality, validity and authority of the Treaty, remained committed to advancing the NPT review process and made unremitting efforts to push forward the process of nuclear disarmament, safeguard the nuclear non-proliferation regime and promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and related international cooperation. China has always kept to the path of peaceful development and pursued an independent foreign policy of peace and a defensive national defence policy. China will continue to actively participate in and practice multilateralism, firmly safeguard the international arms-control and non-proliferation regime and contribute substantively to the noble cause of peace and security for humankind.
