Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We would like to
thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her comprehensive
briefing. We have taken note of the fourteenth report
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
which provides an update on activities regarding the
situation in Libya and which is not very encouraging,
unfortunately. According to the report, the situation in
Libya continues to be volatile, with clashes occurring
between various factions across the country, as well as
ongoing political instability, a fragile security situation
and a breakdown in the rule of law - all of which have
resulted in widespread abuses of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law.

We are deeply alarmed by the reports of unlawful
killings of civilians, as well as executions, abductions,
torture and prolonged detentions without trial or other
legal processes. We have learned from information
provided by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya that in October alone there were 38 civilian
casualties, including 23 killed and 15 injured, as a result
of hostilities across Libya. We are also concerned about
the fact that hundreds of thousands of migrants and
refugees in Libya have suffered abuses and detentions
under inhumane conditions.

Kazakhstan believes that an effective and
credible Government is crucial to reinforcing Libya's
commitment and capability for restoring order and
promoting the rule of law, in addition to addressing
impunity, protecting basic human rights and ensuring
justice for past violations. Every effort should be
made to overcome the protracted crisis and find a
political solution that sets Libya on the path to peace
and reconciliation. At the same time, to have effective
results, we realize that the Libyans themselves must take
a leading role in those efforts. To that end, the support
of the international community for Libya remains
vital in restoring stability and security throughout the
country. The United Nations has a key role to play in
that process.

