Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I should like, on behalf of my
delegation, to thank you, Sir, and through you, your
Government, your people, your mission here in New
York and Ambassador Koonjul for your initiative to
convene this meeting, which we welcome.

Secondly, I extend our sincere thanks to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, who, among all
officials of this international Organization, is the most
interested in African issues. His many reports to the
Security Council and other organs of the United
Nations reflect that intense interest. I also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for the various practical
points she made in her statement yesterday. I extend
my sincere regards to the many African ambassadors
who have come here specifically to participate in this
debate. Moreover, I extend my thanks and best wishes
to my brother, the Secretary General of the
Organization of African Unity, Mr. Amara Essy, for his
statement and for all his efforts on behalf of Africa. We
are hopeful that his leadership and capabilities will
help Africa achieve a better future.

The theme of our debate, "The situation in
Africa", is very clear. I would say that the situation is
truly bad. We have suffered from conflicts, rivalries,
debt, disease and external pressures; even nature is
angry with the continent. We have witnessed extreme
drought and desertification, which have caused much
hunger and deprivation. We have witnessed floods and
catastrophes of all sorts throughout Africa, including
the eruption of volcanoes that have destroyed entire
villages and towns.

With regard to conflict, we should not be
surprised by what we have witnessed in Africa. From a
purely historical point of view, it is easy to understand
and interpret the grave social upheavals on the
continent. The peoples and States that we now call the
developed countries - at least in the material or
cultural sense - have gone through much worse. They
have been through numerous civil wars and foreign
conflicts that have lasted centuries. They have also
been involved in regional wars and in wars that took
place not at home, but in the homelands of others, such
as ours. Those they called "world wars".

Historical evolution is governed not by decisions,
but by time. As a result of colonization, we Africans,
whether we live in tents in the desert or in occupied
cities, are not very familiar with the kind of stability
that has prevailed in other countries. Even today,
stability is unknown is many corners of Africa. Thus, if
we view this issue from the appropriate historical
perspective, we must conclude that our present is a
natural consequence of the past. I do not mean that we
should accept it; rather, we must face up to it and make
every possible effort to help Africa modernize and
move on towards peace, stability, reconstruction and
development.

How can we achieve this? When the Security
Council assumes its responsibility, supports stability
and peace and assists the Organization of African Unity
and other regional organizations in their efforts, then
we may possibly achieve our objective. We have yet to
see such material support from the Council. The
statement made by Ambassador Mahbubani yesterday
will bear out that observation. The innumerable
meetings held, statements made and hours spent here
are not what Africa is waiting for. Africa expects
serious work by the Security Council that will help it to
heal its wounds. Are you going to be moved to action?
This is what Africa expects of you.

My country not only calls on others to do so, but
works continuously on these issues. We do not call on
others while we ourselves do nothing. We do our share.
In the interest of brevity, I will summarize the
statement I had intended to make, but I will provide
members of the Council with documentation
demonstrating all the daily work we have done in my
country for Africa. I do so not in order to boast, but to
prove that we are being very practical and expect the
same from others.

Libya launched an initiative - which later
became a joint initiative with Egypt - to restore
stability, reconciliation and peace in the Sudan. The
Foreign Minister of the Sudan, before leaving my
country yesterday, confirmed that the initiative had
been successful, since it included all parts of his
country, not just certain regions. The practical result of
the initiative is that all the leaders of the opposition in
the Sudan have come to the negotiating table and are
working together politically. The initiative
encompassed the entire country.

We have striven and have made tremendous
efforts to reconcile brothers in the Sudan and Uganda
and in Eritrea and the Sudan. We have undertaken
visits to the Sudan; the Sudanese President has been to
Uganda; the Ugandan President has been to the Sudan;
diplomatic ties have been restored and reconciliation
has prevailed.

As for Somalia, we have done a great deal from
the very outset. We invited all the factions in Somalia
to meet together in Libya; they did so and their Arta
conference was a success. Last week, the Somali
President came to Libya and our two countries agreed
on the following steps. In the field of small arms and
light weapons, the Somali Government is committed to
disarming and demobilizing all combatants, a process
which the Libyan Government will finance. We are
doing so now, just as we have financed similar efforts
in other African countries. The Government will
collect these weapons and destroy them, as was done in
Sierra Leone. Libya will also provide funding of $7.5
million, in a manner to be agreed by both parties, for
the salaries of the military and the police for three
months. We provide material assistance as well -
scores of vehicles from Libya to be used by the civilian
police, customs officers and even military officers. We
also provide assistance in starting up power stations
and generators in Mogadishu and contribute to the
maritime fishing company established jointly by our
country and Djibouti. We help that country in the
agricultural sector as well.

Moreover, we have cooperated with Burundi and
attended the Arusha meetings. We have worked with
the countries of the Mano River Basin and other
African nations such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which responded positively to our request for
meetings and agreed with us on texts that will be
included in the documents that I will provide to the
Council. We have also worked for reconciliation
between our brothers in Ethiopia and Eritrea. We have
assisted our brothers in Sierra Leone, whose President
visited my country to express his thanks. In addition,
we sent a high-level emissary to attend the ceremonies
in Sierra Leone, including the destruction of weapons
that I mentioned earlier.

We recently informed the Council that, after an
entire year of continuous effort, we have secured an
agreement with our brothers in Chad, which sent its
representatives to Libya and agreed to a proposal that
we had previously sent to them. Now a ceasefire is in
effect, the peace process is back on track and Libya is
supervising the implementation of the various
provisions of the agreement.

The Security Council is probably well aware of
what Libya has done twice to stop the bloodshed in the
Central African Republic and to contain the situation
so that it does not extend beyond the country's borders.
We are pleased with our achievement in that regard,
and the leader of the Libyan Revolution, Colonel
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, has contacted the Secretary-
General, Kofi Annan, concerning cooperation and
coordination efforts.

Furthermore, the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) recently attended
a meeting with 17 African ministers. That meeting
established a committee for conflict resolution in
Africa, and the results of the meeting will be conveyed
to the Council by the mission concerned.

I have spoken very briefly in order to show that
Libya is engaged daily in working for Africa. As
Africans, we would like to make the following requests
of the Security Council.

First, Africa, a poor continent, cannot finance
peacekeeping forces in all its regions. We request that
the Security Council manage the situation in Africa the
same way it has managed situations on other
continents. Africa cannot provide the financing, but
more important, the international community should
supervise all peacekeeping operations. Libya is being
asked to provide millions of dollars to finance these
operations. We accept this responsibility, but we would
request more involvement and engagement by other
parties so that we can continue our support. Libya has
spent $65 million in the past few years alone on
peacekeeping operations carried out by the
Organization of African Unity and other regional and
subregional organizations on the continent. We would
like the Security Council to support the requests made
by African subregional organizations and the African
Union. All we ask for from the Council is equal
treatment.

Secondly, with regard to the economic situation,
members will recall that at the inauguration ceremony
of President Chavez of Venezuela as leader of the
Group of 77 and China this year, Mr. Chavez stated
that a decade ago the debt of the Latin American
countries was $700 billion. Now they have paid off
$700 billion, but they still owe $900 billion. This fact
is unbelievable. How can a continent pay $700 billion
and still be $900 billion in debt? These figures come
from the International Monetary Fund and other
development banks. If Africa continues in the same
manner, it will not be able to pay its debts for
centuries.

What we request is just and legitimate; we do not
ask for charity. All those who participated in the
pillaging of Africa's resources, which reached the point
where Africans were bought and sold and transported
across oceans and seas - even the African name Kunta
Kinte has been changed to a non-African name -
should atone for their past mistakes by compensating
Africa for the long years of bitter colonization and
pillaging. A first step would be to forgive Africa's debt
so that it can return to the path of progress.

Even in the field of HIV/AIDS, we are
cooperating with our brothers in Nigeria and Cuba,
although we lack a pharmaceutical industry that is
capable of producing the necessary medicines.

