Mr. Carmon (Israel): Mr. President, allow me, at
the outset, to commend you on your leadership of the
Council during this month of April and on convening
this important debate. Israel believes that the issues
relating to energy, security and climate are closely
linked and are vital to the promotion and sustainability
of peace and security throughout the world.

Energy plays a critical role in our society.
Adequate and affordable energy has always been
central to economic development. Historically, access
to energy resources enabled the shift from agricultural
economies to modern industrial and service-based
economies. But energy is not merely essential to
achieving development goals. It is necessary for basic
and decent living.

At the same time, however, energy adversely
affects the climate. Vulnerable areas around the world
are even more susceptible to these issues. Governments
and other players can use the tools in their hands for
the benefit of mankind, but these tools can also be
misused. There is no doubt that the security of these
regions relates directly to, among other things, the
commodity of energy resources and their availability.
History has shown that competition between States
seeking to satisfy energy needs can instigate conflict,
particularly in regions where tensions already exist.

It is not only the potential scarcity of oil and gas
and other traditional energy resources that can drive
conflict. Access to water, food and fertile soil,
population movements and border disputes all must be
factored in as well. Furthermore, as recent scientific
research shows, these factors are complicated and
further threatened by climate change.

The international community must cooperate in
researching and developing renewable and alternative
energy resources for the betterment of all societies.
Mitigation efforts and adaptation to climate change
will enable us to work together in synergy to promote
sustainable practices. In this regard, Israel looks
forward to the coming fifteenth session of the
Commission on Sustainable Development and future
forums dealing with sustainable development, climate
and other related issues.

Moreover, Israel has also shown the viability of
cooperation with regard to resources, in particular
those that are scarce in our region. As just one
example, the 1994 Israel-Jordan peace treaty stipulated
terms for cooperative usage of water and other
materials from the Jordan River basin. For so many
years, water was perceived as a source of tension and
conflict. But as shown, water can also be a source of
harmony and peace.

As part of the global efforts to address the
challenges I have just mentioned, Israel is conducting
extensive research and development programmes and is
developing the appropriate technologies. Considering
the shared nature of energy resource conditions and
environmental challenges throughout our region, Israel
has planned for additional cooperative programmes and
is participating in a regional desalinization centre and a
project combating desertification and promoting
afforestation. Israel is committed to working with
regional and international partners to address these
challenges in our region.

Israel believes that by addressing climate and
energy issues in appropriate forums, the international
community can constrain the effects that these issues
may have on peace and security.

