Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General, the President, my
fellow ministers and the members of the Security
Council for responding to the call for this gathering
and for convening a special meeting of this body on
such short notice.

The Darfur peace agreement, signed just days ago
at Abuja, represents an historic opportunity for the
people of Darfur to secure real peace and lasting
justice. The United Nations has a vital role to play at
this hopeful moment. The United States urges the
Security Council to quickly pass the draft resolution
that we circulated yesterday.

I have visited Darfur. I have seen the unspeakable
suffering and heard harrowing stories of survival -
stories that are shared by 2.5 million men, women and
children who were driven and displaced from their
homes and who now live in camps in the Sudan and
Chad. For tens of thousands of others death came
brutally at the hands of Janjaweed marauders. The
United States has characterized this wanton campaign
of violence as genocide. Yesterday, President Bush
reaffirmed that judgment.

With the signing of the Darfur peace agreement,
we really have an opportunity to help end the long
nightmare that has befallen the people of Darfur. The
source of the conflict in Darfur is a political problem
as old as the Sudan itself. Historically, the Government
of Khartoum has not been able to rule all of its citizens
justly. The recent civil war with rebels in southern
Sudan killed millions of people. It was ended only with
the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
which addressed the deeper political problem of how
the Sudanese Government would share power and
wealth with the people of its southern region.

In that way, the Darfur agreement is a worthy
complement to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
We applaud the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan Liberation Movement of Minni Minawi for
embracing the promise of peace.

That accord would not have been possible
without the leadership of the African Union (AU) and
the individual contributions of President Sassou
Nguesso, President Konare and Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, and especially that of President Obasanjo of
Nigeria. The United States was proud to join with other
international partners as well in that effort.

The Darfur peace agreement is the foundation on
which to begin building a future of freedom, security
and opportunity for the people of Darfur. Each of the
parties has pledged to cooperate in meeting its unique
and important obligations, from disarming and
demobilizing militias to building an inclusive political
process and to sharing wealth and generating
development in Darfur. Most important, the agreement
sets out a path that can return the people of Darfur to
their homes. It is now vital for all of Sudan's
neighbours to support the peace agreement as well. In
addition, the international community must insist that
all parties remain accountable and that the agreement is
completely and verifiably implemented.

It is now more important than ever to have a
strong United Nations effort to ensure that the
agreement's detailed timelines are monitored and
enforced. The accord clearly states that neutral
peacekeepers have an essential role to play in that
process. We applaud the heroic efforts of the African
Union Mission in the Sudan, which has helped to
reduce large-scale violence. This is an extremely
difficult job, and the AU troops have performed
admirably. Recognizing this, the African Union
expressed its desire on 10 March to transition its
Mission in the Sudan to a larger, United Nations-led,
force that can do more to protect the people of Darfur.

The draft resolution now under discussion would
honour that request. It would strengthen and transform
the AU force into the effective core of a more robust
United Nations-led mission, and it would empower this
new peacekeeping mission with the mandate and the
capabilities to protect civilians.

Just as United Nations peacekeepers play a
central role in helping to implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement between north and
south, we now need a United Nations peacekeeping
force to help implement the Darfur peace agreement.
We would expect the Government of the Sudan to be a
partner in this effort, lending its full support to the
United Nations, the African Union and others that
might assist, such as NATO.

As we work to realize the hope of the Darfur
peace agreement, the international community must do
more to alleviate the suffering of the people in Darfur.
Hunger and disease are still claiming innocent lives,
and the World Food Programme has announced that it
is beginning to cut rations because it is not receiving
sufficient contributions. The United States has
provided nearly all of the support that the World Food
Programme's mission in Darfur has to date received.
President Bush has requested of the Congress an
additional $225 million for the Sudan, $150 million of
which would be for Darfur. Today, I call upon all
nations to do their part to help the World Food
Programme feed and care for the people of Darfur. The
United States appreciates the Dutch offer to host an
international conference in a few months to support
development and reconstruction in Darfur. The United
States will attend, and we urge others to do so as well.

This is a time of testing for the international
community, especially for the United Nations. The
plight of the people of Darfur stirs the conscience of all
human beings. But conscience alone will not feed
starving people and save innocent lives - or bring
peace to troubled lands. This is not a challenge for
Africa alone, or for America alone. It is a challenge for
the entire community of nations, and it is one that
cannot be taken lightly. If the idea of an international
community is to mean anything, if the founding
principles of the United Nations are to be more than
just dreams and if the notion of our responsibility to
protect the weakest and the most powerless among us
is ever to be more than just an empty promise, then the
Security Council must act. We must pass this draft
resolution and we must seize this momentous
opportunity to restore hope to the people of Darfur.

