Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council is meeting today to take action on
the draft resolution contained in document S/1996/221, by
which it would establish a mechanism for monitoring
Iraqi imports and exports, pursuant to paragraph 7 of
resolution 715 (1991), which called for cooperation
between the sanctions Committee established under
resolution 661 (1990), the Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
developing the necessary provisions.

The Egyptian delegation pays a tribute to the
sanctions Committee under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Eitel, to the Special Commission and to the
IAEA for their efforts, through a series of meetings and
consultations, to prepare a draft resolution. These efforts
resulted in a report (S/1995/1017), submitted to the
Security Council in December 1995, which gave rise in
turn to intensive consultations within the Council with a
view to giving due weight to the concerns of all
delegations.

My delegation, however, wants to reaffirm a number
of points. First of all, no provision of the draft resolution
must jeopardize the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Iraq. The provisions of paragraph 5 of the draft resolution
must not prevent Iraq from exercising its legitimate right
to import or export, for non-proscribed purposes, the

 

technologies or materials it needs to promote its economic
and social development.

Secondly, while this new mechanism would monitor
Iraq's import and export of dual-use materials after
sanctions are lifted, it is our understanding that this regime
must be put in place as that stage approaches. In this
context, we hope that Iraq will create the conditions and
climate necessary for achieving this objective, through full
cooperation with the Special Commission established to
supervise the elimination of all Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction, and through the provision, at the earliest
possible date, of complete, comprehensive and final
information on all elements of its proscribed programmes.

Thirdly, although the establishment of this new
mechanism amounts in fact to a reinforcement of the
current regime established under sections C and F of
resolution 687 (1991), with the purpose of ensuring that
Iraq does not require materials proscribed under that
resolution, the concept is unprecedented for the Security
Council in that no specific time-limits are set for the new
mechanism. This is a matter of some concern for the
Egyptian delegation.

Fourthly, the mechanism approved under the draft
resolution, as provided for in paragraph 3, is emphatically
and clearly without prejudice to and shall not impair the
operation of existing or future non-proliferation agreements
or regimes on the international or regional level, including
arrangements referred to in resolution 687 (1991). In this
context, my delegation wishes explicitly to reiterate that
those arrangements are those referred to in paragraph 14 of
resolution 687 (1991), which clearly states that actions
taken by Iraq in accordance with that resolution in
connection with the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction represent steps towards the goal of establishing
in the Middle East a zone free from weapons of mass
destruction.

Fifthly, Iraq accepted Security Council resolution 715
(1991), which provided for the export/import monitoring
mechanism to be developed. In making its decision on the
draft resolution, the delegation of Egypt took that Iraqi
position into account, although the new mechanism regime
imposes new and unprecedented commitments for States
and their national institutions.

In light of these considerations, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

