Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank Mr. Zarif for introducing the quarterly report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/72) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I also thank the Prime Minister of Serbia
and Mr. Hashim Thaci for their statements.

I will principally address the issues related to the
still precarious security situation in northern Kosovo,
and those related to normalizing relations between
Kosovo and Serbia. For nearly two years, under the
auspices of the European Union (EU), the Serbian and
Kosovar authorities have undertaken a process aimed at
normalizing their relations. My country welcomes the
progress made since then. It is noteworthy that, at the
technical level, the dialogue has led to an agreement
aimed at improving the daily lives of the people in
both territories, whose existence has been roiled by the
political and legal stalemate.

Both sides have therefore agreed on arrangements,
in particular the exchange of liaison officers, in order to
improve communications and the joint management of
crossing points. They have agreed on a customs regime
involving the recognition of documents including
vehicle registration plates, identification documents
and university diplomas from Kosovo. My country
is convinced that such initiatives will promote the
rapprochement of the people of Kosovo and Serbia
by promoting increased exchanges between both
territories and by addressing the daily tensions arising
from coexistence.

The dialogue undertaken has gradually evolved
from technical to policy issues in recent months, which
we welcome. We commend the positive momentum
made possible by the mediation efforts of the European
Union and highlighted by the recent high-level meetings
in Brussels on 6 February between the President of
Serbia and the leader of Kosovo, and between their
Prime Ministers on 19 and 20 February. Togo welcomes
the resolve reaffirmed by the senior officials at those
meetings to normalize relations between Serbia and
Kosovo.

The powerful symbol of the normalization process
represented by those meetings is encouraging, given
that only a few months earlier their positions were so
rigid that such meetings between senior Serbian and
Kosovar officials could scarcely have been imagined.
Still, beyond the symbolic aspect, Togo hopes that the
momentum will continue in order to bring about a rapid
settlement to the sensitive and complex issue of the
maintenance of parallel Serbian structures in northern
Kosovo, and ultimately of the final status of Kosovo.
To that end, we urge both sides to be much more open
and flexible with a view to a win-win solution in the
interests of the Serbian and Kosovar populations and to
promote peace and stability in the region.

Togo also remains concerned about the inter-ethnic
tensions still evident in northern Kosovo, in particular in
North Mitrovica, which riskjeopardizing reconciliation
efforts. In December 2012 and in January, there was an
increase in the number of demonstrations condemning,
in particular, certain aspects of the agreement on the
integrated management of crossing points, the building
of housing for repatriated Albanians in North Mitrovica
and restrictions on the freedom of movement of Serbian
senior officials to Kosovo. That led to the Serbian
President cancelling his visit to Gracanica monastery
in January.

Such developments attest to the ongoing
inter-ethnic strife and the limited positive response
locally to reconciliation initiatives. Togo believes that
there must be a particular focus on the local impact of
the reconciliation process. In that regard, we call on the
religious authorities and the civil society of Serbia and
Kosovo to become more involved in bringing together
the various communities. In that regard, we commend
the example of the dialogue between the Orthodox
Church in Kosovo and the municipal authorities in Peje
on a range of practical issues.

The lack of security undermines efforts to bring
the Serbian and Kosovar communities together. It has
a negative impact on the decision of displaced persons
and refugees from northern Kosovo whether or not to
return and reintegrate. Togo therefore urges the Kosovo
authorities to continue the investigations under way
into the cases of attacks against the Serbian residents of
Kosovo and their property in order to bring tojustice the
perpetrators of such acts and to provide the necessary
compensation to victims.

On the issue of disappeared persons, my country
welcomes the visit to Cyprus on 7 and 8 November 2012
of members of the Kosovo Serb family associations
of missing persons, who were able to learn from the
experience of Cyprus in that area. We look forward
to the rapid implementation of the recommendations
arising from that visit, which underscore the importance
of ownership of such activities by the populations
themselves and of the involvement of family associations
in all discussions and decisions on the issue.

Togo is also concerned about the phenomenon of
corruption and organized crime that are developing
widely, in particular in northern Kosovo. We call
on the Kosovo authorities to do their utmost to fight
effectively against that scourge. We note the decision
taken by the Kosovo authorities in that regard, as stated
by Mr. Thaci. We believe that the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) should have
the appropriate staffing in order to further focus on
preventing and suppressing that scourge.

Moreover, with regard to the allegations of
trafficking in human organs, we again call on Kosovo
and its neighbours to allow the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force to work in peace and to fully
cooperate with it. We hope that the investigations
undertaken by Prosecutor Williamson can be rapidly
concluded in as impartial a way as possible in order
to once and for all shed light on that case, which is
dividing peoples and views.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my country's
congratulations to the European Union, UNMIK, the
Kosovo Force, EULEX, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and all partner organizations
that continue to work alongside the Kosovo authorities
in order to prevent tension and to promote the adoption
of consensus solutions by playing an important role in
mediation and in facilitating dialogue.

