Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): At the outset, I would
like to welcome Ambassador Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Ambassador Jacques Klein, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). I
would also like to welcome Mr. Javier Solana,
Secretary General of the Council and High
Representative for Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union, whose presence here is a
clear sign of the European Union's commitment to
ensuring the stability and prosperity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

On number of occasions during his mandate,
Mr. Petritsch found himself in virtually impossible
situations - Bosnia and Herzegovina has a reputation
for being the ultimate challenge for international
officials. But his will and determination to perform his
task prevailed over all difficulties.

I would like to assure his successor,
Lord Ashdown, that Croatia is committed to continue
to contribute to the stability and prosperity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and that he will be able to rely on our
help while performing his role.

I have known Jacques Klein, and successfully
cooperated with him, in various capacities for many
years. His contribution to the success of the two
completely different United Nations missions in South-
East Europe - the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium in Croatia, and UNMIBH in Bosnia
and Herzegovina - represents an unprecedented
accomplishment.

The United Nations has decided that, at this
particular moment, its presence is needed more
elsewhere than it is in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
proposal has been made that it should be replaced by a
regional organization. The European Union acted
quickly, deciding to take over. In our View, that
decision was the most appropriate. Taking into account
Bosnia and Herzegovina's European aspirations, it is
appropriate that the European Union should continue
the daunting task of carrying out police reform in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We wish the European Union
every success in its endeavours. As Bosnia and
Herzegovina's neighbour and friend, and as aspirants to
future European Union membership, we stand ready to
provide assistance, if needed.

On the other hand, it will be possible for the
United Nations to continue its presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by monitoring human rights through the
Special Representative of the Commission on Human
Rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, Mr. Cutileiro, whose future
mandate will be discussed during the forthcoming
session of the Commission in Geneva.

With regard to the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Prevlaka - which, in its administrative
aspect, is linked to UNMIBH - my Government
believes that its mandate should, in its own right,
expire by 15 July this year.

This year will be filled with important events for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and I have already briefly
mentioned some of them. However, one of those events
will have special importance for the future of the
country: the admission of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
the Council of Europe on 2 May. That is going to
accelerate democratic processes, the rule of law and the
protection of human rights - developments that we in
Croatia have experienced since the moment we joined
the organization in 1996. Throughout the whole
process of accession, Croatia was one of the staunchest
advocates of the need for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
join the Council of Europe. We are delighted to see this
process coming to an end, and we wholeheartedly
congratulate our neighbour on this well-deserved
success.

If Bosnia and Herzegovina wants to fully
embrace European standards with regard to the
protection of human rights, it will have to adapt its
institutional structure. Further efforts need to be made
towards implementing the Constitutional Court's
decision on the equal rights of all three constituent
peoples throughout the whole territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We simply cannot expect the authorities
in Sarajevo to implement all the requirements
stemming from membership in the Council of Europe,
while at the same time still struggling for the bare
survival of an ethnically divided State.

My Government would like to see the parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina working together to bring
about an evolution of the present constitutional
arrangement so that it can respond to the new political
environment and the new challenges arising from it.
We hope that the forthcoming elections in October will
represent another step in the development of a
sustainable, European-oriented Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is our hope that these will provide a
smooth transition from the "Dayton" Bosnia and
Herzegovina, aimed at stopping the conflict and
pragmatic life-saving, towards a "European" Bosnia
and Herzegovina - a sustainable State, corresponding
to European standards of good governance, the rule of
law and the protection of human rights.

On the same note, we see acceptance in the
Council of Europe only as a first step towards the
further and deeper inclusion of Bosnia and
Herzegovina into European integration. Hopefully in
the near future, Bosnia and Herzegovina will start
negotiating a stabilization and association agreement
with the European Union - the type of agreement that
Croatia recently signed. My Government stands ready
to share our experiences of that process.

We firmly believe that the recently opened trial
against Slobodan Milosevic, the former President of
Serbia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, marks
the beginning of a new era for our region. It is closing
a chapter for hundreds of thousands of those in Croatia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo who lost their
loved ones and had to continue to live with the bitter
memories. The trial of Slobodan Milosevic will also
serve to benefit a better understanding of the course of
events in the former Yugoslavia and, consequently, to
benefit reconciliation among the people of South-East
Europe.

Unfortunately, last week's attempts by the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) to apprehend Radovan
Karadzic, another notorious war criminal, were not
successful. He is still at large and, together with Ratko
Mladic, should remain at the priority list of The Hague
Tribunal. The presence of Radovan Karadzic in Bosnia
and Herzegovina constitutes a permanent threat to the
stability of the country and creates a danger that has to
be dealt with. The lack of success - or the lack of
political will - to arrest Karadzic also negatively
reflects on the credibility of SFOR and undermines
international efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina overall.
I reiterate what I have said on previous occasions: there
can be no sustainable Bosnia and Herzegovina with
Karadzic and Mladic at large.

Croatia will continue to broaden the scope of
bilateral cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina,
with which we share a wide range of common interests.
This cooperation, like every process, has its ups and
downs, good periods and periods of missed
opportunities. It is crucial that the general trend of
bilateral relations remain positive. Just yesterday, the
Croatian Deputy Foreign Minister visited Sarajevo and
had a very constructive dialogue with the Bosnian
leadership, while the Prime Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be visiting Zagreb later this week.

Let me conclude. Bosnia and Herzegovina is
crucial to Croatia as our neighbour, as the homeland for
Bosnian Croats, as our economic partner and as our
friend. Therefore, Croatia is willing to fully support
international efforts to facilitate a sovereign, stable and
sustainable Bosnia and Herzegovina. Fully respecting
that its constitutional arrangement is a matter for the
three constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and of all its citizens, we sincerely hope that its new
constitutional arrangement will truly reflect the equal
rights of the three constituent peoples on all of its
territory as a prerequisite for the successful return of
refugees, for the protection of human rights, stability
and sustainability, and for further successful inclusion
into European integration processes.

