Mr. Ruiz Massieu: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to present the latest report of the Secretary-
General on Colombia (S/2019/780). I welcome
the participation in today's meeting of Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Archila, Presidential
Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation, and
thank them for their support of the work of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.

The peace process has continued to move forward
through a challenging period since the last briefing (see S/PV.8581). Two years after the successful conclusion
of the laying down of arms by the former guerrillas of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-

Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP), the vast majority of
former fighters remain engaged and committed to the
Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and the
Construction ofa Stable and Lasting Peace. Thousands
of former fighters are pursuing academic studies,
receiving vocational training, participating actively
in cooperatives and employed in activities related to
the peace agreement. More than 3,500 combatants
are involved in collective and individual productive
projects, ranging from agricultural ventures to clothing
manufacturing to ecotourism.

It is important to emphasize the commitment
of these former combatants to the peace process,
especially given the regrettable and unjustified actions
of a few former FARC-EP commanders, who recently
announced that they have taken up arms again. I would
like to recognize the swift and categorical rejection of
these actions by all sectors across the country, including
the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun
(FARC) political party, which has expelled those who
took up arms again, and certainly by President Duque
Marquez and his Government. The Special Jurisdiction
for Peace also declared that all those who announced
their rearmament would be excluded and lose the
benefits provided under the peace agreement. It is now
more important than ever to support the women and
men who remain resolutely committed to peace and
to transforming their lives and those of their families
and communities.

Important results have been achieved in the approval
of productive projects by the National Reintegration
Council, but further efforts are needed given that
the projects that have thus far received Government
funding represent 14.7 per cent of the accredited
former combatants. It is critical to accelerate the pace
of disbursement of funding and to guarantee access
to land. Additionally, it is fundamental for all actors
to ensure that these projects become sustainable so
that former combatants and surrounding communities
can see lasting results from their hard work. All
reintegration efforts should involve and benefit local
communities, as well as empower women. I welcome
that all productive projects approved by the National
Reintegration Council include a gender-sensitive
approach. I trust that both parties will work together to
move forward in their implementation.

I am pleased to report that the Government has
temporarily extended the monthly allowance, the
provision of food and services and the presence of
public security forces around the former territorial areas
for reintegration. The decree regulating that transition
was adopted on 9 September, although specific details
are still pending. I welcome the announcement by
the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation of the extension of the monthly allowance
and food services until August 2020.

Now I would like to draw the Council's attention
to the situation of more than 8,000 former combatants
living outside the former territorial areas, who have
limited access to reintegration benefits and are more
vulnerable to violence and to recruitment by illegal
armed groups. More should be done to support
that population.

(spoke in Spanish)

Last week I was in the department of Putumayo,
a region where more than half of whose residents are
registered as victims of the conflict and yet have not
received the full benefits of the signing of the peace
agreement. I met with several women social leaders and
it was very inspiring to see the courage and strength
with which they exercise leadership on behalf of their
communities and work for territorial peace, despite the
many obstacles and threats to their lives.

The situation of those admirable women is a
reflection of the situation of thousands of leaders, human
rights defenders and communities that continue to be
victimized by violence. In this and all my visits to the
territories, the same messages are heard. Communities
clamour for development, basic services, security
and economic opportunities through comprehensive
State presence. In addition, they call for immediate
strategies to improve protection and security in the
regions, in cooperation with communities and local
authorities. That is, undoubtedly, the promise of the
peace agreement.

Part of the solution to address this worrying
situation lies with the National Commission on Security
Guarantees, which was convened by President Duque
in August and is tasked with formulating, with input
from civil society, a public policy for the dismantling
of criminal organizations and their support networks.
It is essential that regular discussions be held on this
issue and that their decisions be translated into concrete
actions that, in the short term, protect all communities
and consolidate State institutions in the affected areas.

(Spoke in English)

Unfortunately, I must report that attacks against
former FARC-EP combatants continue to be of
serious concern. Since my last briefing to the Council,
20 former combatants have been killed, for a total of
151 since the signing of the peace agreement. There has
been some progress in the implementation of various
measures announced by the Government to strengthen
security guarantees for former combatants and to step
up investigations into those killings. But more needs to
be done, including to address the continued budgetary
shortfalls faced by the entity in charge of providing
protection to former combatants.

The departmental and local elections are less than
three weeks away, and violence against candidates
is affecting political parties across the ideological
spectrum, including FARC, which is participating in
local elections for the first time. Protection measures
for all candidates should be strengthened.

I welcome the National Pact for Political Culture and
Non-Violence during the Electoral Campaign, signed
in August by 12 national political parties, rejecting
violence and calling for a peaceful and respectful
campaign. It should certainly serve as an example of
how dialogue can lead to consensus. Dialogue is also
key to overcoming challenges in the implementation
of the peace agreement. I encourage the Government
and FARC to continue to engage constructively, as seen
during the joint visits to the former territorial areas.

In the same spirit, I hope that they make increased
use of the architecture established for that purpose
under the peace agreement, especially the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement. Constructive
dialogue that is inclusive of FARC should also be
reflected in any further discussions on reforms related
to provisions of the peace agreement, to the extent that
such discussions continue. It would also be important
to ensure that any such reforms have only future
applications, as Foreign Minister Holmes Trujillo
Garcia has previously emphasized to the Council.

On 26 September, 10 former FARC-EP commanders
appeared before the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
to acknowledge their responsibility and to ask for
forgiveness for kidnappings committed during the
armed conflict. This was also an important step in
the implementation of the provisions of the peace
agreement that are aimed at ensuring accountability,
truth and reconciliation. The willingness of Colombia's
victims to embrace forgiveness is inspiring. In that
connection, the Truth Commission plays an essential
role in fostering truth and reconciliation by bringing
the victims to the forefront. Victims must continue to
be at the centre of the peace process.
This a precious opportunity to put an end to the
recurrent dynamics of violence in Colombia. The
United Nations remains convinced that the way
forward is through a comprehensive implementation
of the Final Agreement. Advancing rural development
and political participation, just to cite two examples,
is as important to consolidating peace as reintegrating
former combatants. I have heard this conviction
repeatedly expressed in the rural areas of Colombia by
community activists, local authorities, peasant women
and indigenous leaders.

The hopes of Colombians for a peaceful and
prosperous future can be realized if we all - the
Government, FARC, Colombian society as a whole and
the international community - work together to ensure
that the letter and spirit of the peace agreement become
concrete deeds and actions to improve the lives of those
who have suffered the most from the conflict. The
unified support of the Security Council for the peace
process will continue to be of the essence. The United
Nations Verification Mission, along with the country
team, which has played a key role in supporting different
aspects of implementation, is ready to continue doing
its part to help consolidate peace.

