Mr. Mohammed (Ethiopia): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. I also wish to thank your predecessor for his
excellent leadership of the work of the Council last
month.

It has now been almost nine months since the
Eritrean regime committed an act of aggression against
Ethiopia and occupied Ethiopia's territory by force. While
fully recognizing its own right, as a sovereign country, to
defend itself, Ethiopia, however, chose to seek a
diplomatic solution to the crisis. Accordingly, as the
Council knows full well, Ethiopia accepted peace
proposals aimed at ending the dispute peacefully. In
particular, the Council is fully cognizant of Ethiopia's

 

acceptance of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
Framework Agreement, of which the Council, in its
resolution 1226 (1999) of 29 January 1999, expressed its
full support and called for full implementation without
delay.

It is common knowledge, and the Council knows this
very well, that Eritrea has rejected virtually all peace
proposals and continues to create confusion by pretending
that it remains engaged in the OAU process.

The facts speak for themselves. During the past nine
months there has never been a single occasion when the
Eritrean regime was engaged positively and constructively
to resolve the crisis between Eritrea and Ethiopia. On the
contrary, it left no stone unturned to frustrate all peace
endeavours at all levels, including through well-known
games and tactics, including the blackmail of mediators.

During the past nine months the Eritrean regime has
not only consistently sabotaged and rejected all peace
proposals, but has also carried out provocative military
actions in order to create an atmosphere of general crisis
and to divert the attention of the international community
from the core issue: Eritrea's withdrawal from Ethiopian
territory. It is exactly for that reason that the Eritrean
regime launched a large-scale military action, including the
aerial bombing of the town of Adigrat on 4, 5 and 6
February while the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
was in the region to persuade Eritrea to accept the OAU
Framework Agreement.

In this regard, I wish to draw the Council's attention
to my letters of 4 and 5 February 1999 and their annexes,
in which I inform the President of the Council of these
latest Eritrean military actions against Ethiopian military
positions and civilian targets. Under these circumstances,
and in view of Eritrea's continuous acts of provocation, the
Ethiopian Government has had no option but to exercise its
legitimate right of self-defence, as clearly stipulated in
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations.

I now wish to briefly comment on the draft resolution
before the Council. My delegation welcomes the fact that
the Council reaffirms its resolution 1226 (1999), in which
it strongly urged Eritrea to accept the OAU Framework
Agreement without delay. I also welcome the fact that the
Council has once again stressed that the OAU Framework
Agreement remains a viable and sound solution for the
conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea.

We should also put on record our reservation in the
strongest possible terms with regard to paragraph 7 of the
draft resolution. It is a well-known fact that Ethiopia is a
victim of Eritrean aggression and that its territory has
been illegally occupied through the use of force for over
eight months - as a result of which it is now engaged in
an exercise of legitimate self-defence under Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations - and it is patently
contrary to elementary principles and a sense of justice to
place the aggressor and the victim of aggression on the
same footing and to call for the cessation of arms sales to
both countries.

In this connection, we should recall how Ethiopia
was treated by the League of Nations back in 1936, when
the organization imposed an arms embargo on both fascist
Italy and Ethiopia, knowing full well that fascist Italy -
the aggressor - was self-sufficient in arms, while
Ethiopia - a poor country - was trying to defend its
sovereignty against a major European Power of the time.

History is repeating itself. It is well known that since
Ethiopia does not have and would not have any relations
with rogue States, it has no arms supplies. Calling for a
cessation of arms sales to both Ethiopia and Eritrea when
the latter retains intact its sources of arms - States
whose commitment to international law is highly
questionable at best - is, in effect, directed solely against
law-abiding Ethiopia, a country without any source of
arms supplies whatsoever. Moreover, it is clear that
Eritrea is a country with a long coastline, while Ethiopia
is a landlocked country. It does not require any stretch of
the imagination to see which country can continue to
import arms despite any call for a cessation of arms sales
to both countries. Again, paragraph 7 of the draft
resolution is, in the final analysis, targeted against
Ethiopia.

Let me conclude by stating that our infinite patience
and readiness to cooperate with parties working for a
peaceful resolution of the dispute - in spite of our being
a victim of aggression - should not be mistaken as a
slackening of our resolve to defend our sovereignty.

