Mr. Sukhee (Mongolia): At the outset, let me congratulate the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council and express my gratitude for the convening of this open debate. I take this opportunity to warmly welcome all the elected new members of the Security Council - Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam - and express our full confidence in their leadership and commitment in addressing world peace and security. Our appreciation also goes to the outgoing members - Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland - for their important contribution to the work of the Security Council. The founding fathers of the United Nations established the Organization around three pillars - peace and security, development and human rights - to prevent war by binding us in a rules- based international order. Seventy-five years after the establishment of the United Nations, we are still tackling enormous challenges, including protracted conflicts, persistent poverty and hunger, terrorism and violent extremism, human rights abuses, financial and economic crises and a fast-changing climate. Respect for international norms and institutions is weakening. Multilateralism is being challenged more often. The challenges of the contemporary world in the areas of peace and security, economic development and social progress, human rights and the rule of law urge the international community to renew its commitment to upholding and defending the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law. In order to maintain international peace and security, States Members of the United Nations must pursue the principles of the Charter in good faith. In particular, all Members should fulfil the obligation to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations. I take this opportunity to reassure those present of Mongolia's firm commitment to upholding and promoting the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and the principles of international law. I therefore wish to reiterate Mongolia's principled position and commitment to promoting the settlement of international disputes by peaceful means, in such a manner that international peace, security and justice are not endangered. In conclusion, I would like to highlight that the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations in 2020 presents an opportunity for the international community to reaffirm its collective commitment to upholding the United Nations Charter in order to maintain international peace and security.
