Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I welcome the
briefing from the Deputy Secretary-General, and I
welcome the Secretary-General's ongoing visit to the
region.

"We are all human beings; we are all equal". Those
are the words of Uri Rezken, an Israeli man who was
stabbed last week. Yuri was attacked in a supermarket
while working side by side with an Arab colleague. His
assailant was an Israeli, but, as Uri said afterwards, "It
does not matter if an Arab stabbed me or a Jew stabbed
me - a religious, Orthodox or secular person. I have no
words to describe this hate crime".

Uri is just one victim of the continuing violence
and terrorist attacks across Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories. To his story we can add countless
others, from Palestinians, from Israelis and now from
an Eritrean man, Haptom Zerhom, who, like Uri, was
a victim of mistaken identity. Like Haptom, too many
of these Victims are now unable to tell their own story.

All of us in the Council understand the frustration
at the lack of progress towards peace. But we must
send a clear and unwavering message today that neither
frustration nor anything else can possibly justify these
attacks. There are no words to describe these hate
crimes.

The British Government strongly condemns all acts
of Violence and incitement, no matter who committed
them. We are clear that the parties need to agree on
the status quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, Temple Mount,
and commit to it. They need to tackle incitement, which
fuels violence and hostility. Both sides need to do all
they can to end the Violence. If it does not stop, it will
only drag the parties further away from the solution
that we all want.

The Council must also play its role in de-escalating
the situation and in driving forward political progress
towards a lasting solution. This means increasing
efforts to find practical improvements on the ground.
This is Vital if we are to preserve the viability of the
two-State solution.

Without progress in three areas, I fear that we will
see only more Violence. First, Gazans must be able to
secure jobs and build their livelihoods. This means the
free movement of people and goods; it means immediate
practical measures from Israel to develop water and
energy infrastructure; and it means Palestinian factions
pushing forward with reconciliation and making the
reconstruction of Gaza a priority.

Secondly, progress is desperately needed, too, in
the West Bank. The transfer of authority over Area C to
the Palestinian authority, as the Oslo Accords set out, is
critical to successful two-State solution. It could unlock
huge economic benefits. Immediate progress towards
this would not only improve the lives of thousands of
Palestinians, it would also help restore much-needed
faith in the peace process.

Thirdly, as my Prime Minister and Foreign
Secretary made clear to Prime Minister Netanyahu last
month, the expansion of settlements and the demolition
of Palestinian homes must stop. They are illegal under
international law; they erode faith in the two-State
solution; and they erode the physical viability of the
Palestinian State.

We remain convinced that a negotiated two-State
solution is the only way to resolve the conflict. It is
the only way to see a safe and secure Israel coexist
alongside a viable, sovereign Palestinian State. The
United Kingdom will continue to work towards this
urgent priority in the Council and elsewhere.

A long-term political settlement, one that ensures
a safe future for all, is exactly what we want elsewhere
across the Middle East. In the interests of time, I will
not discuss today Lebanon, Iraq, Yemen or Libya;
instead, I will focus on Syria, where, tragically, the
prospects are deteriorating. The number of refugees
has increased to 4 million, and tens of thousands are
crossing into Europe to avoid barrel bombs and other
violations of human rights. The Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and terrorist groups continue to
pose a threat both in the region and beyond.

To have a long-term response to the migration
crisis and to the threat from ISIL, we must tackle the
root cause. Make no mistake: the root cause in Syria
is the brutality of the Al-Assad regime. Indiscriminate
attacks on civilians with barrel bombs and the use of
chemical weapons have caused 12 million Syrians to
flee their homes and have left a quarter of a million
dead. So the United Kingdom, with France and Spain,
will circulate shortly concrete proposals designed to
bring to an end the indiscriminate use of barrel bombs.

The Council has always been united on the need to
find a political solution in Syria. Together we supported
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and voted
in favour of its principles. But now Russian military
intervention on the side of Al-Assad is assisting the
targeting of moderate armed groups. Such actions only
diminish the prospects of a political process. Some
of the groups targeted are the very ones that Staffan
de Mistura had invited to join his talks. Russia has
undermined the constructive relationship that we built
in the Council when we came together to make some
progress on chemical weapons and humanitarian issues.

Russia's decision to target moderate armed groups
will only prop up Al-Assad and undermine peace, for
Al-Assad's brutality remains ISIL's greatest recruiting
sergeant. Al-Assad has shown that he cannot be apartner
against ISIL. And in deciding to take part in Syria's
civil war, Russia will now have to defend its actions to
the Council and, indeed, to Sunni communities across
the world, and it must use his influence to get the
regime to stop its worst excesses and acts of brutality.

