Mr. llkin (Turkey): I would first like to thank
Special Representative Kai Eide for his interesting and
comprehensive brieflng. I also welcome our colleague
Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan.

We very much appreciate the leading role of the
United Nations in coordinating the efforts of the
international community to assist Afghanistan. We
express our full support for the endeavours of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in that direction.

Afghanistan today is still passing through a
critical period. This period brings to the fore both
challenges and opportunities, which are in fact well
defined in the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/ 135).
We fully agree with his observations and
recommendations.

Actually, there is not much divergence Within the
international community as to what needs to be done in
Afghanistan to achieve our common objectives. But we
are still not where we want to be. For that, resolute and
concerted efforts are needed at the local, regional and
international levels. Given the critical period ahead of
us and the broad consensus on the way forward, it is
now high time to step up to the occasion and deliver
the expectations of Afghanistan.

While doing so, we should always bear in mind
that any further deterioration in that country would
have broad adverse effects reaching beyond
Afghanistan. Therefore, we must not be dismayed by
occasional setbacks and must always keep a clear
perspective as to what we can and should achieve
collectively. We must do so in a way that will further
strengthen the hopes and expectations of the Afghan
people. After all, we should not forget that, unless we
win the hearts and minds of the Afghan people, peace
and stabilization will always be a distant objective.

In that regard, there is certainly a need for a
comprehensive approach to be put in place,
encompassing security, governance, the rule of law,
human rights and social and economic development.
All these aspects are interlinked and, hence, the
following four areas of priority deserve equal and
special attention: comprehensive economic
development with a visible impact on the living
conditions of the people; a strong Afghan military and
police to take the lead and assert ownership of the
nation's security; inclusive national reconciliation that
will consolidate peace and stability in the country; and
a modern education and justice system to effectively
combat extremism of all sorts.

Furthermore, in the immediate future, the
presidential elections to be held in August will also be
of critical importance. Those elections should help the
democratic process in the country rather than creating
new fault lines. For that, the elections should be well
prepared and should be carried out in a free and fair
manner. Needless to say, the United Nations has an
important role to play in this regard, and we support
UNAMA's efforts to that end.

Likewise, regional cooperation is also a must to
accomplish our goals in Afghanistan. In the light of
recent promising developments in this context,
especially with respect to Afghanistan-Pakistan
relations, the international community should
encourage and help regional cooperation and the joint
endeavours of those countries.

As a country which has special ties with the
region, Turkey has contributed and will be contributing
to the improvement of the situation in Afghanistan in
every way it can. Apart from our continued support for
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
the sizeable reconstruction assistance provided through
our Provincial Reconstruction Team in Wardak, a
multifaceted, extensive assistance programme is under
way. In this context, in 2008, we doubled our pledge of
development assistance to Afghanistan to $200 million.
Hence, we will focus on more visible projects of direct
impact, such as establishing a new university, building
a modern training and research hospital and paving
roads of Kabul.

We decided to contribute €1.5 million to the
Afghan National Army trust fund. Our existing training
programmes, both in Turkey and in Wardak, designed
to support the Afghan National Police will continue.
We will also contribute a total of $5 million for the
elections in Afghanistan.

Furthermore, as part of our efforts to enhance
regional cooperation, the Turkey-Pakistan-Afghanistan
trilateral process is geared towards helping develop
closer relations and mutually beneficial cooperation
among those countries. In April 2007, Turkey hosted
the first trilateral summit with the participation of the
Presidents of Afghanistan and Pakistan, which
culminated in Ankara Declaration. A joint working
group was established at the Ankara summit to work on
various cooperation projects. The second trilateral
summit was held in Istanbul on 5 December 2008. The
process has already come a long way and we are
committed to take it further. In this framework, we
intend to host a third summit.

In conclusion, I would like to underline once
again that failure in Afghanistan is unthinkable. We
must succeed, and we are confident that we will.
Indeed, the sense of purpose and dedication around this
table and within the international community at large
gives us every reason to be optimistic. We also believe
that the high-level meetings to be held in Moscow and
in The Hague later this month will provide us with
excellent opportunities to demonstrate our collective
will and commitment once again.

Turkey is more than ready and willing to join in
this endeavour and to do its fair share. In other words,
we will not stop assisting the brotherly Afghan people
in their struggle to carry their country forward. After so
many decades of conflict, they deserve to live in
democracy, peace, prosperity and stability. We have
full confidence in the determination, resilience and
wisdom of the Afghan people in their struggle to
achieve that goal.

