Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I am
honoured to speak to the Security Council on behalf of
Ambassador Fode Seck, Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan. He is unfortunately unable
to attend this meeting due to a last-minute conflict of
schedules. He offers his apologies.

In my statement, I shall summarize the main
conclusions and recommendations contained in the
final report of the Panel of Experts (S/2017/326),
introduced to the Committee on 16 March, as well as the
outcome of the consideration of these conclusions and
recommendations by the members of the Committee on
29 March. I shall also briefly touch on the work carried
out by the Committee since the Chair's briefing to the
Council on 17 November 2016 (see S/PV.7814).

With regard to the political situation, the Panel
again asssessed that the Agreement on the Settlement
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan August
2015 had de facto been shattered. In its view, the
political arrangement between President Salva Kiir and
First Vice-President Taban Deng Gai left the significant
segment to one part of the opposition movements,
other political camps and many influential non-Dinka
community leaders. The Panel concluded that the
political arrangement arrangement was

"not nationally unifying, ha[d] not arrested
the security and humanitarian crisis and [was
increasingly an obstacle to genuine political
reconciliation, undermining the transition to
the inclusive and sustainable peace envisaged
in resolutions 2206 (2015) and 2290 (2016)"
(S/2017/326, p. 2).

On the question of security, the Panel noted that
the conflict in South Sudan was becoming increasingly
asymmetrical, and that the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Government, the
SPLM/A in Opposition and other armed groups had
all conducted military operations in 2016 and the
first quarter of 2017. Nevertheless, it was considered
that the military exercises carried out and planned by
the SPLM/A in Government, under the leadership of
President Kiir, had been the largest by far.

Throughout its mandate, the Panel of Experts
identified widespread violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
by all parties. It indicates in its final report that such
violations had continued unabated, including attacks
against civilians, violations of the rights to freedom of
expression and opinion, and violations of the rights of
the child. Those violations have been committed in a
climate of near-total impunity and in the absence of any
credible effort to prevent or punish the perpetrators.

The Panel also considered the events that led to the
declaration of famine in two counties of Unitty state in
February 2017. Specifically, it found that in the years
prior to the famine, the Government had conducted
repeated military operations in the southern part of the
state that had hampered humanitarian assistance and
led to forced population displacements.

At the humanitarian level, the Panel reported that
at least 100,000 South Sudanese were starving to death
and that a million more were on the brink of starvation.
In this context, the Panel found that South Sudan was
the world's deadliest country for humanitarian workers.
Since the beginning of the war in December 2013, it
has recorded the deaths of at least 72 humanitarian
workers and reported to the Committee at the meeting
on 29 March that the figure had risen to 80. Violent
attacks on humanitarian workers were only one of the
factors hampering the delivery of aid. Other factors
included the intimidation, harassment and detention of
humanitarian personnel; the looting of humanitarian
supplies; restrictions on the freedom of movement; and
a general climate of insecurity.

In accordance with its mandate, the Panel reported
cases of the sale, supply or transfer of arms and related
equipment and reported regional efforts to halt the
deterioration of the situation and the macroeconomic
conditions in South Sudan.

The Group of Experts makes four recommendations
in its final report. It recommends that the Security
Council impose an arms embargo on South Sudan. It
also recommends that the Council should send a letter
to the President of the Human Rights Council and to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
requesting that the Commission receive the full legal
and forensic support necessary to execute effectively
its mandate to collect, preserve and analyse evidence of
human rights violations and violations of international
humanitarian law. Since these two recommendations
are addressed to the Security Council, the Committee
has taken no decision in their respect.

With regard to the other two recommendations of
the Panel of Experts, the Committee decided to take
note of the recommendation that it consider listing
other individuals and entities on the list. Finally,
in accordance with the last recommendation, the
Committee decided to consider the possibility that
Ambassador Seck, in his capacity as Chair, write to the
States members of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to reiterate their obligation to enforce the
travel ban and asset freeze established under resolution
2206 (2015) and extended under resolution 2290 (2016).
Draft letters were circulated to the members of the
Committee under a tacit approval procedure which
expires on that date.

I would also like to brief Council members on
the work done by the Committee since the Chair
addressed them on 17 November 2016. The Chair
had the opportunity to visit South Sudan, Ethiopia,
Uganda and the Sudan from 10 to 19 December 2016.
He was accompanied by representatives of France and
the United Kingdom who sit on the Committee, and
members of the Panel of Experts. On that occasion,
the Chair was privileged to hear directly from many
stakeholders on the ground, as they expressed differing
opinions about the situation in South Sudan. He was
also able to see the extent to which sanctions have been
enforced in the country and region. When he returned
from his visit, he circulated a detailed report to his
colleagues on the Committee for their consideration
during consultations on 18 January.

On 21 March, the Committee held consultations
at which the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children in Armed Conflict,
Leila Zerrougui, and former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Zainab Hawa Bangura, made presentations.
Ms. Zerrougui noted, among other things, that
security conditions in South Sudan had continued to
deteriorate, thereby exacerbating a situation that leads
to the perpetration of gross violations against children,
including in particular, the recruitment and tremendous
exploitation of children; the targeting of civilians,
including children on the basis of their ethnicity,
involving murder, abduction, illegal detention, rape,
sexual violence; the torching ofvillages; looting and the
denial of access to humanitarian assistance. Famine has
also exacerbated the situation. It is estimated that more
than 1 million children suffer from acute malnutrition
and that there are in excess of 250,000 cases of severe
malnutrition. Ms. Zerrougui underscored that the
perpetrators of serious violations against children
must be held to account for their actions. If that is not
done, it will given them the green light to commit other
barbaric acts.

Ms. Bangura, along with Ms. Zerrougui, stated
that after three years of conflict, the situation in South
Sudan remained just as disastrous and impunity just
as pervasive. She underscored that rape, gang rape
and other acts of sexual violence continued to be
committed in an environment of impunity. She pointed
out that the Committee had an important role to play,
such as punishing the perpetrators of sexual violence
by genuinely adopting targeted measures against those
in high-ranking positions. There must be consequences
for committing acts of sexual violence or giving orders
for such acts to be committed; if not, such crimes
will persist.
