Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Since the beginning
of this year, we have witnessed quite a number of
important new developments in the Council's working
methods and procedures, the most important of which
is the tendency towards the increased participation of
non-members of the Council in the discussions of this
body. Let me recall one of the latest events in support
of this assertion: the meetings of the Council with the
participation of the members of the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Agreement, held on 15 and
16 June. I would like to emphasize that this was the
first time in the history of the United Nations that the
Security Council had at its table representatives of
rebel movements, who participated in the Council's
discussions.

As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, Ukraine attaches particular significance to this
important tendency. I am deeply convinced that the
Security Council as a whole derives considerable
benefits from this tendency, which enhances its actual
influence on the situation on the ground. In this regard,
my delegation sees an inconsistency between this
tendency and the request for a vote on the participation
in the Council's meeting of the representative of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

First of all, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
remains a participant in the peace process in the
Balkans. It is a signatory to the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement. It is a host country of the international
presence in Kosovo. It is a party to the settlement of
the Prevlaka dispute. We believe this provides
sufficient grounds to allow this country to participate
in the discussion of the Security Council on the
situation in the Balkans as a whole.

Furthermore, I must recall the important
provisions of Article 32 of the Charter of the United
Nations, under which any State that is a party to a
dispute under consideration by the Security Council
has to be invited to participate in the discussion
relating to the dispute. It is impossible to deny that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia de facto remains a
party to every track of the peace process in the
Balkans.

Since September 1992, the Security Council has
adopted a special form of invitation when faced with a
request for participation from the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. According to that formula, the President of
the Council - in response to a written request from the
representative ofthe Federal Republic of Yugoslavia -
invites that representative by name to address the
Council in the course of the discussion of the item
before it. At the current stage, we do not see any
grounds to abandon this practice, which has been in
existence for nearly eight years.

These are the reasons why my delegation will
vote in favour of the participation of Mr. Jovanovie in
today's open meeting ofthe Security Council.

Finally, I would like to place on the record that
this position of Ukraine is without any prejudice to the
status of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

