Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): First of all, I wish to associate
myself fully with the statement that the Permanent
Representative of Spain is about to make on behalf of the
European Union. I wish to add some comments to that
statement.

For four long years Italy has anxiously followed the
protraction of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a
country to which we are close geographically and with
which we have close historical and cultural ties of long
standing.

The images of that conflict, particularly of the
suffering of the civilian population, have left a profound
impression on the conscience of the Italian people and of
the whole international community. It was therefore with
feelings of deep satisfaction and relief that we learned
yesterday that a Peace Agreement had been initialled in
Dayton. This is a historic event, and we wish to express
our gratitude to those who worked to promote it,
particularly the United States Government and
Mr. Holbrooke personally, whose extraordinary diplomatic
skills played such an important part.

 

Now we must take advantage of this crucial
development to consolidate the prospects for peace. We
must not lose the momentum gained in Dayton. We believe
that the Peace Agreement should be quickly signed in Paris
and that the upcoming London Conference can help to
create the basis for the economic reconstruction of the
former Yugoslavia. In fact, Italy feels that economic
rehabilitation and development are essential components of
the general process of pacification and reconciliation, a
process that will necessarily be long and complex, given the
deep wounds left by the conflict. Italy, which convened a
meeting in Rome last October to discuss this subject, is
ready to make a significant contribution for this purpose,
together with its partners in the European Union.

Italy is one of the sponsors of the two resolutions
adopted today by the Security Council. They are closely
tied to the Agreement signed in Dayton yesterday, and they
must be viewed in that perspective. The resolution on the
arms embargo against the former Yugoslavia provides for
a phased lifting of the embargo. For us, what is particularly
important is its linkage with the Agreement on Regional
Stabilization, reached by the parties in Dayton and included
in the Peace Agreement as Annex 1B. This is an essential
instrument for preventing the lifting of the embargo from
turning into a new arms race, which would inevitably
threaten to rekindle a conflict that has finally ended.

The resolution to suspend sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is an important step towards full
reintegration of that country into the family of nations. In
recent months, particularly during the past weeks in Dayton,
the Belgrade Government has made an important
contribution to the positive outcome of the negotiating
process. Today's resolution recognizes this positive role and
encourages Yugoslavia to continue in this direction.

As for the Bosnian Serbs, the suspension of sanctions
against them is made dependant on the withdrawal of their
forces behind the zone of separation established in the
Peace Agreement. Moreover, the termination of sanctions
depends on the holding of free and fair elections - an
important provision, since it points to the full restoration of
democratic rule at a crucial moment in the implementation
of the Peace Agreement.

I wish to emphasize the importance of urging the
successor States of the former Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to reach an agreement on the problem of
succession to that State, including the distribution of its
funds and assets and the allocation of its liabilities. Only an
agreement of this kind can allow, among other things, a
final and satisfactory solution to the question of the
frozen funds and assets of the former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

I wish to conclude by emphasizing the importance of
firm respect for human rights throughout the former
Yugoslavia. This is an absolute condition for a full
normalization of the situation in a region so close to us.
In this context, my country strongly appeals to all the
parties affected by today's resolutions to collaborate with
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia,
whose activity we consider indispensable to healing the
wounds of the past.

