Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU). The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, and the EFTA country Liechtenstein
align themselves with this statement.

I would like to congratulate Chile on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council.

I will read out a shortened version of our statement.
The full version is being circulated in the Chamber and
will be posted on our website.

The European Union is deeply concerned about the
tense situation on the ground, which threatens to take
the parties further away from a negotiated solution. The
decision of the Israeli Government to halt the transfer
of tax revenues to the Palestinian Authority runs
counter to Israel's obligations under the Paris Protocol.
An effective Palestinian Authority that is committed to
non-violence and a peaceful resolution of the conflict is
a key element for a two-State solution.

In that regard, the European Union is providing
considerable support, including financial assistance, to
Palestinian State-building efforts. Those achievements
should not be put at risk by not meeting obligations
regarding the timely and transparent transfer of tax and
custom revenues.

It is a well-known and long-standing fact that the
European Union supports the United Nations system and
the widest application of its multilateral conventions.
An effective system of international criminal justice is
based on the broadest possible participation in the Rome
Statute, and the European Union remains committed to
promoting its universality. On 2 January 2015, Palestine
deposited instruments of accession to the Rome Statute,
which was welcomed by the President of the Assembly
of States Parties to the Rome Statute on 7 January.

The European Union calls again on the Palestinian
leadership to use its international status constructively
and not to weaken efforts by partners to bring the
parties back to the negotiating table.

The European Union deeply deplores and strongly
opposes the announced expropriation of land near
Bethlehem, the implementation and announcements
of plans for new settlement construction, notably in
East Jerusalem, the plans to displace Bedouins in the
West Bank and the continued demolitions, including
of projects funded by the EU and its member States.
We urge Israel to reverse those decisions, which run
counter to international law and directly threaten the
two-State solution. Recent settlement activity in East
Jerusalem seriously jeopardizes the possibility of
Jerusalem serving as the future capital of both States.

The European Union renews its call for both parties
to resume negotiations towards a peace settlement and
to refrain from any actions undermining the viability
of a two-State solution or the prospects ofa resumption
of negotiations. Actions that call into question stated
commitments to a negotiated solution must be avoided.

The European Union also urges both sides to renew
their commitment to the two-State solution and to
build the trust needed for meaningful direct talks. We
are committed to promoting and supporting efforts to
achieve a lasting peace based on the two-State vision,
together with international partners, including in the
region.

The European Union underlines its concern at the
dire humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, which
still remains to be adequately addressed. It welcomes
the international community's pledges towards the
reconstruction of Gaza and calls upon countries to
swiftly honour them. The European Union urges the
parties to fully implement the temporary monitoring
mechanism as an important step towards the necessary
urgent opening of all crossing points. Obstacles to the
effective functioning of the temporary mechanism
must be removed quickly. The alleviation of the grave
humanitarian situation of the people in Gaza must be
given absolute priority.

The European Union notes with grave concern
the inflammatory statements made by Hamas and its
attempts to rearm. The disarmament of all militant
groups in Gaza and the assumption of full Government
functions by the Palestinian Authority are critical
for a lasting improvement of the situation in Gaza.
We reiterate our call for a fundamental change of the
political, security and economic situation in the Strip,
including the end of the closure.

The parties should urgently make progress towards
a durable ceasefire, based on their August agreement
in Cairo, to reach an agreement that ends the closure
and addresses Israel's legitimate security concerns. We
stand ready to play a key role in international efforts
to support a durable ceasefire, including through the
rapid reactivation and possible extension in scope and
mandate of the EU Border Assistance Mission in Rafah
and the EU Coordinating Office for Palestinian Police
Support missions. The European Union urges all the
relevant parties to create the conditions to allow it to
play such a role. We also urge all Palestinian factions to
end internal divisions.

The unsustainable situation in Gaza, the recent
violence in Jerusalem and the deteriorating regional
context underline the need for a comprehensive
peace, ending all claims and fulfilling the legitimate
aspirations of both parties, including those of Israelis
for security and those of Palestinians for statehood.
The European Union calls on the parties and on all
major stakeholders - including the Quartet, the
League of Arab States and the Security Council - to
take the necessary steps to that end. In this regard,
the EU reaffirms its strategic interest in seeing an end
to the conflict and is willing to play a major role and
actively contribute to the immediate resumption of
negotiations aimed at achieving a negotiated solution
of all final-status issues without further delay. It recalls
its parameters agreed in the July 2014 EU Council
conclusions.

The European Union remains gravely concerned
regarding the continued deterioration of the
humanitarian and security situation in Syria. The EU
is committed to fully supporting the Special Envoy De
Mistura's efforts to achieve a strategic de-escalation of
violence as a basis for a broader sustainable political
process. We stand ready to support concretely the
development of his proposals.

A reduction of violence will not be achieved
without effective monitoring, preferably anchored in the
Security Council. Cases of forced surrender imposed
by the Al-Assad regime through starvation sieges
have been labelled fallaciously as local ceasefires in
the past. We are seriously concerned at the intensified
military action by the Al-Assad regime against areas
held by the opposition, which threatens Special Envoy
De Mistura's initiative. We will seek ways to provide
practical support for his efforts, notably by contributing
to the revival of local governance and administration,
to the restoration of basic services, and to the return to
normalcy in areas of reduced violence, in particular in
Aleppo, as conditions allow.

The overall objective remains an inclusive and
Syrian-led political process leading to a transition
that meets the legitimate aspirations of all the Syrian
people, based on the Geneva communique of 30 June
2012 (S/2012/522, annex)and in line with relevant
Security Council resolutions. We call on all Syrian
parties to show clear and concrete commitment to this
process, and to ensure the involvement of civil society
and women. We are ready to engage with all regional
and international actors with influence over the
Syrian parties, and call on them to use their influence
constructively towards this end.

The European Union recalls that the moderate
opposition, including the National Coalition of Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, is a vital element
of both a future political settlement and in fighting the
extremist groups on the ground in Syria. We encourage
internal and external opposition groups alike to unite
behind a common strategy in order to present an
alternative to the Syrian people. We will seek ways
to enhance our political and practical support to the
moderate opposition.

We condemn the continued widespread and
systematic violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law perpetrated in Syria,
in particular by the Al-Assad regime and terrorist
groups, as reported by the Commission of Inquiry. The
EU recalls in this regard that some of the violations
and abuses committed in Syria may amount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity. We will spare
no effort to ensure that all perpetrators of such acts
are held accountable, and we reiterate our call on the
Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.

The EU urges the Al-Assad regime to fully implement
resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention, and to take the measures necessary to
eliminate its chemical weapons programme completely
and irreversibly. We condemn the use of chlorine gas as
a chemical weapon by the Al-Assad regime, which is a
clear breach of the Chemical Weapons Convention and
of resolution 2118 (2013).

The EU urges all parties to fully and immediately
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. We condemn the continuing and
new impediments to the delivery of aid, for which the
Al-Assad regime bears the primary responsibility. We
urge all parties, in particular the Syrian authorities,
to fully and immediately implement all the provisions
of resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014) and presidential statement S/PRST/2013/15 of
2 October 2013. We also encourage the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners
to use border crossings as effectively as possible and
to scale-up, to the extent possible, the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to all people in need in Syria,
in particular in hard-to-reach and besieged areas.

The European Union and its member States
continue to play a leading role in the provision of
humanitarian aid in response to the crisis, having
mobilized so far €3 billion. We will sustain our efforts
to provide humanitarian aid to the people affected
by the crisis and to build their resilience. We were
seriously concerned about the severe lack of funding
for the United Nations appeals for 2014, and call on
the international community to step up its funding and
assistance in view of the winter and in response to the
forthcoming 2015 appeals.

The European Union commends the considerable
efforts of Lebanon and Jordan, as well as Turkey, in
sheltering refugees from Syria. We will spare no
effort to continue to help them. The European Union
remains fully aware of the immense security challenges
that the crisis in Syria poses to Lebanon and Jordan
in particular. We reiterate our commitment to seeking
ways to further enhance this support to both countries
to meet those challenges.

