The President: I thank Ms. Sunday for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom.

As we sit safely in the Council Chamber, villages
in South Sudan are being raided, plundered and set
ablaze. Thousands of men, women and children are
being driven from their homes, separated from their
families and forced to endure terror and hunger as they
seek safety in squalid camps. The toll of suffering in
South Sudan has grown inexorably. At the close of
2015, some 2 million people had been displaced. Today,
that figure has risen to 3 million, almost half of whom
are refugees in neighbouring countries, including up to
1 million in Uganda.

Last month alone, the brutal cycle of raiding,
retaliation and counter-retaliation compelled another
80,000 people to flee and, most telling of all, famine
has been declared in areas of former Unity State - the
first famine in the world in six years. Any visitor to
that region of South Sudan will know that its green and
fertile plains are watered by the tributaries of the White
Nile. Nature and geography therefore cannot explain
why famine has struck. Only the avarice and folly of
human beings are to blame. I am reminded of the words
of the hymn by Bishop Heber: "Though every prospect
pleases only man is vile". We should be in no doubt
that famine could blight other areas if the fighting does
not stop. Against that background, no member of the
Security Council can escape the responsibility to renew
our efforts to restore peace in South Sudan.

Today, and each day afterwards, we must
demonstrate the unity of the Council over what needs
to be done. The peace accord of 2015 must be revived
in order to deliver a genuine political process that
embraces all people of South Sudan and begin the task
of reconciliation and healing. There are three key steps
to achieving that. First, there can be no real dialogue as
long as South Sudan is ravaged by fighting. All parties
must respect an immediate cessation of hostilities. As
President, Salva Kiir is responsible for taking the first
step and others must follow.

Secondly, there must be impartial leadership of the
effort to revive the political process. Lastly, any talks
will bring long-term peace only if all South Sudanese
are represented. That means including not only the
opposing forces but also other armed groups, political
parties, displaced people, refugees, young people and
women. President Konare, the High Representative
of the African Union (AU) for South Sudan, Prime
Minister Hailemariam Dessalegn, Chairman of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
and Secretary-General Antonio Guterres have resolved
to drive the process forward together. I also welcome
President Mogae, Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, responsible for enforcing the
implementation of the peace agreement.

We in the Security Council must demonstrate
our wholehearted support for their efforts, and those
responsible for atrocities must be brought to account
through the establishment of a hybrid court. Given the
scale of the suffering, all of the opposing forces have
a special responsibility to enable the delivery of aid
wherever it is required, anywhere in the country. I am
deeply concerned about the reports that the Government
of South Sudan has denied its own citizens the help
they so desperately need by blocking humanitarian
deliveries, including in Unity State, where famine has
struck. We should all make clear that denying food
to the starving is simply unconscionable; nor can we
accept a situation in which the Government or any
armed group obstructs aid agencies in their efforts to
deliver emergency supplies or United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) in its efforts to protect
civilians. We should also spell out with unity, clarity
and conviction the progress that we expect from the
Government. We must back that up by resolving that the
Council will consider alternative measures, including
an arms embargo and targeted sanctions on individuals,
if that progress fails to materialize.

The United Kingdom remains convinced that an
arms embargo would serve to protect ordinary South
Sudanese from the worst excesses of military power,
and on a future occasion we will ask the Council to
reconsider that measure. Our strength of feeling arises
partly from Britain's profound ties of history and
friendship with the people of South Sudan. We were a
guarantor of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement of
2005, which paved the way for South Sudan to achieve
independence. The United Kingdom was a witness to
the peace accord of 2015 that sought, unavailingly, to
end the current conflict. We are now the second biggest
bilateral donor to South Sudan and we are strengthening
UNMISS peacekeeping by deploying almost 400
British military engineers, medics and a field hospital.

The Council is aware that more than 200,000
civilians have taken shelter inside United Nations sites
across South Sudan, unable to leave those barbed-wire
confines lest they be murdered for no other reason than
their ethnicity. Day after day, UNMISS tries to protect
those civilians, and I know that British peacekeepers
will help UNMISS fulfil that task. But South Sudan's
people should not have to rely on outside protection.
And if our efforts falter, the Council should be in no
doubt that South Sudan's tragedy could become even
worse. There is an urgent need for collective action,
particularly by neighbouring countries, who are already
hosting 1.4 million refugees. As Ms. Sunday has just
told the Council, the innocent and the most vulnerable
are enduring the greatest suffering in this war.

We are all here today because we have an obligation
to act, and we cannot leave this meeting believing that
our work is done. We should acknowledge that a terrible
failure of political leadership lies behind the bloodshed.
At every level we must therefore place pressure on the

leaders of South Sudan, both in Government and in
opposition, to act in the best interests of their people.
We - the Security Council, the United Nations,
IGAD and the AU - must help the South Sudanese to
come together and agree on a common vision for their
country's future. And we should all stand ready to make
that vision a reality.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

