Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia): The Azerbaijani
statement came as no surprise to my delegation.
However, I will not engage in long polemics with the
representative of our neighbouring State. The situation
prevailing today was created by Azerbaijan, which two
decades ago attempted to resolve the Nagorny
Karabakh conflict by military force, obviously with
unexpected consequences for itself. My delegation has
had a number of opportunities in the past to provide
conclusive information on the Nagorny Karabakh
problem, and we do not think it would be appropriate
to repeat our arguments here once again. However, I
deem it necessary to reiterate that the Armenian side
strongly believes that the fundamental resolution of the
problem must be achieved on the basis of a
comprehensive political settlement, taking into account
the right of people to self-determination and a security
guarantee for the people and population of Nagorny
Karabakh.

I join my colleagues in thanking the Secretary-
General for providing us with his in-depth analysis of
the international mediation practices of the United
Nations. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his concise and thorough
presentation of the report (S/2009/l89), which deals
with an issue with which he is very familiar from his
personal professional experience in the South
Caucasus.

Despite the efforts of international community,
inter- and intra-State conflicts are still threatening
peace and security in different parts of the world. The
United Nations Charter requires Member States to
settle their disputes by peaceful means. There is no
doubt that, among the various instruments the Charter
offers to that end, mediation has proven to be the most
promising one.

Undoubtedly, the success of any mediation is
critically dependent on the selection of mediators,
mechanisms for bringing the positions of the
conflicting parties into alignment, and instruments to
implement the agreed decisions.

Without questioning the importance of the United
Nations in that regard, I concur with those of my
colleagues who have stressed the key role of regional
organizations as the most appropriate mediators.
Shortly after the creation of the United Nations,
international developments led to the formation of
various regional initiatives and organizations. It
became obvious that the international community
needed a number of organizations to address the
challenges arising in different regions. These
organizations have been extremely instrumental in
handling regional problems and mediating the
settlement of disputes.

Among them, the largest regional security
organization in the world - the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe - holds a special
place. It operates on the basis of the fundamental
principle of consensus, which distinguishes favourably
it from other international forums. We strongly believe
that only consensus among the concerned parties can
lead to a genuine compromise and guarantee a lasting
and durable solution to disputes. We maintain that only
after that regional organization has brokered a political
settlement through its mandated representatives should
the United Nations, with its well-established
mechanisms, resources and expertise, lead the
implementation process to ensure the successful
fulfilment of the agreements reached.
If that does not occur, one should not be surprised
when attempts to impose conflict settlement formulas
from the existing negotiation format through decisions
taken by a simple majority of votes not only prove
ineffective, but may jeopardize a fragile peace and
ongoing talks.

The next important issue to which I would like to
call the Council's attention is confidence-building
policies and the essential role that mediators can play
in this regard. It is widely recognized that, regardless
of the format and mechanisms of international
mediation, agreements reached hardly have a chance to
be successfully implemented without a proper level of
trust and confidence among the conflicting parties.
Regrettably, despite its importance, this issue does not
receive due attention in the report.

In conclusion, the Armenian delegation expresses
its appreciation to the Mexican presidency for
organizing this open debate. It gave us an opportunity
to present our views on the important issue of
mediation and settlement of disputes, and we hope that
our positions will be duly considered on relevant
occasions.

