Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Let me, first of all, welcome the presence of Foreign
Minister Carrera at the Council's meeting this morning.
We thank the Secretary-General, Executive Director
Fedotov and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Djinnit for their instructive and helpful
presentations this morning. The statistics and patterns
they highlighted demonstrate the urgency of the issue.
The Sahel and West Africas region is emerging as a hub
and corridor for trafficking in hard drugs, as well as
a transit and production point for synthetic drugs. We
join the international community in expressing alarm
over this troubling development.

Drug trafficking in the region has tended to target
countries with porous borders, fragile institutions, weak
justice and security apparatuses and limited resources.
It has, in turn, contributed to the violent unrest and
instability the region has seen over the past year. When
left unchecked, drug traffickers may link up with other
illicit networks and, in the most extreme cases, share
trade routes, and possibly profits, with rebel groups and
violent extremists.

Not only do drug trafficking networks undermine
development and security, they also erode confidence
in justice and Government institutions. When corrupt
leaders profit and traffickers act with impunity,
populations lose confidence in the rule of law, illicit
economies flourish and accountable and responsive
governance is further eroded. We have seen that in
Guinea-Bissau, where drug trafficking has been both a
cause and consequence of poor governance.

The destabilizing effects of illicit flows are
compounded as Governments must now also grapple
with the social and policy challenges presented by
increased domestic drug use. Illicit trafficking is
correlated with higher school dropout rates, increased
violence and criminal behaviour, lost workforce
productivity and diminished human capital.

In spite of those growing challenges, we strongly
encourage regional institutions to face those issues
head-on and we welcome the extension of the Economic
Community of West African States in 2013 of its
regional action plan to support the work of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the
United Nations Office for West Africa and committed
Governments. We join the international community
in emphasizing the importance of regional solutions,
which, like the problems themselves, must cross
borders, cultures, languages and economic systems.

Over the past year, we have seen an increase
in regional conferences, commissions, agreements
and policies aimed at tackling narcotics trafficking
and consumption. Now is the time to translate the
agreements and policies into action. The United
Nations has a crucial role to play, particularly on border
security, as the international community partners with
regional Governments to develop the tools to combat
drug trafficking and its negative impacts in the Sahel
and West Africa.

The United States has committed significant
resources to address drug trafficking and its effects in
the region, and will launch new programmes in Mali
and in Chad in the coming year. Our programmes
support current efforts to counter drug trafficking,
respond to drug use, increase public awareness and
strengthen the rule of law. For example, the United
States has helped to develop the training curriculum
and the investigative capacity of the Nigerian national
drug and law enforcement agency. In October, the
agency burned over 7,249 kilogrammes of illicit drugs
that it had seized.

The United States has also been working with the
Governments of Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia and Nigeria to
develop a professional substance-abuse system that
includes a certification board and licensing process
and implements evidence-based treatment programmes
that respect human rights. In Benin, the United States
will soon launch programmes to address corruption,
strengthen the rule of law and raise awareness of issues
related to transnational organized crime. We have
also provided approximately $2.5 million to UNODC
in support of the West Africa Coast Initiative, which
addresses border and corruption issues throughout the
region.

Since the Security Council first considered the
threat that drug trafficking poses to international peace
and security, in 2009 (see S/PV.6233), much progress
has been made in the global fight against drugs. We
look forward to continuing and extending that global
work in the Council and to continuing our focus on the
Sahel and West Africa regions to bolster the capacity
of Governments and institutions to disrupt transit
corridors and deny traffickers the space to operate.

Finally, as this is the last scheduled formal Council
meeting in 2013, let me say, on behalf of the United
States, that it has been an honour and privilege to work
with the delegations of the five departing members of
the Council, over the past two years.

