Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Let me first thank you,
Madam President, for convening this public meeting,
which gives both the Security Council members and
the general membership the opportunity to discuss the
overall situation in Angola. My delegation is grateful
to His Excellency Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda,
Minister of External Relations of the Republic of
Angola, for his very important statement. My
delegation also thanks Ambassador Gambari, Special
Adviser on Africa, for his comprehensive briefing on
this issue. We commend him for his effort to find ways
and means to help the peace process in Angola.

Over recent months, there has been an increase in
terrorist attacks perpetrated by UNITA against innocent
civilians in Angola. Mr. Savimbi and UNITA go on
defying the international community and they continue
their systematic acts of violence against the defenceless
civilian population and Angola's economic and social
infrastructure. It is indeed time for the Council to
declare Mr. Jonas Savimbi a war criminal, in line with
what has been decided by the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC). There is no doubt that the
primary responsibility for the ongoing violence in
Angola lies squarely with Mr. Savimbi and UNITA and
their refusal to implement the Lusaka Protocol. My
delegation would like once again to reiterate that the
Lusaka Protocol remains the only viable basis for the
resolution of the conflict in Angola.
It is imperative for UNITA to abide by the
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol. Taking into account
the present extent of violence in Angola, one can
imagine what the situation would have been had the
Security Council not imposed sanctions against
UNITA. These sanctions have to a great extent
disrupted the activities of the rebel group. They have
substantially reduced UNITA's capacity to wage a
conventional war. This Council should remain focused.
It should maintain and even increase the pressure
against UNITA. The sanctions should be not only
closely monitored, but also tightened. We should keep
in mind that UNITA would not hesitate to derive
maximum benefit should there be any lapse on the part
of the Security Council to pursue the sanctions regime.
For my delegation, it is clear that the Monitoring
Mechanism has greatly contributed to improving the
effectiveness of the implementation of measures
against UNITA.

It is extremely important for Member States to
ensure strict compliance with Security Council
resolutions 1173 (1998) and 1127 (1997). It is
unacceptable that some countries have failed to
cooperate with the Monitoring Mechanism in the
implementation of resolution 1173 (1998). We are
deeply concerned over the findings of the Monitoring
Mechanism that huge quantities of diamonds
originating in Angola vanished into thin air after
leaving the country, and that not a single diamond
dealer has claimed to have witnessed Angolan gems
being traded on any diamond bourse. This illicit trade
in Angola is directly helping UNITA sustain its
activities.

We welcome the positive steps taken by some
Governments in implementing Security Council
resolution 1127 (1997). We do not share the view that
the resolution is incompatible with some regional
treaties, and we call on the concerned countries to take
the necessary steps to ensure its effective
implementation. We welcome the circulation of the
most recent list of senior UNITA officials and
immediate adult family members, and urge all Member
States to ensure that these people are refused entry into
their territories. It is important that this list be regularly
updated, to keep the pressure on UNITA.

The financial network of UNITA is another aspect
that deserves the utmost attention. As long as UNITA
continues to obtain financial support, it will persist in
its efforts to destabilize Angola. We take note that the
sanctions Committee and the Monitoring Mechanism
have already initiated work to identify the financial
network of UNITA. We need to pursue our efforts to
target the financial network. The funds of the UNITA
membership must be tracked and, should it become
necessary to lift the veil that hides its financial
transactions, the international community must take all
measures to stem the source of funding to UNITA.

In our region, SADC countries are fully engaged
in ensuring the implementation of the sanctions against
UNITA. At the SADC Summit held in Blantyre,
Malawi, in August 2001, SADC approved concrete
measures in response to Security Council sanctions
against UNITA. These measures target illegal flights
across SADC national borders, the certification system
for trade in rough diamonds and the supply of
petroleum products to UNITA. SADC has also taken
the decision to compile and submit a full report on how
its members are implementing the recommendations of
Security Council resolution 1295 (2000). The Council
should appeal to the international community to help
the countries of the region in capacity-building aimed
at fully implementing the sanctions against UNITA.

The Government of Angola deserves all our
encouragement for its efforts to achieve national
reconciliation. The United Nations should support
efforts of the Government to hold free and fair
elections when the conditions so permit. We commend
its four-point agenda and call on UNITA to cease
violence and enter into serious dialogue with the
Government. Both Mr. Savimbi and UNITA must
understand that there is no justification for their
criminal acts and that the only way forward is through
dialogue.

We also welcome the engagement of civil society
in the search for peace in Angola. The Council must
express its full support for the contribution of civil
society in this regard. My delegation is deeply
concerned about the large number of internally
displaced persons resulting from the terrorist attacks by
UNITA and the resulting humanitarian situation. We
call upon the international community to help these
internally displaced persons by providing them with
appropriate humanitarian assistance and to facilitate the
efforts of the Angolan Government in addressing this
problem.

It would remiss of me ifI did not place on record
the contribution of the United Nations Office in Angola
in the search for a solution to the Angolan conflict. My
delegation would like to express it full support to
Ambassador Gambari for his mission to Angola and for
the consultations he will be undertaking with the
stakeholders. We look forward to hearing from him on
his return.

