Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General
for the report (see S/2016/510) presented to the Security
Council on his behalf and on behalf of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous for his briefing. We reiterate that we
will continue our full cooperation.

I would also like to express my sincere condolences
to the Governments and the peoples of the United States
and France for the terrorist attacks that happened in
both countries recently. We condemn terrorism in all
its forms. In that context, it gives us great pleasure
to convey to Council members who are following-up
that we will cooperate fully to defeat terrorism and
eradicate its threat, side by side with the international
community and the individual countries concerned.
That is know to everyone.

The reality on the ground in Darfur does not
conform with some of the contents of the report. The
best proof is the work of the Joint Working Group on
an exit strategy for UNAMID, which met on 24 May.
That tripartite Group, made up of the Government of
the Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations,
visited Darfur to assess the situation. The mission
travelled to all five states and met with representatives
of the Governments, the displaced, the local authorities
and the commanders of UNAMID.

In the report that was issued following its visit to
Darfur, the Joint Working Group attested to the great
improvement in the security situation following the
success of the Sudanese military forces in defeating
the rebel movements and eradicating them from all the
states of Darfur, with the exception of one region in
western Jebel Marra. The report of the Joint Working
Group also confirms the great effort made by the
governors of all five Darfur states to provide security
and prevent inter-communal disputes. That had great
impact on decreasing the number of inter-communal
conflicts and limiting their consequences, especially
those occurring during the reporting period.
Thanks to the improved security situation, a huge
increase was seen in voluntary returns of the displaced
to their original villages. Statistics of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs show that
more than 400,000 displaced persons have returned
voluntarily and are benefiting from the security and
basic services available for the returnees in villages set
up by the brotherly State of Qatar and the League of
Arab States and in line with the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur.

In addition, the Government of the Sudan has
started implementing a plan to address the situation of
the displaced in the camps and to take all the measures
necessary for their voluntary return, or for transforming
the camps and the necessary resources for those who
want to remain.

Moreover, I would like to inform the Council that,
during his short visit to New York last week, the Sudanese
Minister for Foreign Affairs held a number of meetings
with the Secretary-General and various persons
interested in the situation in Darfur, during which he
referred to the full engagement of the Government of
the Sudan with the United Nations, UNAMID and all
other actors in ensuring a comprehensive response to
all the needs and demands of UNAMID and continue
working together to respond to such requests, inter
alia, involving visas, containers, customs duties and all
other measures that we have addressed so far.

The administrative referendum in Darfur
represented an important historical juncture with
regard to the legal requirements set out in the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, which set the proper
basis to bring about peace and security in Darfur. We
hope that the Council will adopt a supportive stance in
view of those results. As witnessed by the entire world,
the referendum took place in a conducive political
and security environment that enabled the citizens of
Darfur to exercise their right to register and to vote,
thereby choosing the administrative formula they
desire to govern Darfur. The process was conducted
completely peacefully without a single security
incident reported. That is yet further clear proof of the
sustained improvement of the political and security
situation there.

The Government of the Sudan has reiterated time
and again that the establishment of UNAMID was
the result of an agreement with the Government of
the Sudan. A stipulation was made that the mission
would consist mostly of African personnel to assist
in maintaining peace and security in the Sudan. After
almost a decade, we find that the need for UNAMID no
longer exists in many parts of Darfur, as attested to by
UNAMID commanders and forces. In that connection,
I would like to refer the Council to the report of the
Joint Working Group that was submitted to the strategic
tripartite mechanism following its members' visit to
Darfur in May. That proves the success of the African
UNAMID force, which has achieved its objective by
providing peace and stability.

Moreover, the Government of the Sudan calls
for a drawing down of UNAMID forces in the areas
where they are no longer needed - of which there are
many. The starting point would be the areas agreed
upon by all parties in West, South and North Darfur
states. Such a drawdown could serve as a starting point
in the implementation of the exit strategy gradually
and smoothly, in phases. Following that, the duties of
UNAMID would be transferred to the United Nations
country team to implement the development projects to
promote stability and peace in Darfur.

The Government of the Sudan has spared no effort in
attempting to bring about comprehensive lasting peace
throughout the country, thereby avoiding the scepter of
war and conflict. In that context, the national dialogue
initiative, launched by the President of the Republic
last October, continued its meetings over more than
three months and covered various issues. The different
committees undertook their work in free and open
settings, and then submitted their recommendations
to the General Assembly for discussion. They are now
awaiting their adoption and the start of implementation.

We are also providing the opportunity and the time
for those who have abstained from joining the process.
We hope that they willjoin soon so that we can complete
the road map for building our nation on the basis of
consensus and unanimity, while rejecting division.
Accordingly, I hope that the international community,
foremost the Security Council, will bring pressure to
bear on those who have abstained from participating so
that they join the national dialogue, as well as to impose
sanctions on all of those who have hindered the process
or attacked UNAMID forces, as was the case involving
the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction on
1 January, during which it attacked UNAMID forces
with heavy weapons near Kutum, as described in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2016/268) on UNAMID
published on 22 March, which the Council considered
on 6 April (see S/PV.7666).

In cooperation with the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel, the Government of the
Sudan attempted to reach a peace agreement with
the opposition forces and the armed movements. The
Government therefore signed the road map presented
by the tripartite mechanism. However, the refusal
and intransigence of the other party portend further
violations and impediments to the peace process. The
Council must take a clear position aimed at returning the
opposition and the other remaining armed movements
to the negotiating table by accepting the road map as a
basis for the settling of all issues.

I see no alternative to giving full cognizance to the
fact that Darfur today is free from all organized armed
movements, as accurately defined in the 1977 Protocol
II additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
That fact has been recognized by the joint meetings
involving the Government of the Sudan and the African

Union, on the one hand, and the United Nations, on the
other. Therefore, we must now allow any disassociation
between the verified facts recognized in such joint
meetings, as proved on the ground in Darfur, and
the decision to be taken in a few days by the Council
on UNAMID. We therefore call upon the Council
to recognize the great progress achieved after the
resumption of the Joint Working Group meeting on an
UNAMID exit strategy - a group that bases its work
primarily on resolution 1769 (2007), which established
the mission in 2007.

To conclude, I would like to stress the unequivocal
determination and readiness of my Government to
cooperate and coordinate with UNAMID and all of its
entities to enable the mission to fully undertake and
implement its mandate. It is worth mentioning that
the statistices included in the report of the Secretary-
General, although contested, bear out such cooperation
and the progress made with respect to the situation,
particularly regarding the return of displaced persons.
Ifissues remain in other areas, such as customs or other
matters, it has nothing to do with any premeditated
intention. We have demonstrated to the Council several
times and with statistics the volume of that great
cooperation.

