Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): We would like to join
previous speakers in offering our condolences on the
tragedy that took place in Somalia today. Armenia
condemns the massive attack on the United Nations
compound in Mogadishu, which resulted in dozens
of casualties among the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia staff and security personnel. Our
prayers go out to the families of the victims, the United
Nations and the Government of Somalia.

I wish to express my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate
and thank the Deputy Secretary-General, as well as the
World Bank Managing Director and the Chair of the
Africa Progress Panel, for their contributions.

United Nations bodies and the Security Council in
particular are uniquely placed to promote global policy
development so as to address the linkages between
natural resources and conflict. Along with other
development partners, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, the Council can effectively contribute to
the post-conflict peacebuilding efforts to integrate the
peace and development agenda in the context of the
governance and management of natural resources.

The role of natural resources in fuelling conflicts
and prolonging their political resolution is being
increasingly recognized in strategies for conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. International experience
shows that a multidimensional approach is required to
reduce the linkages between instability and conflict
in mineral-rich countries and regions through the
deployment of a wide range of security and development
initiatives. In the volatile region of the South Caucasus,
we have yet to fully employ an essential resource that
could bring us closer to peace, sustainable economic
development and the creation of regional opportunities
for trade and investment in jobs that could lead to
the engagement in solutions on the political front. A
good starting point is to take current policy tools
and analyse how the countries in our region address
natural resources. A coordinated effort to mainstream
transparent, efficient and equitable Governments and
the management of natural resources to develop policies
and conflict-prevention strategies is rather essential.

The mechanisms whereby natural resources induce
or prolong conflicts are often deeply rooted in economic
and social structures and call for integrated approaches
in addressing peace and development. Good governance
and management of natural resources are the core tools
for conflict prevention.

The high dependency on natural resources without
proper and fair management and appropriate policies
is creating social tensions, weakening Government
institutions and prolonging the resolution of conflicts,
thereby increasing the risk of conflict resumption.
Corruption, State weakness and reduced accountability
tend to be associated with large revenues from natural
resources. It is a well-known fact that corruption
emerges as a problem due to the sheer volume of
revenue from natural resources.

It is also true that a rich natural-resources base does
not necessarily lead to poor economic performance.
There are several examples of stable democracies
where natural resources have contributed to long-term
economic growth and equitable income distribution.
Natural resources can significantly contribute to
economic development in an appropriate, diversified
economic framework.

Today, as Member States are focused on the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals
and other internationally agreed development goals, we
all have a unique opportunity to develop an inclusive
approach to natural resources and development,
conflict prevention and peacebuilding, thus integrating
the management of natural resources into national
sustainable development policies. The successful
implementation of this agenda requires a basic level
of political will and determination on the part of all
stakeholders as a precondition for peacebuilding and
supporting peace. With that political condition in
place, the ability of the United Nations and any other
intergovernmental or regional actor will be enhanced
and supported.

Armenia therefore welcomes the United Kingdom
initiative to hold this thematic discussion. It is an
opportunity to recap and reflect on our experiences
in dealing with the issue of conflict prevention and
natural resources.

