Mr. Konishi (Japan): At the outset, my delegation
wishes, on behalf of the Government of Japan, to express
its appreciation to all the men and women working for the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT) for their efforts to promote the peace process in
Tajikistan.

It is, however, regrettable that, despite the efforts
made by UNMOT, the progress of the peace process has
been very slow during the last three months and that the
security situation on the ground remains precarious. My
delegation is particularly concerned that the recent
violations of the ceasefire have deteriorated mutual
confidence between the Government of Tajikistan and the
United Tajik Opposition (UTO). My delegation calls upon
both parties to maintain their commitment to the peace
process and to redouble their efforts to fully implement the
General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord in Tajikistan, particularly the Protocol on
military issues.

In such circumstances, it is clear that the presence of
the United Nations observers is still indispensable to
making the ceasefire truly effective and to facilitating the
implementation of the General Agreement. My delegation
will therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution before
us, which extends the mandate of UNMOT for another six
months.

My delegation shares the view of the
Secretary-General, contained in his latest report, that
comprehensive international support, including financial
assistance, is essential for the continuation of the peace
process and for the reform and development of Tajik
society. On the basis of this recognition, Japan has been
making a substantial contribution to Tajikistan in the field
of refugee and humanitarian aid. It also dispatched recently
a political affairs officer to UNMOT.

I should like to close by expressing the readiness of
the Government of Japan to continue to participate actively
in the efforts of the Security Council and the international
community as a whole to assist in the achievement of
lasting peace in Tajikistan.

