Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for his second
statement.

As he has done, I would like to provide some
clarification. I can agree with him on the geographic
issues regarding the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the fact that the two Kivu provinces share a border
with Rwanda, and that the same peoples live in the
Kivu provinces and in Rwanda. I could link that
geographic aspect to historical aspects, because the
genocide in Rwanda took place within the Tutsi ethnic
population.
16

Those who committed genocide were transferred
with their arms and munitions to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and they have continued their
genocidal project on the other side of the border. What
I have said is what is recorded in history: the actors of
the genocide in Rwanda, the ex-FAR/Interhamwe/
FDLR, were transferred and continued their genocidal
project, in terms of acts as well as ideology. The
ideology that they teach today is an ideology of hate, to
reduce and exterminate the Tutsi segment of the
Congolese population. That is all I said; I did not say
anything else. And those are facts.

I would also like to recall the fact that, in view of
this historical situation, the United Nations established
MONUC to bring an end to this incredible situation
where an army that has committed genocide and is
known to have done so is circulating freely within a
territory. That is what I brought to the Council's
attention, and I will do so again. It deserves the
ongoing attention both of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and of the Security Council.

In conclusion, I would like simply to come back
to the statement made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and to say that in the past months there has
been a process shared by the two countries that seeks,
through ongoing meetings, to examine these problems
and find solutions. What I have said and what I hope is
that those meetings may continue and culminate in
declarations or agreements that can, like previous ones,
be put into action. It is here that the problem lies: in
the implementation and application of the agreements
that have been signed.

