Mr. Jele (South Africa): The report of the Secretary-
General draws attention to the deteriorating security
situation in Angola which, if left unchecked, could have a
negative impact on the ongoing efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
representatives of the three observer States to defuse the
prevailing military and political tensions.

In April of this year South Africa joined the
international community in applauding the inauguration of
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, a
momentous event which we saw as opening a new era of
peace in Angola. Since then it has been our hope that the
inclusion of UNITA in the established Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation would lead to the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and thus lay the
foundation for lasting peace. But the current tensions which
affect almost the entire country, as reflected in the
Secretary-General's report, seem to belie our optimism and
rather point to trends that could reverse the gains already
achieved. For the States members of the Southern African
Development Community the normalization of State
administration and peace in Angola is a priority concern,
because it would serve as a vital contribution to the
extension of the frontiers of stability to the whole of our
subregion.

Although the international community continues to
make commendable efforts, the success of the peace
process is dependent on both parties making a full
commitment. In this connection, we would like to
reiterate the strongly held View that President Dos Santos
and Mr. Savimbi should meet in Angolan territory. We
believe that this long-awaited meeting would provide an
opportunity for the two leaders to address the main
obstacles to the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol
and help move the peace process forward. Everything
possible should be done to ensure that this meeting is
convened as a matter of urgency. In order to create a
favourable climate for this meeting, it is important for the
parties to observe the ceasefire and refrain from all
hostilities.

It is essential that UNITA submit to the Joint
Commission verifiable information on the weapons it
possesses and on the strength of the personnel still under
its control. UNITA should also ensure the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and desist from
imposing restrictions on its verification and monitoring
tasks, a course of action which hampers the Joint
Commission in its work and, as a consequence,
constitutes a serious impediment to the peace process.

The issue of the demilitarization process remains a
pivotal obligation under the Lusaka Protocol. However,
the lack of cooperation by UNITA has delayed the
registration of its troops with the United Nations, and as
a result their integration into the Angolan Armed Forces
has yet to reach the target number. In addition, the
mobilization by UNITA of military resources, the drive
for conscription and an increase in hostile propaganda are
activities which underline the gravity of the situation.
Given this tense atmosphere, it is not surprising that
military attacks have taken place between UNITA and
elements of the Angolan Armed Forces. It is indeed a
matter of serious concern that these attacks resulted in the
destruction of villages and the deaths of innocent
civilians. These clashes do not augur well for the peace
process and can only serve to heighten the risk of serious
conflict, and therefore demonstrate the urgent need to
expedite the demobilization of both the UNITA
commanders and officers of the Angolan police.

 
It is worth bearing in mind that UNITA is widely held
to be responsible for the civil war that has caused
devastation and so much pain and suffering for the people
of Angola. In the light of that bitter experience, and taking
into account the volatile climate currently generated by
UNITA's activities, it would seem logical for this body to
exert maximum pressure on UNITA to deliver on its
obligations. We therefore believe that it should not be
allowed to continue to violate the Lusaka Protocol with
impunity. The time has come for the Security Council to
act decisively and in a manner which ensures that UNITA
fulfils its commitments. Attempts at appeasing the Council
by making piecemeal, inadequate concessions on the eve of
its important meetings can no longer be tolerated.

It is for this reason that South Africa supports the
draft resolution before the Council. We also support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to again postpone
the withdrawal of the United Nations military units from
Angola and to retain a significant number of military
personnel until the end of October 1997 so as to provide
the parties with another opportunity to complete the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. The anguish that
the people of Angola have endured over the years should
no longer be allowed to continue.

