Ms. Bahemuka (Kenya): My delegation would
like to thank Algeria for organizing this very important
debate. We thank you, in particular, Mr. President, for
having found time to come and chair this very
important debate for us. At the very outset, Kenya
would like to acknowledge with appreciation the work
and the brief presented to us by Mr. Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, and other
reports that have been made available to us, including
the recent report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change.

While we recognize that international
humanitarian law sets universally acceptable standards
for the protection of civilians in armed conflict, the
world has witnessed violent conflicts that have claimed
the lives of millions of civilians and have left tens of
millions of people permanently displaced. Victims
have been expelled from their homes and have often
been denied access to life-saving food, medicine and
shelter. Grave violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law and blatant disrespect for
humanity have been witnessed.

The nature of conflict itself has also changed
from the inter-State wars common earlier to internal
conflicts and even terrorism. It is now very common to
find situations where civilians have taken up arms
against established Governments. Combatants now
depend for survival on the support of civilian non-
combatants. That creates a very complex scenario for
the parties in conflict. We are seeing armed groups that
do not have standard command and control functions,
that do not operate under standard military rules or
procedures and that often use child soldiers, who are
abducted to fight wars or who are kept on drugs.

Those complexities not withstanding, the onus is
still on the international community to uphold and
enforce international humanitarian law to stop the
suffering of civilians during conflicts. The issue of
impunity should be addressed, and all actors -
whether Government actors or rebels - must be made
to understand that the international community will
hold them responsible for any act in violation of
international humanitarian law. We concur with the
View of Mr. Egeland with respect to the International
Criminal Court and the role it can play in addressing
the issue of impunity. We appeal for further discourse
by Member States on this matter with a View to
reaching consensus.

On the other hand, the international community,
led by the Security Council, must develop strategies to
engage more persistently with regard to conflicts in
order to help protect civilians in neglected crises. All
possible tools must be made available, including
intense diplomacy, support for the negotiation of
access for humanitarian aid in extreme cases and the
contribution of troops to United Nations-led
peacekeeping missions with strong mandates to protect
civilians.
In addition, Governments and the United Nations
should implement new, systemic procedures in order to
best protect vulnerable civilians, especially women and
children, in crises. When the international community
has the will to help civilians, it often can. The action
required could vary according to the specific protection
needed by civilians who are caught in conflict; that
does not always have to be military support.
Diplomatic pressure, negotiated access and other steps
can save lives and allow people to live with dignity.

The leadership of the Security Council in that
regard is critical. It is the only body that can authorize
action such as Operation Artemis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and that can be indispensable
to saving lives. Such interventions are desperately
needed. They are practical proof of the existence of a
committed international community that seeks to
protect civilians whenever they are threatened. Led by
the current Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, the
United Nations has paid more attention to the
practicalities of protecting civilians in the past few
years. Those steps are useful, but more work needs to
be done.

Only humanitarian protection in conflict
situations has the principal concern of preventing or
mitigating the most damaging effects of war on
civilians. It is concerned with the way conflict is
conducted and the way people, including refugees and
displaced persons, are treated. Humanitarian protection
is therefore driven by the real threats faced by
communities and individuals. Although protection such
as that provided by Operation Artemis is crucial to the
survival of civilians caught up in conflict, their
sustained survival depends on humanitarian assistance.
The independent and impartial provision of basic needs
to a population is meant to be a key part of the
international community's commitment to protect that
population. Every civilian caught up in an armed
conflict has the right to receive food, water, shelter and
medical assistance. The international community has a
responsibility to provide funding and to apply political
pressure on warring parties to ensure that, despite the
conflict, vital supplies reach the most vulnerable
groups.

Not only are the current levels of spending and
engagement inadequate, they are also not distributed
according to the needs. An increasing number of
donors are giving only to favoured crises.
Humanitarian assistance is earmarked for certain
countries and projects. That has to change. That
application of double standards has left millions of
children, women and men in need and without aid.
Some emergencies are totally neglected. Today's
single-minded focus on international terrorism steers
international attention to a smaller number of crises.
Action is therefore needed to deliver on commitments
to guarantee the distribution of high-quality
humanitarian assistance to all vulnerable populations,
based on need and need alone.

Finally, Kenya recognizes the important role
played by the United Nations in general and the
Security Council in particular in addressing conflict,
especially in Africa. That was recently demonstrated
by the Security Council's visit to Nairobi, Kenya, to
push forward the Sudan peace process in recognition of
the suffering of millions of civilians in that conflict and
in other African regional conflicts. The invaluable
support that the United Nations has given to our
regional organizations so that they can address these
issues is highly appreciated. However, individual
Governments, assisted by the international community,
must also address the root causes of conflicts. It is
crucial to establish early-warning mechanisms and take
timely and appropriate steps.

