Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I thank Under-Secretary- General Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing. Estonia expresses its strong support for the activities of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. I would like to focus my statement today on the following points: the need for the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, the deteriorating security situation, and the importance of accountability. Fullimplementation of the peace agreement remains the basis of a successful political process in Mali. It is the main tool for addressing the root causes of the conflict and helping to restore trust among the people of Mali. A crucial aspect in the implementation process is the full, effective and meaningful participation of women and youth; a lasting solution will not be possible without them. We welcome the holding of the inclusive national dialogue that was concluded on 22 December. However, the most important part of the process - implementing the conclusions of the national dialogue - needs to start now. Moreover, the process has to support the implementation of the peace agreement. We count on the leadership of the Government of Mali and the political will of all parties to take this process forward. We are following with great concern the reports of negative trends in the country, especially the further deterioration of the security situation in the centre of the country. The growing number of terrorist attacks on civilians, targeted attacks on military outposts and growing resentment towards the international presence are extremely worrying. Only last week, MINUSMA's base in Kidal was attacked again. These terrorist attacks are simply unacceptable. We agree that it is important to effectively engage the local community. Its trust and acceptance are crucial for the successful implementation of MINUSMA's mandate and a sustainable transition. We commend MINUSMA for the steps taken so far. However, this remains a key challenge and requires a thorough, integrated approach and enhanced cooperation with relevant actors. Counter-terrorist efforts in Mali require effective cross-border cooperation among regional and subregional organizations, the States of the region and international actors. It is important that Mali and its neighbouring States take full ownership of the fight against terrorism. We welcome the efforts of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and encourage its further operationalization. Estonia supports the counter-terrorist efforts in the Sahel by contributing to French-led Operation Barkhane. The Estonian parliament recently decided to nearly double our military personnel deployment in the operation. Finally, allow me to turn to the question of accountability. Parties involved in grave human rights violations and abuses, those fuelling intercommunal tensions, and perpetrators of crimes against civilians and peacekeepers must be brought to justice. A continuous and principled fight against impunity willnot only hold the perpetrators accountable, but is also a powerful tool in building trust and bridging a way to lasting peace.
