Mr. Mladenov: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
unfolding events in and around Gaza.

I am afraid that the past two days have seen the
most serious escalation since the 2014 conflict between
Hamas and Israel, and they have shown all of us how
close we are to the brink of war every day. Between
28 and 30 May, according to the Israeli Defence Forces
(IDF), 216 projectiles, rockets and mortar shells were
fired from Gaza towards Israel, approximately 77
of which hit areas in the Eshkol, Sha'ar Hanegev and
Sdot Negev regions. Although most of the projectiles
were intercepted by the Iron Dome system, one hit a
kindergarten yard at a kibbutz near the Gaza border, and
at least one other damaged a house. Thankfully, there
were no casualties or serious injuries. In response to the
attacks and mortars, the Israeli Air Force carried out
strikes on 65 Hamas and Islamic Jihad targets in Gaza
and destroyed a two-kilometre tunnel near the Kerem
Shalom crossing. No casualties or serious injuries were
reported in Gaza as a result of the strikes.

On 29 May, the Hamas Al-Qassam Brigades
and the Islamic Jihad's Sarai Al-Quds claimed joint
responsibility for the rockets and mortars fired at Israel.
Their joint statement blamed Israel for targeting their
fighters and military positions during the preceding
48 hours, cautioned against attempts to dictate new
equations on the status quo and warned that they would
reciprocate "shelling with shelling and blood with
blood". In the meanwhile, Prime Minister Netanyahu
vowed that Israel would respond with great force to
the rocket attacks, as for more than 24 hours Israeli
communities around Gaza lived with the fear of having
mere seconds to seek shelter from incoming rockets.

Such attacks are completely unacceptable. The
firing of rockets and mortars against civilians cannot
be justified under any circumstances. I take this
opportunity to call on the international community
to join me in unequivocally condemning the
indiscriminate targeting of civilians and the dangerous
escalation in Gaza. This dangerous escalation comes
after a series of warnings by the United Nations and
in the context of recent developments on the ground. It
cannot be divorced from the context of the two months
of protests at the Gaza fence, in which approximately
110 Palestinians were killed and a large number were
injured. Throughout this period, militants have also
placed improvised explosive devices (IEDs) at the
perimeter fence and attempted, sometimes successfully,
to breach it, with the intention of damaging military
infrastructure and perpetuating attacks against Israelis.

Particularly in the days following 14 May, several
such incidents were filmed and posted on social media,
prompting a response by Israel on targets inside Gaza.
On 27 May, in response to an IED found by the IDF
adjacent to the fence, the IDF targeted a Palestinian
Islamic Jihad observation post and killed three
members of the group. Islamic Jihad issued a statement
vowing to retaliate for what it described as a dangerous
escalation. Subsequently, on 28 May, the IDF announced
it had fired a tank shell at another observation post,
killing a member of the military wing of Hamas. The
shelling took place after Israeli troops came under fire,
reportedly by Hamas militants, while arresting two
Palestinians who had crossed the perimeter fence into
Israel. During the night of 28 May, machine-gun fire
from Gaza also hit the Israeli city of Sderot, causing
damage to several buildings and a vehicle. The next
day, the situation escalated.
Since the early hours of this morning, the situation
has quietened down and, since 5 a.m. there have been
no projectiles launched from Gaza or any IDF strikes
on locations inside the Gaza Strip. In that respect, I
welcome the efforts of Egypt aimed at ensuring that
calm prevails, and I reiterate my call on all sides to
uphold all understandings and prevent the recurrence
of any incident thatjeopardizes the lives of Israelis and
Palestinians alike.

It is imperative that this period of calm be preserved
at all costs. No one in Gaza can afford another war.
No one has the right to play with the lives of 2 million
people who have lived through hell in the past decade.
No one should live in fear of an indiscriminate rocket
attack. All parties have a responsibility to do their part
to de-escalate and to step back from the brink, in the
interests of their own people and the future of their
own children. As demonstrations and protests in Gaza
continue into the month of June, I am concerned that we
may experience further violence and additional risks
of escalation.

Despite the dangerous escalation, Gaza's civilian
infrastructure did not sustain any significant damage as
a result of Israeli retaliatory fire yesterday. Moreover,
the crossing points for people and goods remained
open and functioned normally. The Rafah crossing
into Egypt continued operations for the nineteenth
consecutive day, and both the Kerem Shalom and the
Erez crossings into Israel functioned with only minor
delays. Nevertheless, fire from Gaza has caused
damage to electricity installations on the Israeli side,
resulting in a reduction of more than 30 per cent of the
only electricity supply there is to Gaza, and it will take
a few days at least to repair that.

As I recently briefed the Council, Gaza's electricity,
water and health systems continue to experience
unprecedented strain (see S/PV.8265). Egyptian
electricity lines have been effectively down since
February, and the Gaza power plant has not functioned
since April. Today the total supply for Gaza is barely
enough to provide three hours of sustained electricity.

Finally, during my briefing to the Council last
week, I was greatly encouraged by the willingness of
Council members to consider ideas to change the reality
in Gaza. Under the current circumstances, failure to act
immediately with a set of relatively modest, achievable
interventions will only amplify the humanitarian crisis
and drastically increase the risk of confrontation. The
goals that I outlined last week remain as valid as ever:
to prevent a war with potential regional implications,
address the urgent humanitarian needs of the population
and support Egyptian reconciliation efforts. That means
that we need to urgently implement already approved
projects, revive efforts to empower the Government to
take up its responsibilities and, very important, sustain
the 2014 ceasefire understandings on the ground and
halt the militant build-up.

The United Nations will move forward on
immediately enhancing our capacity and presence to
facilitate project implementation in Gaza and improve
coordination with Israel, Egypt and the Palestinian
Authority in order to overcome political, administrative
and logistical blockages. It is important that all sides
agree to improve movement and access restrictions
and ensure uninterrupted and upgraded water and
electricity supply to the population.

This plan is the only sustainable way to ensure
that we do not again slide into another devastating
conflict, that we do not allow Gaza to become a pawn in
somebody else's plans, another tragedy on the already
crowded map of regional Middle East conflicts. But I
would also like to use this opportunity to send a very
clear message to Palestinians in Gaza. We hear their
plight, we see their suffering and we will do all that
we can to ensure that they have a future beyond mere
survival, a future of freedom and development, a future
focused on peace and prosperity, where they are the
masters of their own fate, a future for all Palestinians,
under a single democratic Government, living in a State
of Palestine, side by side in peace and security with the
State of Israel.

That is why we need to make sure that calm
continues, that the militant build-up ends and that we
deny those who want to disrupt peace any opportunity
to do so. Without those conditions in place, it will be
impossible to move forward on achieving our long-
term political and developmental goals. It is high time
that we intensify our calls on Israelis and Palestinians
to undertake concrete steps that will advance the goal
of a just and sustainable peace. Such actions must
encompass the overarching political objectives, the
unification of Gaza and the West Bank under a single
democratic and legitimate Palestinian Authority, an
end to the occupation and a resolution to the wider
Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of the two-State
solution and in line with previous agreements and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.

This latest round of attacks is a warning. It is a
warning to all of us how close to the brink of war we
are every single day.
