Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, my delegation warmly congratulates you
personally, Madam President, and your country,
South Africa, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October. Your
extensive wealth of experience and your country's
commitment to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law have been at the
heart of the success of your presidency, which began
resoundingly on 1 October. Let me also welcome the
presence among us of His Excellency Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.

As the Council is undoubtedly aware, during the
exchange between the Secretary-General and our
Minister for Foreign Affairs on the margins of the
General Assembly on 27 September, the two came
together on a decision with regard to ending the Special
Envoy's mandate in November. Accordingly, I would be
remiss were I not to thank the Special Envoy for having
provided his professionalism, diplomatic expertise and
wisdom to Burundi and the region in the context of the
peace process in Burundi. I can safely say today that
he ably accomplished his mission. He leaves behind a
peaceful, stable and definitively reconciled country.
For our part, we wish him happiness and success in all
his personal endeavours and pursuits for the benefit of
the international community in the future.

Likewise, I must thank His Excellency Ambassador
Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing and for all
he has done for Burundi with regard to the peacebuilding
process. We reassure him of our full cooperation.

Before beginning the substantial part of my
statement, I would like to note with regret that some
delegations here continue to use the langue of 2015
instead of evolving with the pace of events in Burundi.
I encourage them to leave behind the status quo and
follow the flow of what is now happening in the country.

My statement will focus on five points, namely,
the political situation, which will be predominately
influenced by the holding of the 2020 elections, the
security situation in the country, the humanitarian
situation, with particular emphasis on the return of
refugees, the human rights situation and cooperation
between Burundi and the United Nations, on the one
hand, and between Burundi and bilateral partners, on
the other.
The political situation in the country is being
shaped by preparations for the 2020 elections, which
are progressing satisfactorily. National mechanisms
dedicated to the holding of elections are already
operational. While not citing an exhaustive list of the
latter, I will cite in particular the following actions.

First, the Kayanza road map leading to the holding
of peaceful elections in 2020 was adopted following
very broad consultations within the Burundian political
class. Second, the National Independent Electoral
Commission (CENI) is already operational and is
regularly holding press conferences on the progress
of the electoral process in full transparency in the
presence of members of the international community
based in Bujumbura. Third, the revised electoral code
was adopted by the National Assembly in April by
105 to 108 votes. Fourth, the Government adopted the
decision to finance the entire operational budget for
the elections without recourse to external resources,
which, as the Council is aware, are often unpredictable
and contingent on other factors. The fifth action was
the Independent National Electoral Commission's
publication of an electoral calendar detailing all
polls planned for 2020. Sixth was the Commission's
announcement of a period of partial voter registration
for those who had been unable to register for the 2018
referendum. That partial registration for the electoral
rolls will take place from 9 to 12 December, just about
five weeks from now.

As the Council can see, Burundians are already
deep into the 2020 electoral process, and we continue
to take ownership of it both organizationally and
financially. While promising free, transparent and
peaceful elections, we would like to remind anyone
who tries to interfere without being expressly invited
that in Burundi as elsewhere in the world, electoral
processes are an internal affair that is exclusively a
matter for national sovereignty. Any outside support
must be provided only at the request of the Government
of Burundi and in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. And no support gives
anyone the right to any such interference.

With regard to promoting an atmosphere conducive
to the holding of peaceful and inclusive elections, among
other things I would like to point to the expansion ofthe
political space in the country through the approval of
new political parties and the promotion of freedom of
expression with the active support of the Government
of Burundi; second, to the lifting of the suspension
of opposition political parties that violated the law
governing the functioning of political parties; third, our
President's numerous announcements of his decision to
voluntarily renounce his constitutional right to run in
the 2020 presidential elections; fourth, the reception
and reintegration of the large numbers of refugees
returning to Burundi; fifth, the return to the country of
opposition political leaders who fled the country in 2015,
most recently on 5 October; sixth, the continued efforts
to hold constructive political consultations within a
forum of political parties in a spirit of openness and
political tolerance, including at the levels of provinces
and communes; seventh, increasing messages from
political leaders to their followers focused on discipline,
social cohesion and political tolerance; eighth, the
Government's decision to create joint committees at the
national level, including young people from all political
parties, with a view to preventing violence during the
elections; ninth, the commitment by political parties to
consult regularly through the forum of political parties
on all the problems facing the country; tenth, public
statements by State officials deploring and condemning
various isolated cases of violence and promoting social
cohesion and peaceful coexistence; and lastly the
release by presidential pardon at the beginning of the
year of more than 2,000 prisoners, including young
rioters and insurgents of 2015.

Still on the subject of elections, I would like to
inform the Council that at the summit of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, attended by 120 member
States in Baku on 25 and 26 October, the Heads of
State and Government of the Movement called for the
holding of free, transparent, inclusive and peaceful
elections in Burundi in 2020. They congratulated the
Government of Burundi on the steps it has already
taken in preparing for these elections and welcomed
its sovereign decision to finance the entire electoral
process from the country's national resources.

At the continental level, the Summit of Heads of
State of the African Union, held on 10 and 11 February
in Addis Ababa, congratulated the Government
of Burundi on starting preparatory processes for
the 2020 elections, particularly the creation of the
Independent National Electoral Commission and a
truth and reconciliation commission. It also welcomed
the announcement by President Nkurunziza that he
would not stand in the 2020 elections and urged the
Government and the political parties to work together
to ensure the smooth conduct of the elections.

With regard to security, as stated in paragraph 58
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/837), the
Government of Burundi has made significant efforts
to improve security conditions in the country. The
situation in Burundi is stable, calm and under control
throughout the country, with the notable exception of a
few isolated cases of common criminality such as occur
in other countries. From north to south, west to east and
in the centre, day and night, Burundian citizens enjoy
their civil and political rights in peace. Officials of the
United Nations and of subregional organizations who
have recently visited the country have seen with their
own eyes how peace and security have been restored
in Burundi. Major efforts are under way throughout
the country to preserve this longed-for peace, first and
foremost by promoting Burundians' love of country
and attachment to the intrinsic principles and values
that our nation was built on.

A plan has been developed for securitizing the 2020
electoral process and training programmes in several
areas related to the elections are being implemented,
with a view to preparing for their overall security. The
restoration of peace, stability and trust in the country
is transforming the national landscape. Today all
Burundians, in their rich diversity, feel safe, protected
and able to freely participate in the political process
without fear or restriction. Political and social discourse
is conducted with mutual respect and tolerance and
acceptance of those different from ourselves.

In terms of collective security, we continue to
participate actively in the fight against terrorism and
in peace operations, with approximately 6,000 troops
in contingents on the ground, primarily in Somalia
and the Central African Republic. Our participation in
peacekeeping around the world is our way of repaying
the international community, which has always
supported us during difficult periods in our history.
The full value of our substantial contribution to peace
operations and the fight against terrorism should be
recognized and appreciated in that regard.

In terms of development, the greatest challenge
facing Burundi today is the fight against poverty, the
common enemy of all Burundians of all political and
social stripes. It was in that context that the Government
of Burundi developed and finalized our new 10-year
national development plan, and we are seeking the
support of our traditional and non-traditional partners
in helping us to implement the plan. The United Nations,
through its country team and the Burundi configuration
ofthe Peacebuilding Commission, can serve as a bridge
between Burundi and its partners in mobilizing the
resources needed to complement our national efforts to
implement Burundi's new development strategy.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
welcome the mass voluntary returns of Burundian
refugees who fled the country in 2015. Beyond the
several thousand Burundians who are returning
without assistance from the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, between 1 August 2017 and
29 October - that is, yesterday - 79,375 refugees,
belonging to 26,739 households, were voluntarily
repatriated to Burundi from Tanzania, Kenya and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The most recent
group, composed of 252 refugees from 134 households,
arrived yesterday in Kobero in Muyinga province, on
our northern border with Tanzania. Such mass voluntary
returns are clear evidence that peace, harmony, trust
and stability have been restored to the country, despite
the comments of some foreign actors who continue
deliberately to inflate the number of refugees still in
exile in order to keep Burundi in artificial crisis mode
and to maintain jobs.

Turning to the human rights situation, the
Government of Burundi is continuing its efforts to
improve the situation and the promotion of human
rights through a number of national mechanisms that
have been established, in particular the Independent
National Human Rights Commission. We cooperate
closely with international mechanisms accepted by all,
such as the Universal Periodic Review, which reviews
the human rights situation in each Member State
without singling out States. Most recommendations of
the Universal Periodic Review are being implemented
by the Government of Burundi. As an example,
the Government regularly carries out impartial,
independent and effective investigations into proven
cases of alleged human rights violations reported to it
so that all perpetrators without exception are rapidly
brought to justice and punished in accordance with
the law.

Regarding the rebuilding of trust between
Burundi and our bilateral partners, the Government
of Burundi is striving to resume peaceful relations
with our development partners, in particular those that
have wavered since 2015. We hope to encourage our
traditional and non-traditional partners to focus on
the future of Burundi and to move forward together,
putting aside the short-lived misunderstanding in
2015. It is now time to rebuild trust among us, to
review things that did not work and to put them right
in a spirit of mutual trust. We must acknowledge the
political realities and prevent any relapse. Continued
confrontations are counterproductive in all areas and
for all parties. For its part, the Government of Burundi
reaffirms its readiness to improve bilateral relations
with its development partners. Against that backdrop,
the country's highest authorities have recently again
dispatched ambassadors to those countries where
bilateral relations were disrupted following 2015.

With regard to our relationship with the United

Nations - and this is an extremely important
point - we welcome the role played by the United
Nations country team in Burundi in assisting national
efforts to implement the national development plan, the
Sustainable Development Goals and the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for 2019 to 2023.
The Government of Burundi commits to working
constructively with the United Nations country team
in Burundi so as to achieve lasting socioeconomic
development in the interests of all Burundians.
However, we remain convinced that having the
situation in Burundi on the Security Council agenda
is inappropriate and violates the Charter of the United
Nations. The current political and security situation in
the country does not represent a threat to international
peace and security, which would justify Burundi
remaining on the Security Council agenda. We reiterate
our legitimate call for Burundi to be removed from the
Council agenda. The arbitrary retention of Burundi on
the Council's agenda is likely to set a bad precedent.
The holding of unnecessary meetings on Burundi,
which are notjustified by the reality on the ground, will
destabilize the country rather than promote peace and
calm. Some troublemakers take advantage of that to
commit crimes in the days leading up to each Security
Council meeting.

In conclusion, Burundi reiterates its commitment to
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and its determination to strengthen
democracy, consolidate peace and security and
achieve balanced, inclusive and lasting socioeconomic
development in the interests of the Burundian people.

