Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): My delegation
understands that the resolution just adopted is part of a
sequence of decisions to be taken in due time by the
international community - and in particular by the
Security Council - with a view to promoting peace
and security, alleviating the suffering of more than 1
million people and putting an end to the humanitarian
disaster in the Darfur region.

Those decisions will have to address all features
of a complex crisis that is undermining major efforts
towards peace and development, not only in Sudan but
also in a large part of the African continent. The
decisions must respond first to the huge need for
increased international support for humanitarian
assistance, both in Darfur and in Chad. Brazil therefore
welcomes the great efforts being made by Secretary-
General Kofi Annan to reach donor countries and to
obtain further resources. At the same time, those
decisions will have to further stimulate the political
engagement of all parties concerned to comply fully
with their commitments to promptly improve the
situation on the ground, thereby allowing the safe
return of Sudanese refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes.

Security is a major issue. The unequivocal
political determination of the Government of Sudan
and of the rebels to honour the ceasefire signed at
N'Djamena is absolutely necessary, as is the disarming
and reining-in of the Janjaweed militias and other
outlaw groups.

Lastly, the decisions will also have to convey a
strong message to all perpetrators of human rights
violations that there will be no impunity and that the
guilty will be brought to justice.

Resolution 1556 (2004) contains valuable
provisions that my delegation believes it fair to
highlight. They include the condemnation of all acts of
violence and violations of international humanitarian
law by all parties to the crisis, the emphasis on the
responsibilities of the Government of Sudan itself, due
reference to the leading role being played by the
African Union, and a crucial request of the donor
community to meet the commitments it made in the
context of appeals on behalf of Darfur and Chad.
Nonetheless, we regret that the entirety of the
operative part of the resolution is under Chapter VII of
the Charter, thus, as we understand it, adding little or
no value to its vigour. In fact, except for provisions
made in paragraphs 6 to 9, we believe that the Council
need not act under Chapter VII. My delegation and
others also view the reference to Article 41 of the
Charter as a way out and a compromise. However, the
text should have made clear that measures such as
those envisaged in Article 41 as appropriate should be
adopted solely for the purpose of giving effect to the
decisions of the Security Council contained in this
resolution.

Finally, I would like to refer to the official
statement issued last Wednesday at Brasilia. Brazil
reaffirms the urgent need for all the parties concerned
to respect the ceasefire. We also urge the Government
of Sudan to comply fully with its commitments under
the joint communique signed on 3 July, particularly
those referring to the protection of its population in
Darfur and to the observance of international
humanitarian law. In that same statement, my
Government also stressed the need for the Security
Council to support the efforts made by the African
Union in its mission to monitor the ceasefire and to
help bring peace to Darfur.

