Mr. Mercado (Philippines): My delegation
thanks the Danish presidency for having convened this
public meeting on Timor-Leste. This meeting could not
be more timely or important, particularly as the
assistance of the international community to Timor-
Leste, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, is

S/l'V.5457

 

becoming more critical than ever due to the
unfortunate events of the past two months. We also
thank Special Envoy Ian Martin and Ambassador Jose
Luis Guterres for their candid reports.

We join other delegations in expressing our deep
concern at recent developments in Timor-Leste. We
support the efforts being undertaken by the
Government of the country to end the violence and to
restore security and stability in the country. We
welcome in particular the plan to hold an all-inclusive
dialogue and the creation of a special inquiry
commission to determine responsibility for the
violence. At the same time, we commend Australia,
Malaysia, New Zealand and Portugal for having
speedily responded to calls for assistance and for
helping to restore law and order in Timor-Leste.

Timor-Leste is once again at a critical juncture in
its young history. It would seem that, after the
considerable efforts expended by the international
community in building this nation, the violence of the
past month has set back the progress achieved thus far.
We are confident, however, that this is but a temporary
bump in the road, for there is no smooth path to
progress in Timor-Leste. After all, nation-building
requires time, patience, sustained effort and deep
commitment in order for the process to become
irreversible.

International support is essential to keep Timor-
Leste on the track of development. On this point, my
delegation is of the View that the crucial engine that
will drive Timor-Leste back onto the right track is a
continued, sustained and appropriately constituted
United Nations presence in that country. The United
Nations should not abdicate its role in building up
Timor-Leste. That country is considered one of the
United Nations success stories and any effort that
would result in the United Nations leaving should be
eschewed.

What is needed right now is strategic planning in
order to put Timor-Leste back on track and ensure that
the significant gains achieved are not wasted. We hope
that the UNOTIL rollover and the recent violence in
Dili has given decision-makers time and the proper
perspective to adequately plan for the future of Timor-
Leste.

The continued United Nations presence should
work to strengthen the institutional capacity of the
Government of Timor-Leste, particularly in the

delivery of basic services, justice and economic
development. An electoral component is also necessary
to assist Timor-Leste in organizing next year's
elections.

Inasmuch as law and order is a major concern, as
we have seen in the past two months, a robust police
component, as requested by the Government of Timor-
Leste, is essential. It should not only perform
operational policing but also plan and build the
capacity of Timor-Leste's police force until it can act
as an independent and professional law-enforcement
agency.

My delegation takes note of the Government of
Timor-Leste's request for the deployment of police
units from the Philippines under the United Nations
umbrella. We take this opportunity to thank the
Government of Timor-Leste for its trust and confidence
in requesting police units from the Philippines, which
we view as a way of further contributing to
peacekeeping operations in that country.
Prior to the events of the past two months, the
experience of Timor-Leste had been one of the best
examples of a successful international enterprise
engineered through the combined, cooperative efforts
of the United Nations and regional players and
partners. Let us View Timor-Leste through the prism of
optimism and pragmatism and act to ensure that this
will continue to hold true. The events of the past
months should serve as valuable lessons on the fluidity
and uncertainties of peacebuilding in the United
Nations context and should not deter us from our duty
of pursuing it despite the odds.

