Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing today.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of Israel
and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for their
presence and contributions to our debate.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains deeply
concerned about the absence of any progress in the
Middle East peace process. The current impasse is not
in the interests of either the Israeli or the Palestinian
people. The scheduled time frame for the conclusion of
peace negotiations is approaching rapidly. Hence, we
cannot afford further delays before the beginning of
serious and responsible negotiations between the
Israelis and Palestinians. At this critical moment, it is
also of vital importance that the Security Council, the
Quartet, the Arab League and other international and
regional actors continue their efforts aimed at bringing
the parties to direct substantive talks.

In that light, we understand President Obama's
statement of 19 May and his appeal for decisive action
that should lead to a lasting peace that includes two
States for two peoples. For our part, we reaffirm our
commitment to the two-State solution, with the State of
Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable State of Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security.

The current upheavals in the wider region clearly
reflect the democratic aspirations of the peoples in the
Middle East. This new environment creates an
opportunity to speed up the negotiation process. We
hope that the interested parties will recognize this
newfound momentum and, by taking up the chance for
substantial negotiations, will join the stream of positive
changes in the Middle East.

Continued settlement activities on occupied land
are illegal under international law and contrary to
Israel's obligations under the Road Map. These
activities represent an obstacle on the road to
comprehensive peace. We therefore call upon Israel to
respond positively to appeals by the international
community by ending all settlement activities in
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is firm in its position
that civilian populations must be protected. It is for this
reason that we urge the parties to observe restraint and
make every effort to avoid violence and further loss of
innocent lives.

The continuation of the unsustainable and
unproductive situation in Gaza is also of concern. In
this regard, we welcome the Israeli Government's
recent approvals of materials for new homes and
schools to be constructed by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. However, we strongly believe that this is not
enough and that more needs to be done. Only the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) can meet the
basic needs of the 1.5 million Palestinian residents of
the Gaza Strip. Hence, we reiterate our call for a full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) and for the
immediate, sustained and unconditional opening of
crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial
goods and persons to and from Gaza, including goods
from the West Bank. Israel's security concerns,
including a complete stop to violence and arms
smuggling into Gaza, must also be addressed.

In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina believes
that lasting peace and stability in the region of the
Middle East are possible through diplomatic efforts
and full commitment to the peace process. To that aim,
we expect the parties to take difficult decisions and
return to direct talks without delay.

