Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The
resolution we have adopted today is another
acknowledgement of the progress towards peace that is
being made in Liberia. For too long the prospects for
peaceful reconciliation in that poor country were bleak. But
with the persevering help of the regional States, supported
by the international community, a brighter future is now on
the horizon. Today's resolution demonstrates the
commitment of the international community to assist the
Liberian people down the road towards that future.

My country believes that the peace process in Liberia
is very important, not only for the people of Liberia, but
also for the whole West African region. That is why my
Government pledged $75 million at the recent Conference
on Assistance to Liberia. An investment now in peace in
Liberia will be returned a thousandfold in better and freer
lives for the people of the region.
As you are all aware, my Government has carefully
considered the Secretary-General's proposed adjustment to
the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) and its revised concept of operations.
We needed time to do so. Our sole aim has been to ensure
that UNOMIL continues to play an appropriate role in
helping to implement the peace programme.

Under the new concept of operations, UNOMIL will
have a major role in the management of and financial
responsibility for the demobilization process. The United
States agrees that the demobilization of the tens of
thousands of Liberian combatants is critical to the peace
process. We recognize that this will be a complicated and
difficult task to complete. We believe that international
humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations can and must be brought into the peace
process as soon as possible - not only because their
expertise and resources will ease the burden on UNOMIL,
but also to ensure that the entire process, from
disarmament through demobilization to reintegration into
society, is carried out in an efficient, speedy and
coordinated manner.

In this context, we support the Secretary-General's
intent to expand and strengthen coordination mechanisms,
to appoint a United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator for
the United Nations agencies, and to support the efforts of
the wider humanitarian community, including non-
governmental, international and multilateral organizations.
For our part, we are prepared to use some of the funds
pledged at the 27 October Conference to help fund the
demobilization-reintegration process. We will continue to
look for ways to fund activities which will reduce the cost
of UNOMIL. We urge other countries to support the
peace process generously.

The peace process in Liberia cannot move forward
unless the Liberian National Transitional Government
(LNTG), the Liberian factions and the Economic
Community of West African States Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) do their part. We, along with many other
countries, are working hard to mobilize resources for
logistical support of ECOMOG's deployment, a
precondition for UNOMIL's own deployment and the
actual start of the disarmament and demobilization
process. But the LNTG, the Liberian factions and
ECOMOG must do the maximum with the resources they
now have to keep the process moving, and we trust that
they are doing so. If ECOMOG does not deploy in
December, many combatants and civilians will lose faith
in the peace process.

My Government looks forward to the Secretary-
General's progress report on the situation in Liberia and
the implementation of UNOMIL's adjusted mandate. We
intend to work closely with the United Nations and
UNOMIL to achieve an efficient and cost-effective
implementation of the new mandate.

The people of Liberia have an opportunity now, with
the support of the international community, to fashion a
bright new peaceful future for themselves. We urge them
to seize this opportunity and to become once more the

 

shining symbol of freedom that is their heritage as the
oldest democracy in Africa.

With today's vote we hope to see a movement towards
democracy in Liberia, but it is impossible to talk about
peace and democracy in Liberia without expressing my
Government's outrage at the reports of the execution of
Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other minority rights activists in
Nigeria.

Their conviction was stunning in its absence of any
modicum of due process under law. The unseemly haste of
this reported step contravenes all values of the civilized
world. The defendants were not given a fair and free trial
and were not able to present witnesses or evidence.
Presumably this is true, since the whole act - the
condemnation to death and the executions - has in fact
been reported by the Nigerian News Agency.

This heinous act offends our values and darkens our
hope for democracy in the region. We particularly deplore
this action, for it was taken despite the pleas of so many
Governments, including my own. My Government is now
urgently considering what further steps to take, including
action by the Security Council.

