Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I wish in
my turn to thank Mr. Guehenno for his very
comprehensive briefing.

I also offer our condolences to the Republic of
Korea for the loss of five of its peacekeepers attached
to the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).

We have considered the Secretary-General's
report with keen interest. We agree with him that
vigilance is essential. The situation remains precarious,
but we must clearly identify the true nature of the
threat if we are to respond adequately. Within the
country, there is a genuine risk that confrontations,
such as those of December 2002, may break out again
in Dili or that lesser such incidents may occur in the
provinces. As for the external borders, however, we
feel that the new State of Timor-Leste is not genuinely
threatened. Its relations with Jakarta have been
normalized. The militias in West Timor seem to us in
general to have demobilized.

On the basis of this analysis, the best response is
undoubtedly to strengthen Timorese peacekeeping
capacities. The Secretary-General's recommendations
in that context are particularly welcome and we support
them fully. As a priority, we should intensify the
training of Timorese police. Could the Secretariat give
us more information about recruitment and training
policies for the Timorese police?

As the representatives of the United Kingdom,
the United States and Germany have said, the matter of
adjusting the military component of UNMISET is
another matter entirely. We have questions about
revising the timetable for its downsizing from 2,780
today to 1,750 staff members by the end of the year.
The mission of the peacekeepers is not to maintain
order; that is a job for the police and, to the extent
possible, for the Timorese police. We trust the
Commander of UNMISET to redeploy his personnel as
effectively as possible from the calmer areas to those
where the situation is more sensitive - in particular, to
the limits of the Tactical Coordination Line. This, we
feel, should make it possible to protect what has been
one of the United Nations greatest successes.

