Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): At
the outset, Mr. President, I should like to congratulate
you on having convened this public meeting on
Guinea-Bissau. This subject is very important at a time
when the Security Council is actively preparing for the
mission that it will send in a few days' time to West
Africa, including to Guinea-Bissau, which will be the
mission's first stop.

I should also like to thank our special guests for
the high quality of their introductory briefings, which
informed us of the difficulty of the challenges faced by
Guinea-Bissau since the cessation of the armed conflict
and of the risk of a reappearance of the conflict. In
addition, I must thank the Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS), Mr. David Stephen, for his briefing,
which, as usual, was particularly informative, detailed
and precise. I should also like to tell him and the whole
UNOGBIS team how much Cameroon appreciates the
remarkable work that they do every day to help
Guinea-Bissau to consolidate the peace and to restore
itself socio-economically.
From the Secretary-General's report
(S/2003/621), we see that the political and socio-
economic situation in Guinea-Bissau has deteriorated
further and remains a source of grave concern. The
persistence of political tensions, the radicalization of
the regime at this juncture and the deterioration of the
human rights situation are factors of potential
instability. Added to that is a particularly disastrous
economic and social situation that gives Guinea-Bissau
one of the lowest human development indices and
makes an already tenuous social climate even more
fragile. Thus, the situation in Guinea-Bissau is so
anaemic that the country has accumulated enormous
salary arrears amounting to approximately $11 million,
and Ambassador Kumalo just referred to hundreds of
children who are dying of hunger.

Clearly, the situation in Guinea-Bissau requires
urgent and vigorous action by the international
community. It also requires, first of all, the continued
commitment of the citizens of Guinea-Bissau
themselves, on whom rests the primary responsibility
to resolve their problems. At the very least, the
Security Council's efforts to make its contribution to
the success of Guinea-Bissau's experience in the area
of post-conflict rehabilitation in Africa must reflect a
constant search for a balance between the need for the
support of the international community and the
political will of the country emerging from conflict.
Those two rationales, which serve the same objective
of post-conflict relief and reconstruction, need to go
hand in hand. Undoubtedly, the political will of
Guinea-Bissau and the resolve of the international
community - particularly of the United Nations -
cannot fail to provide substantial support, where it is
needed, to the process of Guinea-Bissau's post-conflict
restoration.

Cameroon therefore wishes to join the Secretary-
General in acknowledging the commitment made
several months ago by the Bretton Woods institutions
to respond to the urgent needs of Guinea-Bissau's
population. However, my country hopes and requests
that that commitment be more specific, taking into
account urgent current needs, particularly Guinea-
Bissau's lack of liquidity, whose sad result is the
country's inability to pay its public servants, including
teachers.

In our view, the World Bank must consider
without delay the possibility of forgiving debt to
restore and rebuild the economy in order to reduce
social tensions, which would help to change the
political climate. With the support of the United
Nations Development Programme, the diligent
finalization of poverty reduction strategies could also
help to reconcile Guinea-Bissau's authorities with the
international financial institutions and make additional
resources available. Promoting a constructive dialogue
among Guinea-Bissau, the international community
and the Bretton Woods institutions requires that we
seriously consider easing or lightening the short-term
conditions imposed by donors on that country, which is
not currently in a position to meet them and lacks the
means to do so. Indeed, the Chairman of the Group of
Friends of Guinea-Bissau just asked us to consider that.
He welcomed the fact that, in January, the Economic
and Social Council approved the special report of the
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau, which
suggests, among other recommendations, the
establishment of a partnership between Guinea-Bissau
and the donor community.

We also welcome the fact that the mandate of the
Advisory Group has been extended to July 2003.
Cameroon reiterates its full support for the
recommendations in the report of the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group, and we encourage interested parties to create
conditions that will make this partnership a reality, in
the interest of the people of Guinea-Bissau.

The upcoming legislative elections will no doubt
be decisive in easing the political climate and will be
an opportunity to demonstrate the democratic maturity
of the people of Guinea-Bissau. In all circumstances,
the political forces must give priority to dialogue and
cooperation, taking this new opportunity to consolidate
the peace process and to tackle resolutely the
challenges of economic rehabilitation and
reconstruction facing that country. We believe that the
holding of free, transparent and regular elections will
contribute to strengthening the credibility of Guinea-
Bissau and to restoring the trust of its developmental
partners. It would also promote the establishment of
partnerships with them, particularly with the donor
community.

The Guinea-Bissau authorities have committed
themselves officially to organizing free and transparent
elections. They need the international community. The
international community must assist the country, as
those authorities have asked, during the electoral
process. In that context, we commend the initial
subsidy from the United Nations Development
Programme and the provision by Portugal of electoral
logistical support. We also welcome the decision of the
parliamentarians of the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries to give financial and logistical
support for the preparation and holding of the
elections, as well as to provide observers. Cameroon
encourages other potential partners to follow those
examples with pragmatism.

We have also noted the conclusions of the
evaluation mission referred to by Mr. Stephen earlier,
and we are pleased to note UNDP's continued technical
assistance to the National Electoral Commission.

I wish to express my country's full appreciation
for the great creativity of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Guinea-Bissau, the Security Council's Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, and the Group of Friends of Guinea-Bissau
in supporting that country in its reconstruction efforts.
The success of the Guinea-Bissau experience will
certainly enrich future recovery strategies for post-
conflict economic reconstruction within the framework
of an ad hoc advisory group created to that end by the
Economic and Social Council. The future of Guinea-
Bissau depends on that.

Finally, my delegation thanks the French
delegation for having submitted a draft presidential
statement, and it commends it for the manner in which
it has conducted the negotiations on that draft. The
measured tone and balanced language of the draft
statement will create conditions for dialogue that are
more favourable for the Security Council mission that
will go, in a few days, to Guinea-Bissau. Cameroon
concurs with it fully.

