Mr. Baja (Philippines): I would like to thank the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
Ambassador Denisov, for his comprehensive briefing
on the activities of the Committee over the past three
months and for the report of the Committee on its 13th
90-day work programme, covering from 1 October to
the end of the year.

Almost three years ago the Security Council
adopted resolution 1373 (2001), which gave birth to
the CTC in the aftermath of the trauma of 11
September 2001. In our view, the scourge of terrorism
remains one of the defining threats to international
peace and security of the twenty-first century. The
Council has harnessed the efforts of Member States to
fight this menace through the mechanisms of resolution
1373 (2001), which has served as the fulcrum for the
Council in the fight against terrorism. Earlier this year,
we sought to revitalize the work of the CTC through
resolution 1535 (2004) and the establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED). We
hope to see the CTED, under the leadership of Javier
Ruperez, activated as soon as possible, despite the
considerable bureaucratic process that will be required
if it is to get into full operation.

We are also grateful to Ambassador Ruperez for
his briefing on activities undertaken so far by the
CTED and for the future plan of action and objectives,
which we support. We are pleased that the Council has
again demonstrated its unity and resolve against the
enemies of peace by adopting, two weeks ago,
resolution 1566 (2004). That resolution will further add
substance and texture to the Council's efforts in
implementing practical measures against individuals
and groups that are engaged in terror throughout the
world.

We are pleased that the Council was unequivocal
in its conviction that, while we should not undermine
the rights and prerogatives enshrined in the Charter,
criminal acts against civilians can never be justified by
the purported nobility of the motivation for or
rationalization of such acts. The protection of innocent
civilians, especially women and children, is a
primordial value which the Council will preserve at all
times.

We welcome the strategy set out by Ambassador
Denisov as the CTC identifies efforts to achieve the
goals set out in resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1566
(2004). It is critically important for all Council bodies
dealing with international terrorism to ensure close
coordination and cooperation in pursuing their
respective mandates. Their functions and methods may
differ, but they are undivided and certain in their
mission to root out terror.

We support the idea that, in its activities, the CTC
should actively and effectively strengthen practical
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations in all areas related to
resolution 1373 (2001). We also agree that efforts must
be stepped up to develop direct dialogue and
information exchange with Member States on all
aspects of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001).

A growing number of States - 68 to date, as
Ambassador Denisov said - are unable to submit their
reports to the CTC on time. The Committee should
look into the reasons for that alarming trend. We
suspect that it is caused by the lack of capacity of
States to comply with the high standards that the CTC
may be setting for them. The Committee should
redouble its efforts to provide technical assistance to
States to enable them to comply with the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). The Committee must go
beyond its "switchboard orientation" in directing States
with regard to where to seek help and become involved
in the assessment and the effective programmes on how
States could be assisted in specific areas to enable them
to implement the requirements of resolution 1373
(2001).

One important initiative in helping the CTC to
pursue its mandate effectively is the visits that will be
undertaken to Member States to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to
engage in dialogue on States' technical and other
assistance needs. Aside from that initiative, the CTC
should consider innovations to further enhance
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
Given the difficulties faced by some States in their
individual attempts to implement the provisions of the
resolution, the possibility of a regional approach
among neighbouring States could also be looked into.
This approach made great sense in such areas as border
control among States that share common borders and
frontiers. Such States may be further encouraged to
establish among themselves early-warning systems and
mutual legal assistance mechanisms, which could help
develop strong synergy in the fight against terrorism.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing - as I
did in the Council's public meetings on this issue in
March and July - that the global effort against
terrorism requires the Security Council and the rest of
the membership of the United Nations to remain
committed partners if success is to be achieved in
eradicating the scourge of terrorism. It is our hope that
that will embody our shared goal as we move ahead in
that endeavour.

