Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): It was with great
interest that my delegation listened to your
observations, Mr. President, on the situation between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, as well as to the valuable
suggestion that you made this morning. I should also
like to pay tribute to you for the contribution of the
Netherlands to United Nations efforts to find a solution
to that prolonged conflict.

We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for
his informative briefing, which covered recent
important developments in the situation and informed
us about certain progress achieved in returning to
normality in the region.

We support the active efforts of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU). My delegation welcomes the
resumption last month, under the auspices of the OAU,
of the proximity talks between Ethiopia and Eritrea,
after the four-month break. It is encouraging that the
parties are focusing on peace plan implementation
issues. In this context, we welcome the commitments
of the Governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea to the
provisions of the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities, which has been clearly demonstrated as
both Governments cooperate closely with the United
Nations liaison offices.

United Nations military observers have been
deployed so far to the 11 operational team sites of the
Mission. It is important to speed up the work of the
liaison officers, as well as to establish points of contact
and interaction with the military headquarters of
Ethiopia and Eritrea at the front. That will facilitate,
we believe, the development of a timetable for further
deployment of military observers. We also believe that
it will be useful to receive from the United Nations
Secretariat, on a regular basis, a briefing and
information on phase three of the mission's deployment
and the preparation of the status-of-forces agreement to
be concluded between the United Nations and Ethiopia
and Eritrea.

We are pleased to note the important activities of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Legwaila, whose diplomatic skills and
experience are very well known to all of us. The report
on the meeting he had in Addis Ababa three days ago
gives us good reason for optimism. However, we
remain concerned about the humanitarian situation in
both Ethiopia and Eritrea, in particular in terms of food
and medicine supplies. A prompt and effective
response of the international community to the request
for the provision of humanitarian aid to both countries
is of particular importance. In this context, we call on
both Governments to continue to exercise every
restraint in order to prevent deterioration of the
humanitarian and human rights situation.

