The President: The Security Council will
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/1033, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Angola, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Guinea, Mexico, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1512 (2003).

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.
"The Security Council notes the invitation
of the General Assembly contained in operative
paragraph 7 of its resolution 57/289 of 20
December 2002 that it address uncertainties
regarding the power of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda under its Statute to finance
the upgrading of prison accommodation in which
persons convicted by the Tribunal are to serve
their sentences.

"The Security Council confirms that it is
within the lawful powers of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda under its Statute to
fund the renovation and refurbishment of prison
facilities in States that have concluded
agreements with the United Nations for the
carrying out of prison sentences of the Tribunal.
Such funds shall be used to bring up to
international minimum standards the prison
accommodation to be occupied or used, pursuant
to those agreements.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
this matter."

That statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2003/18.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 11.15 am.

