Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo for
her briefing.

Belgium is of the view that the situation in
Venezuela is a clear threat to the stability of the region.
In order to prevent the situation from deteriorating,
we call upon all members of the Security Council to
work together to promote a peaceful solution to recent
events. We call for violence to be avoided at all costs.
In that regard, I would like to make three points: first,
with regard to an appeal for restraint and de-escalation;
secondly, on the importance of complete humanitarian
access, in line with humanitarian principles; and,
thirdly, about the need to launch as soon as possible a
peaceful political process that paves the way for free
and transparent elections.

First of all, I should like to call on those with
influence on developments in the country to
demonstrate restraint. We call for calm and encourage
all actors to spare no effort to reduce tensions. We
firmly condemn the excessive use of force by security
forces, as well as by pro-Government factions. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has reported four deaths and more than
300 injured, in particular among the Pemon indigenous
community. Belgium extends its sincere condolences to
the families ofthe deceased. We call for an independent
investigation and recall the importance of respect for
the rights of demonstrators and the freedom of the press.

Secondly, the regime's refusal to acknowledge the
humanitarian emergency has led to escalating tensions.
Belgium calls on all actors to authorize the entry of aid
and facilitate the movement of humanitarian workers.
We underscore the importance of humanitarian aid
that seeks to ease the suffering of the most vulnerable,
under the supervision of the competent agencies of
the United Nations and in line with the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. It
is unacceptable for irregular armed groups to intimidate
civilians and members of the National Assembly who
have come together to distribute aid.

Thirdly, Belgium calls for the rapid launch of a
peaceful political process, which would pave the way
for free and transparent elections, enable the people
to freely express themselves and lead to reconciliation
in Venezuela. The current crisis in Venezuela is
political in nature; the solution must therefore also
be political. The presidential elections held in May
last year were not free, fair or credible, and therefore
deprived the Government of Nicolas Maduro of its
democratic legitimacy. We support Juan Guaido in his
constitutional duty to organize free, fair and democratic
presidential elections. The European Union established
a contact group during the transition period to support
the process.

The Venezuelan people have already suffered
enough. It is high time to let them decide their own
future. Belgium calls for a peaceful democratic
transition, restraint, de-escalation by all parties and
respect for political and human rights, in the broader
sense. Those are the essential tools for moving towards
lasting reconciliation in Venezuelan society. Belgium
will continue to closely monitor the situation on
the ground.

