Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): We, too, thank Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous and the Police Commissioners and heads
of police components from the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
for their comprehensive and highly informative
briefings. Your own statement this morning, Madam
President, has inspired us greatly.

We note that, more than any other institution, the
police is the most important link between the population
and the State. Rightly, the French have a saying: the fear
ofthe gendarme is the beginning ofwisdom. We believe
that should permeate even in the areas of peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and conflict resolution. There is nothing
more sobering or more reassuring to the population that
the presence of a police officer - the symbol of the
State, a representative of law and order and the executor
of justice.

With that reflection in mind, we commend the
delegation of Australia for organizing this first-ever
briefing by heads ofpolice components ofpeacekeeping
missions, which provides the Council with an
opportunity to hear directly from, and to interact with,
those responsible for implementing Council mandates
as they concern policing in peacekeeping.

We also welcome the adoption today of resolution
2185 (2014), the first-even Council resolution on
policing, which Nigeria was pleased tojoin as a sponsor.
We commend your delegation, Madam President, for its
leadership role in the drafting of the resolution. In our
view, this resolution should complement the similar
resolution 2151 (2014), adopted in April during Nigeria's
presidency. Through today's resolution, the Council
demonstrates its commitment to backing, among other
things, policing mandates with appropriate resources.
That is significant because police components are taking
on increasingly complex and multidimensional tasks in
the context of peacekeeping missions. To be effective,
they need to be adequately supported. The resolution
also shows that the Council recognizes the need for
close consultation between the Secretary-General and
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
as well as Member States, in order to promote system-
wide coherency in the policing-related work of the

United Nations. In that regard, the prerogative of the
General Assembly should also be respected.

To take a trip down memory lane, we would like
to note that policing in the context of peacekeeping
missions and special political missions is a matter of
great interest to Nigeria. Our involvement in policing
in the United Nations peacekeeping dates back to 1960,
when a Nigerian contingent of 400 police officers was
deployed to the Congo alongside the United Nations
Operation in the Congo. Since then, Nigeria has
participated in over 20 United Nations missions across
the world, involving the deployment of over 12,000
Nigerian police officers.

As indicated in the concept note for this briefing
(S/2014/788, annex), peacekeeping operations
have become multidimensional and now include
the protection of civilians, security sector reform
and support for electoral processes, post-conflict
stabilization, peacebuilding and the rule of law. The
role of the components of peacekeeping missions has
been transformed subsequently. Given that new reality,
Nigeria believes that the time is appropriate to address
policing in United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions. We share the opinion
expressed by the delegation of the United Kingdom
that this is very timely and indeed long overdue, and
that there should be a continuation of today's process
in terms of inviting heads of police components to brief
the Council on an annual basis and to participate in
deliberations as and when necessary.

Given that reality, Nigeria believes that the
time is appropriate, as I said, to address policing in
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
Being an integral part of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the police component must function
interdependently with all other components, including
the military and civilian components, during mandate
implementation. Our briefers have charge of critical
aspects ofpolicing in peacekeeping and special political
missions. It is crucial to note that each peacekeeping
operation and special political mission has unique
challenges, requiring unique responses. For effective
policing in United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, the following measures
might be taken into account.

First, policing mandates must be clearly
formulated. We support the position of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations that this can be
effectively achieved through sustained triangular
cooperation between the Council, the Secretariat and
police-contributing countries. In that regard, that trio,
in consultation with host States, must come up with
workable standards, including relevant training and
effective coordination to facilitate the implementation
of policing mandates.

Secondly, police-contributing countries must be
encouraged to provide personnel with the relevant
competence to carry out mandated tasks.

Thirdly, the police must have the requisite
predeployment training to enhance understanding of
the environment in their areas of primary assignment.
That will facilitate their integration and allow them to
function effectively.

Fourthly, adequate resources, including equipment
and funds, must be made available for the police to
implement their mandates without any hindrance.

Fifthly, the host State must guarantee the safety of
United Nations police whenever deployed and cooperate
fully with them in the discharge of their mandate.

Sixthly, in order to enhance the role of women in
United Nations policing, emphasis should be placed on
assigning roles based on comparative advantages. We
consider it appropriate for policewomen to be given a
central role in the protection of women and children.
That, we believe, will help to promote the women and
peace and security agenda of the United Nations.

As policing mandates continue to evolve in response
to the changing pattern of conflicts, it is crucial that
the Council be kept abreast of developments related to
United Nations policing in order to adopt the relevant
mandates. That will be aided by regular briefings by
heads of police components, as reflected in resolution
2185 (2014), which we have just adopted. We look
forward to the Secretary-General's strategic review on
United Nations peacekeeping, which we expect will be
carried out in consultation with Member States through
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
We also call upon the Peacebuilding Support Office
and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to invite all
heads of police components to participate in the review
of the PBC's work to be held in June 2015.

