Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council, in line with
resolution 2479 (2019).

I have just returned from the Sudan, where I
travelled from 7 to 10 October with Mr. Sma'il Chergui,
African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security. During our visit, we met with Mr. Abdalla
Hamdok, Prime Minister of the Sudan, General
Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, Vice-Chair of the Sovereign
Council, as well as the diplomatic community and
senior officials at central and local Government levels,
including the Acting Wali of Northern Darfur, during a
one-day field trip to El Fasher. During our visit, we also
held on 7 October the 27th meeting of the Tripartite
Coordination Mechanism on the United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), together with senior
representatives of the Sudanese Foreign Ministry. On
10 October in Addis Ababa, we also briefed the African
Union Peace and Security Council. I will share my
impressions from that joint visit in a moment.

Since my most recent briefing on the situation
in Darfur on 26 August (see S/PV.8603), remarkable
developments have taken place in the Sudan. On
8 September, a new Cabinet led by Prime Minister
Abdalla Hamdok was sworn in. Four members of the new
Cabinet are women, including the Minister for Foreign
Affairs. Prime Minister Hamdok rapidly articulated the
priorities of his Cabinet, which are focused primarily
on achieving lasting and comprehensive peace across
the Sudan and the urgently needed economic recovery.
He articulated those same priorities during his remarks
at the high-level event on the Sudan on 27 September
in New York, which he co-chaired with the Secretary-
General and the Chairperson of the AU Commission.

Consistent with the priorities set out in the
Constitutional Declaration signed on 17 August,
including the one related to the urgent need to end
conflicts across the Sudan, on 11 September the
Sovereign Council and a number of armed groups,
including several Darfuri groups, signed, under the
auspices of President Salva Kiir Mayardit of South
Sudan, the Juba Declaration for Confidence-building
Procedures and the Preparation for Negotiation. The
Declaration constitutes a road map and trust-building
agreement for the peace process, under which the
parties have agreed on, among other measures, a
ceasefire, the opening of humanitarian corridors,
the release of war prisoners, the end of travel bans
for the movements' leaders, and the establishment of
a preparatory committee for peace negotiations. As
Council members are aware, negotiations began on
14 October in Juba, with the objective of reaching a
peace agreement by 14 December. It should be noted
that, for the first time in the modern history of the
Sudan, this process is expected to be widely inclusive
of almost all armed groups.

On 16 October, negotiations were suspended for 24
hours after the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-
North, led by Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu, suspended its
participation, accusing the Government of violating
the cessation of hostilities in Khor Waral, in South
Kordofan. The authorities have indicated that the
clashes involved herders and merchants, and condemned
these incidents. The Head of the Sovereign Council,
General Al-Burhan, also issued a decree announcing a
nationwide ceasefire on the same day.

While the effects of these talks on the ground are
yet to be seen, the overall security situation in Darfur
has remained largely unchanged since my last briefing,
despite several incidents detailed in the report before the
Council (S/2019/816). However, the Mission has noted
that the gradual shift of the attention of the authorities
to the security challenges in Khartoum has contributed
to leaving some gaps in the effective functioning of
security institutions across the Darfur states, where
incidents of criminality have increased. This has been
the case particularly in camps for internally displaced
persons (IDPs), and the number of incidents of farm
destruction and unlawful occupation of land in various
parts of Darfur was reported to be higher than during
the same period last year. Meanwhile, intermittent
armed clashes between Government forces and the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA-AW)
continued in the Jebel Marra area, with the movement
targeting Sudan Armed Forces positions around Golo.

The humanitarian situation continued to be
characterized by the trends identified in our special
report of 30 May (S/2019/445). Since then, more people
have been displaced as a result of intercommunal
conflict and of fighting between security forces and the
SLA-AW. As of the end of August, the peak of the lean
season, more than 1.8 million people were facing phase
3 or phase 4 levels of food insecurity across Central,
East, North and South Darfur. This represents 17 to
24 per cent of the population, depending on the state,
compared to an average of 14 per cent for the whole
of the Sudan. Meanwhile, the overall humanitarian
situation in the Sudan is getting worse as the economic
crisis compounds the impact of conflict, political
instability, natural hazards and disease outbreaks. Over
8 million people are estimated to need humanitarian
assistance or protection.

The Mission has continued to implement its
mandate, including on the protection of civilians. Despite
challenges, UNAMID's transition-related activities
have also continued, with joint programmatic activities
with the United Nations country team undertaken
within the framework of the State liaison functions in
four Darfur states. The State liaison functions have
contributed to enhancing the United Nations country
team's presence and operations in Darfur, for example
in East Darfur, where nine agencies, funds and
programmes are currently operating, compared to five
prior to January 2019. The extension of the State liaison
functions to the greater Jebel Marra area is planned
to begin in January 2020, although security concerns
and the limited presence of the United Nations country
team in that area continue to challenge the expansion
process there.
Let me now say a few words on the Visit we just
concluded with Commissioner Chergui, which gave
us a timely opportunity to review progress made in
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in
Darfur, in the light of the most recent developments
and ahead of the envisioned closure of UNAMID. We
were able to discuss with Sudanese counterparts the
challenges facing Government institutions in taking
over key responsibilities entrusted heretofore to
UNAMID, including for the protection of civilians and
security. It was also a chance to discuss the prospects
for longer-term engagement by the AU and the United
Nations following UNAMID's departure.

During our meeting, Prime Minister Hamdok made
a strong request for a well-sequenced transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding in Darfur, aligned with
the Government's priorities and time frame, that would
take the ongoing talks into consideration in defining
the next steps. The Prime Minister indicated that
this request was based on the concerns expressed by
the armed groups during their consultations with the
Government of the Sudan that led to the adoption of
the Juba Declaration on 11 September. In this context,
Members of the Security Council will recall that
among the streamlined benchmarks developed by the
joint United Nations-AU strategic review of UNAMID
earlier this year and presented in the 30 Mayjoint report
of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-
General (S/2019/445), a specific reference was made
to the importance of resuming peace talks with a view
to reaching comprehensive peace across Darfur so as
to create the conditions for a successful exit strategy
for UNAMID.

During our meetings, Government officials also
insisted on the need for the international community to
unequivocally support the new momentum for peace in
Darfur and the Two Areas, initiated with the ongoing
talks in Juba. In this context, our interlocutors deplored
the fact that, despite Prime Minister Hamdok's initiative
to meet with Abdul Wahid Al-Nur of the SLA-AW in
Paris on 30 September, the latter has continued to reject
the transition process and the new Government and is
yet to join the peace talks process. In our view, every
effort should be made to impress upon all concerned
groups the imperative of seizing the momentum
for peace.

Looking ahead, the Government has requested
more time to formulate its needs for a possible follow-
on mechanism to UNAMID, making us unable
to respond to the Council's request for options at
this time. However, during the 27th meeting of the
Tripartite Coordination Mechanism on UNMAMID,
in Khartoum on 7 October, we established a joint task
force that should finalize options for a possible follow-
on presence to be presented in the December 2019
progress report to be submitted to the two Councils. It
should be noted that, in our consultations with Sudanese
authorities, we have emphasized the importance for any
follow-on presence to be guided by the priorities set out
by the Government in order to ensure full ownership of
this possible future partnership for peacebuilding in the
Sudan. Consistent with the political strategy outlined
in the report before the Council, we stressed during
our meetings in Khartoum the readiness of the AU
and the United Nations to actively support the ongoing
talks with a view to ensuring that the peace process
remains inclusive of all armed groups in Darfur and the
Two Areas.

In resolution 2479 (2019), the Security Council
requests the AU Commission Chairperson and the
Secretary-General to provide recommendations on the
appropriate course of action regarding the drawdown
of UNAMID. In the light of the recent developments
on the ground, the report contains two options for
the Security Council's consideration. In the first,
consistent with the AU Peace and Security Council
communique of 13 June, we are proposing to undertake
a geographical realignment of UNAMID's footprint
from the 13 locations currently remaining down to five
team sites, mainly located in central Jebel Marra, where
armed elements are still active. This option takes into
account the conflict trends of the past year, as presented
in the 30 May report, and prioritizes those sites that had
seen no major security incidents during the reporting
period. Accordingly, and for an initial period of six
months, which coincides with the anticipated duration
of the talks, UNAMID would retain the same ceiling
of uniformed personnel. As mentioned in the special
report of May, while the military component would
be consolidated into fewer sites, the Mission would
maintain an appropriate reserve capacity to intervene
in extremis situations in locations from which
UNAMID has withdrawn, such as when the physical
protection of civilians is required. Under the second
option, UNAMID would proceed with its drawdown,
as outlined in our previous report, with a view to
completing the drawdown by end of June 2020.

For both options, we agreed with the Government
during the recent tripartite meeting that closed
team sites would be handed over to the transitional
authorities, in line with United Nations rules and
regulations for civilian-end purposes and in accordance
with the sequenced handover plan already developed
by UNAMID and the Government. The United Nations
would also maintain a presence in vacated areas through
the State liaison functions that would be established to
bring together UNAMID, the United Nations country
team and Sudanese Government institutions in support
of the rule of law, human rights and durable solutions
for IDPs and local communities.

I should note, however, that based on our
interactions with many stakeholders on the ground and
our consultations last week with the African Union
Peace and Security Council, our recommendation
would be to adopt an approach that would align the
next phase of the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in Darfur with the pace ofthe peace talks
in Juba, and therefore the first option would be more
consistent with this approach. That is also in line with
the AU Peace and Security Council communique of
10 October, which stresses the need for the withdrawal
of the Mission to take into account the progress made
in the peace process.

In the months ahead, our strategy to support the
Government's efforts to achieve a comprehensive peace
would also require adjusting UNAMID's priorities to
focus on support for the peace process, the tasks related
to the implementation of the peace agreement, the
Peace Commission and the strengthening of the State
liaison functions and their expansion in Jebel Marra.

I would like to conclude by echoing a key message
that we have repeatedly heard during our visit. Effective
peace consolidation in Darfur and the wider Sudan
cannot be achieved without tangible progress on the
economic recovery front. However, from all accounts,
resource mobilization remains a major challenge that
bears the potential to unravel the positive gains made
thus far by the Sudanese leadership and the people on
the path to political and economic stability. In that
regard, the Secretary-General has made a strong call
for the lifting of all economic and financial sanctions
on the Sudan and for the removal of the Sudan from
the list of countries sponsoring terrorism. The United
Nations system is actively engaged with partners of the
Sudan in forging a path towards alleviating some of the
most pressing economic challenges facing the country.

The Sudan is at a historic crossroads. We have a
unique opportunity to support the authorities in ending
the conflicts that have plagued the country for years.
We are committed to doing everything that we can to
accompany the Government, according to its vision
and its pace, to build an inclusive and lasting peace in
Darfur and the wider Sudan. I hope that we can count
on the Council's support in that critical endeavour.

