Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The unanimous adoption by the Security Council a few
minutes ago of resolution 1044 (1996) must send a clear,
unambiguous message to the Government of the Sudan: that
the international community, as represented by the Security
Council, is resolute in its support for the implementation of
all the decisions of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution. The resolution reaffirms the need for the
international community to combat the phenomenon of
terrorism. It also reaffirms the Council's resolute intention
to deter all those who might be tempted to support
terrorism, including the States which might be involved in
such criminal acts.

The Council has condemned the failed terrorist
assassination attempt on the life of President
Hosni Mubarak as he arrived on the morning of 26 June
last to participate in the OAU Summit in Addis Ababa.
Undoubtedly, the timing of the perpetration of this heinous
crime reflects the existence of an organized conspiracy
which had been prepared long before the commission of
the crime itself.

The resolution of the Council condemns the attempt
as a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and integrity of
Ethiopia and as an attempt to disturb the peace and
security of the region as a whole. The resolution has thus
reaffirmed the statement of the OAU Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution that
there is a conspiracy whose consequences extend beyond
Ethiopia, the State on whose territory the attempt took
place, and also beyond Egypt, the country whose
President was the target of the attempt - because the
attempt was against the whole of Africa.

Terrorism, if not dealt with strongly and resolutely,
will jeopardize international peace and security.
Therefore, it is clear that the Council is dealing not with
a bilateral dispute between two States, which can be
settled by internationally established methods, but with a
dispute that concerns the peace and security of the whole
of Africa.

Despite the extreme gravity of the matter, it was put
before the Security Council more than six months after
the assassination attempt took place, after the Ethiopian
investigations have proved beyond a shadow of a doubt
that some of the terrorists who participated in the
perpetration of the crime had fled to the Sudan, and that
some of them had spent a long time hatching the
conspiracy. As soon as the investigations were concluded,
the Ethiopian Government relayed all the information
available to it to the Government of Sudan. Regrettably,
the latter intentionally wasted time and made repeated
promises of cooperation - indeed, it moved to change
some of the high officials of the security services in the
Sudan in an attempt to give an impression that any
collusion or cover-up was the responsibility of those high
officials, who had left office. This makes it clear that
there is an attempt to hide some of the facts pertaining to
the heinous assassination attempt.

After the efforts made by the Ethiopian Government
on the bilateral level with the Sudan had failed, Ethiopia
resorted to the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution. The Mechanism considered
all the evidence furnished by Ethiopia, which confirmed
beyond a shadow of a doubt all Ethiopia's attempts to
convince Sudan to extradite the suspects that had fled
there, cooperate with the Ethiopian investigation to bring
those suspects to justice and uncover all the dimensions

 

of the conspiracy. I repeat: all those attempts, very
regrettably, have failed.

After the OAU Mechanism had discussed and
considered the matter in all its aspects on 11 September
1995, it made a statement that addresses two clear, concrete
and decisive requests to the Sudan. The first was to
extradite to Ethiopia for prosecution the three suspects
sheltering in the Sudan, on the basis of the 1964 Extradition
Treaty between the two countries. The second was to desist
from engaging in activities of assisting, supporting and
facilitating terrorist activities and from giving shelter and
sanctuaries to terrorist elements and to act in its relations
with its neighbours and with others in full conformity with
the Charter of the United Nations and with the Charter of
the OAU.

The Organization of African Unity did not confine
itself to the adoption of this clear statement. It sent a
mission to the Sudan to urge it to cooperate in the full
implementation of the resolution. On more than one
occasion, the Secretary-General of the OAU similarly urged
the Foreign Minister of Sudan and the Sudanese
Ambassador in Addis Ababa, but to no avail. This forced
Ethiopia once again to resort to the OAU Mechanism,
whose Central Organ adopted on 19 December a new
statement that restates the need for the Sudan to comply
with all the recommendations made by the Mechanism in
September.

When Ethiopia resorted to the Security Council at the
beginning of this year, it did so using its rights under the
United Nations Charter, in particular the right provided in
Article 35. That article makes it clear that any Member of
the United Nations may bring to the Security Council's
attention any dispute which could threaten international
peace and security. In addition, Article 54 makes it clear
that the Security Council shall at all times be kept fully
informed of activities undertaken by regional organizations
or arrangements for the maintenance of international peace
and security.

The resolution the Council has just adopted proves that
there is no divergence between the requirements of
international law and the resolutions adopted by the
regional organization concerned: they are mutually
supportive and they help each other achieve their
objectives. There is no conflict in dealing with the matter
on the regional and on the international levels. As I have
said, the requirements of international law are identical with
the requirements of regional law.

The fact that the Council has considered the matter
could well spare the international community a real crisis,
which, were it to escalate, would threaten regional
security and stability and jeopardize international peace
and security.

By adopting the resolution, the Council has shown
itself ready and willing to respond to the situation and
discharge its responsibilities under the Charter. It is our
sincere hope that the Government of the Sudan will take
the Council's resolution and the OAU's decisions with all
necessary seriousness, given that, under the Charter, all
the Council's resolutions are binding on all States.

The Government of Egypt continues to hope that the
Government of the Sudan will comply, without delay or
equivocation, with the clear demands of the international
community set out in resolution 1044 (1996). We hope
that the Secretary-General will come back to the Security
Council with a report that the Sudan has implemented has
implemented all the measures described therein, which are
identical in letter and in spirit with those in the statements
of the Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism. Egypt is
confident that all States will make efforts to urge the
Sudan to implement the decisions of the Central Organ
and thereby comply with the provisions of the resolution
just adopted by the Security Council.

Implementation by the Sudan of this resolution
would represent a genuine and radical change in the
Sudan's stance and would be a clear indication that the
Government of the Sudan will abandon its present
policies, which have led it into the regrettable position it
finds itself in now.

Allow me, Mr. President, to conclude my statement
with a reaffirmation that every Egyptian feels that the
age-long historical bonds between the peoples of the Nile
valley, in the Sudan and in Egypt, are special. We in
Egypt consider ourselves to be a natural extension of the
Sudan and that the people of the Sudan are a natural
extension of ourselves. Any harm that befalls the people
of the Sudan befalls the people of Egypt; any harm that
befalls the people of Egypt befalls the people of the
Sudan.

There can be no doubt that Egypt takes a keen
interest in a return by the Sudanese Government to the
proper path, thereby enabling the fraternal people of the
Sudan to enjoy prosperity, stability and good relations
with all its neighbours, and with Egypt in particular,
which would be an expression of the strong bonds

 

between the Egyptian and the Sudanese peoples. These
bonds have been strengthened and consolidated throughout
the course of history, and will continue, God willing, to be
strengthened and consolidated in the future.

