I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Envoy of the Secretary- General for the Horn of Africa, for their briefings. We welcome the participation of the representatives of the Sudan and Ethiopia. We express our appreciation for the stabilizing role of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in the Area and along the border between the Sudan and South Sudan, including its support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM). We would also like to commend Ethiopia and its peacekeepers for their dedicated contribution. The ongoing political transitions in the Sudan and South Sudan represented pivotal developments over the past few months, which inspired hope in positive change and comprehensive peace. The Governments of both the Sudan and South Sudan have been actively engaging with each other through reciprocal visits by their leaders and mutual support for their respective peace processes. We believe that it is important for the Sudan and South Sudan, and for the Security Council, to capitalize on those positive developments so that the pursuit of just and sustainable peace in both countries extends to the Abyei Area. We encourage both Governments to foster rapprochement and mutual trust, with a view to reaching a lasting settlement of the status of the Abyei Area. We also urge them to revitalize their cooperation, including with the African Union High- level Implementation Panel, so as to resolve outstanding issues, as outlined in the cooperation agreement between the Republic of the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan of 2012. Tunisia notes the overall progress in the implementation of the UNISFA mandate in Abyei and along the border, as outlined in the report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/308). We commend in particular the continuous engagement of the mission with the officials in Khartoum and Juba, as well as at the Abyei local level. However, despite the encouraging political trends, challenges remain in view of the, sadly, avoidable intercommunal violence, the threat of armed groups and the widespread weapons within the Abyei Area. We are concerned about the escalation of attacks across intercommunal lines, the latest of which was on Mabok village in southern Abyei on 13 April. We express our support for UNISFA's efforts in pushing local peace processes forward to resolve seasonal migration issues and promote intercommunal reconciliation. We also praise UNISFA's efforts to empower women's participation in local peace committees in order to enhance the prospects for lasting peace. The spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has forced a priority shift for many affected countries across the globe. We reiterate the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire and call on parties to exercise self-restraint within the Abyei Area, so that the Sudan and South Sudan can focus on carrying out their challenging State-building tasks. On the way forward for the United Nations presence in Abyei, we would like to endorse the recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his report on the extension of UNISFA's mandate and its support for the JBVMM for a further period of six months, which remain vital for the stabilization of the Abyei Area and along the border. We are of the view that UNISFA's mandate needs to be calibrated and contextualized so as to align with the priority shifts of and the pace maintained by the parties in order to bolster peace, security and development endeavours and effectively counter the COVID-19 pandemic. We stand ready to engage constructively in the upcoming negotiations on further modalities for such extension.
