Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): As
this is the first open meeting of the Security Council
under the presidency of Poland, I am pleased to reaffirm
the full support of my delegation and wish you, Madam
President, every success in your endeavours. We would
also like to thank you, Madam, for your kind words on
the Peruvian presidency. We appreciate the convening of
this debate, as well as the important briefing delivered
by High Representative Valentin Inzko.

Peru recognizes the unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
validity of the 1995 General Framework Agreement
for Peace. It is an agreement that, with the support of
the international community, lays the foundation for
stability and the maintenance of peace in the country,
and has important implications for the region. We note
with concern the limited progress on the implementation
of the 5+2 agenda required to close the Office of the
High Representative and consolidate the State in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In view of that, and given the
forthcoming general elections scheduled for October,
we would like to highlight the need to make progress on
two lines of action that we believe are essential to build
sustainable peace.

First, I will speak on the rule of law and
institution-building. We appreciate the efforts to
comply with the decisions of the Constitutional Court
to amend the regulatory framework of the various levels
of Government. However, we are concerned about the
lack of action on the legislative developments required
to reform the electoral law and the Code of Criminal
Procedure. We believe that those are necessary to ensure
inclusive elections and effectively fight corruption
and organized crime. There are also concerns about
violations of the law on the temporary prohibition
of the disposal of State property and the continued
existence of provisions on the celebration of the Day
of the Republic of Serbia. We believe that the decisions
of the Constitutional Court must be fully implemented.

Secondly, I will address political dialogue,
moderation and agreement. We believe that sustaining
peace requires building a common vision of the future
by and for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ethnic, cultural and religious diversity must be
understood as values of their society. Peru encourages
greater engagement of women and youth in the national
political process, including in the upcoming general
elections. We consider it urgent to overcome the
paralysis of the Parliamentary Assembly, which has
been impeding the necessary reforms to guarantee the
smooth running of the State.

We are particularly concerned about belligerent
rhetoric, which is exacerbated by the election campaign,
questioning of the State authority, secessionist threats
and increased arms purchases by law enforcement.
Such actions increase the feeling of instability.
Political leaders have the primary responsibility of
building sustainable peace. That involves rejecting
hate speech and the glorification of war criminals
and, to the contrary, setting an example of moderation
and commitment to the complex and delicate process
of reconciliation.

In conclusion, we would like to underline the
importance of full cooperation between the parties
and the High Representative and the European Union
Operation Althea, to whom we would like to reiterate
Peru's full support in the implementation of their
respective mandates.

