Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank the Special Representative, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her briefing. I wish to touch on three points. First, I wish to focus on the ongoing security challenges in the eastern part of the country. We condemn the recurrent attacks targeting civilians and armed forces in the Kivus and in Ituri. The incidents in Ituri have resulted in some dozen casualties just last week. There is an overriding need to put an end to the illegal exploitation of natural resources and to ease intercommunal tensions by strengthening the presence of the State so as to break the cycle of violence. In those provinces, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) must focus its efforts not only on the protection of civilians but also on the stabilization of and support for Congolese institutions. In that regard, efforts towards disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, specifically as concerns the Force de resistance patriotique de Il'Ituri, must be duly carried out. Because the violence is perpetrated by both domestic and foreign armed groups, regional cooperation must be scaled up. In that regard, I welcome the initiatives adopted by President Tshisekedi. The Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework should generate tangible results for political stability and for peace. I turn now to my second point. At the humanitarian level, the end of the eleventh Ebola epidemic in the western part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a success to the credit of both the Congolese Government and the partners that contributed thereto, specifically the World Health Organization. However, violations of international humanitarian law remain of great concern. Food insecurity is worsening. There is a vital need to guarantee humanitarian access to all people in need and to protect civilians, specifically women and children. Attacks targeting humanitarian personnel must end. It is essential that human rights be respected. Measures taken to combat the coronavirus disease pandemic must not be used to justify violations of those rights. Moreover, we must also support the country in seeking to surmount the economic and social fallout from the pandemic. Stepping up the fight against impunity and achieving transitional justice and intercommunal reconciliation are all prerequisites for a lasting peace. Turning to my third and final point, it is incumbent on the Security Council to support MONUSCO's transition. The joint strategy presented by MONUSCO and the Democratic Republic of the Congo charts a clear course: namely, to focus the Mission on areas where the situation is most volatile and to pursue the consolidation of both the State and its institutions. That strategy lays the foundation for the transfer of tasks from MONUSCO to the Congolese authorities and to the country team. Of course, this transition should be both gradual and sequenced. The lasting stabilization of the country will also require further efforts and commitment on the part of all stakeholders. I would note in particular justice and security-sector reform, but I would mention also development programmes. In all of those areas, the full participation of women will be of vital importance. The Democratic Republic of the Congo knows that it can count on the full support of France in that respect. As the Council prepares to renew MONUSCO's mandate, I should like to pay tribute to its personnel, who are operating in a volatile environment conditions in which they are frequently targeted. In that context, MONUSCO must be able to reach full operational capacity, which hinges on the reconfiguration of the Force Intervention Brigade. Discussions are currently under way among contributing countries and the Secretariat, which should facilitate the prompt enactment of the decisions taken by the Security Council. The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United Nations are laying the foundation for a renewed partnership. It is now our duty to support it on the path to a lasting peace.
