Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on a successful presidency and on
choosing this very timely and important subject as the
theme of this open debate, at a time when peace and its
keepers are facing difficult challenges.

Lebanon and the United Nations have been strategic
partners regarding the question of peacekeeping for
almost half a century, through the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). That interim
period has lasted 40 years. The mandate of UNIFIL,
as members of the Council are aware, is based on
resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978) and resolution
1701 (2006). Today, UNIFIL has 10,500 troops from 41
countries, making it one of the largest United Nations
peacekeeping operations around the world. Moreover,
the Lebanese Government committed 15,000 troops in
2006 to be deployed in southern Lebanon for the first
time in 30 years.

In your concept note (S/2018/184, annex),
Mr. President, you ask what host nations can do to help

peacekeepers. I will answer that question by talking
about the strategic relationship between Lebanon and
UNIFIL. However, first allow me, on behalf ofLebanon,
to say that we are very grateful to UNIFIL and every
single country, many of which are represented around
this table and in this Chamber, for their participation
in the peacekeeping Mission. UNIFIL has lost 312
soldiers since 1978, and Lebanon will always be
indebted and humbled by the sacrifice of the families
of those soldiers and their countries.

The partnership between the Lebanese Armed
Forces (LAF) and UNIFIL has been consolidated
and cemented since 2006, when the Lebanese army's
fifth brigade deployed in the south to extend the
Government's authority and ensure security and
stability in the region. LAF and UNIFIL soldiers do
routine patrols and work in close coordination on all
issues related to security and stability in the area of
operations. While the situation on the border is fragile,
that partnership has helped to establish a new strategic
environment in the south and, although it is not perfect,
there is calm on the Blue Line. UNIFIL conducts
land and maritime joint exercises with the LAF and
contributes to mine clearing and mine awareness and
education for local populations.

There are vital requirements for a host country
to support and strengthen peacekeeping forces. I will
now detail five of those requirements that the Lebanese
Government has been fulfilling:

First, since the adoption of resolution 2373
(2017), the Lebanese Government has been working
on establishing a model regiment to deploy in the
south to further enhance the Lebanese Government's
security presence in the area. The Rome conference
was a concrete example of the Lebanese Government's
commitment to strengthening its national military and
security forces. That enables the Government to exert
control over and assume responsibility for security in
the country and ease the burden of peacekeepers.

Secondly, the Lebanese Government has shown
strong will, resolve and unparalleled commitment to
ensuring that UNIFIL succeeds in its mission.

Thirdly, Lebanese officials express their support for
UNIFIL through the Lebanese Government's repeated
public statements of support regarding resolution 1701
(2006) and its full implementation, with visits of high-
level officials to UNIFIL's headquarters and area
of operations.

Fourthly, communication and good relations with
the local population are equally important for the
success of a peacekeeping operation, and Lebanon
encourages such relationships. UNIFIL helps the local
civilian population through many projects, such as
quick impact projects, which address the most pressing
needs of the population

Fifthly, one of the most strategically vital roles
of a peacekeeping force is prevention. In that regard,
Lebanon and the United Nations, through the Tripartite
Committee, have been able to diffuse tension, solve
problems, de-escalate and avoid conflict in southern
Lebanon on an almost daily basis.

Twelve years after the adoption of resolution 1701
(2006), we have seen no sign of progress on reaching
a permanent ceasefire, solving the underlying political
problems in the region, such as Israeli withdrawal from
the occupied Lebanese territory, or halting its daily
violations of Lebanese sovereignty by land, air and
sea. We in Lebanon are encouraged by the Secretary-
General's peace and security architecture reform and
support his endeavours, but what is needed is action
from the Security Council that solves the political
problems and tackles the root causes of issues. Open-
ended peacekeeping operations do not end conflicts;
implementing United Nations resolutions does.

TheSecurityCouncilhastoshoulderitsresponsibility
and end the gridlock that has characterized its work
for the past few years. Peacebuilding, prevention and
coalescing around the will of a Security Council that
works for permanent solutions and not security band
aids is what will make durable peace a reality around
the world, especially in the Middle East.

