The President: I thank Mr. Chergui for his briefing.

The Council has before it the draft text ofa statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today's meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2016/l2.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan.

Let me begin by expressing my deep appreciation
for the informative and insightful briefingsjust given by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Amina
Chawahir Mohamed of Kenya and Commissioner Smail
Chergui of the African Union. I would also like to
thank the Ministers from Angola, France, Malaysia and
Senegal for their presence here today.

At the outset, we might want to ask ourselves why
we need to discuss peacebuilding in Africa. The answer
is quite straightforward: Africa and its people possess
a rich culture and traditions and a huge potential for
future growth. But there are African countries that are
suffering from conflicts, confrontations and terrorism.
As we know, the Republic of South Sudan has been
facing grave challenges. Japanese peacekeepers are
working alongside international forces in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), which was
originally mandated to support peace-consolidation
efforts aimed at fostering State-building, with an
emphasis on institution-building. In the light of the
changes on the ground, UNMISS now focuses on the
protection of civilians and other urgent tasks. We need
to pool our collective wisdom in order to engage in
institution-building in countries where confrontation
persists.

Much greater efforts and resources are needed to
address situations once conflicts occur than to prevent
situations from turning into conflicts or relapsing into
conflicts. Whether we succeed in building national
institutions conducive to peace and stability in Africa
is enormously important.

During this open debate, I would like to encourage
representatives to focus on the significant role played by
institution-building, particularly in conflict prevention.
I look forward to pragmatic discussions that might show
us the way forward as we consider lessons learned.

Now let me touch upon Japan's three principles on
peacebuilding in Africa.

First, there is an emphasis on people and the field.
We move forward together with local populations,
empowering the people on the ground.

Secondly, we put emphasis on improving living
standards through inclusive economic development,
which serves as the basis of peace.

The third principle is tolerance of diversity. While
emphasizing universal values, Japan also respects the
importance of ethnic diversity and local ownership, and
is cautious not to rush to quick results.

These principles are in line with the basic
philosophy of the Tokyo International Conference on
African Development (TICAD) process: ownership and
partnership. TICAD VI, which will be held in Kenya
this August, will be a good opportunity to promote
peacebuilding in Africa via development. Japan will
continue to engage with Africa through the open
process of TICAD, based on a broad partnership with
the United Nations and other international bodies.

Bearing in mind these three principles, let me
outline four priority areas for Japan's peacebuilding
efforts.

First, the focus ofour support is institution-building
in Africa, while also respecting the continent's diversity,
unique characteristics and traditional institutions. In
Chad, Japan has supported the enhanced administration
of electoral institutions, as well as the design of systems
to manage election-related disputes. In this context, it is
useful to collaborate with regional organizations with a
deep understanding of the local context.

Secondly, we support capacity-building for the
people who actually run the institutions. In order
to eradicate violence and terror, we need to train the
police forces in communities. Japan has supported a
police-training programme in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo for more than 20,000 police officers. In
addition, Japan will cooperate with the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Organization to promote capacity-
building for legal institutions.

Thirdly, in order to sustain peace, we need
to build trust in addition to institutions. In C6te
d'Ivoire, Japan has supported strengthened capacity
of the administrative services, with an eye towards
social integration, in order to restore trust between
administration and the people.

Lastly, we need innovation in peacebuilding
methods. There is ample room for expanded use of
science and technology. In North Africa, Japan has
supported the installation of high-tech surveillance
cameras to improve security and border control.

Japan also contributes to peacebuilding in Africa
through expanded training of industry professionals
and coordination between industry, Government and
academia.

In order to promote peacebuilding, enhanced
cooperation for counter-terrorism is critical. To
strengthen counter-terrorism capacity in Africa, I
would like to announce here that Japan will implement
the assistance of $120 million, including human
resource development of 30,000 people, from 2016 to
2018. The purpose of this assistance is to strengthen
capacity for information and data collection in Africa.
This will include border control at international
airports with cutting-edge technologies and for security
maintenance, including criminal justice enforcement
and the capacity-building of police forces.

We need to break down silos in order to achieve a
seamless transition ofpeacebuilding. The entire United
Nations system, national Governments, civil society
and all related actors need to work together over the
long term.

As a Foreign Minister who comes from Hiroshima,
peace is particularly close to my heart. After the
Second World War, Japan succeeded in rebuilding its
institutions by learning from foreign countries while also
maintaining the best parts of its traditional institutions.
We will continue to reflect on our experience as we
make further efforts for peacebuilding in Africa.

I would like to conclude my remarks by reiterating
Japan's strong commitment to contributing to the peace
and security of Africa. We will also fully utilize the
Views expressed in today's debate at the upcoming
TICAD VI summit in Nairobi and beyond.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

I now call on His Excellency Mr. Anifah Aman,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.

