Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his briefing today. Both yesterday and today, he
spoke of the litany horrors that the Syrian population
has experienced in the past seven years, of which
the chemical-weapons attacks are among the most
gruesome. The world hardly needs reminding of the
unspeakable suffering that countless Syrian men,
women and children have endured. It is a suffering
that comes at the hands of Al-Assad and his allies.
The Syrian regime has left the world no doubt as to
its willingness to unleash terror on its own population.
The repeated use of chemical weapons counts as the
most cynical expression of that campaign. Just a week
ago, the world was yet again confronted with reports of
chemical-weapons use - that time in Douma.

All the while, the Russian Federation has made
clear to the world its readiness to stand by Al-Assad
every step of the way. It has blocked draft resolutions
in the Council that could have stopped the violence.
I call upon all members of the Security Council to
support a collective, meaningful response to the use of
chemical weapons. But even if the Council fails to act,
it should be clear to the world that the use of chemical
weapons is never permissible. Against the background
of past horrors and the unabated risk of recurrence,
the response by France, the United Kingdom and the
United States is understandable. The response was
measured in targeting a limited number of military
facilities that were used by the Syrian regime in the
context of its illegal chemical-weapons arsenal. The
action taken by those three countries made clear that
the use of chemical weapons is unacceptable.

Last night's response was aimed at reducing the
capabilities to execute future chemical attacks. But do
not let the Syrian regime and the Russian Federation
think for a moment that we will waver in our pursuit
of full accountability for the perpetrators of past
chemical attacks. We will not settle for anything less
than an independent, impartial attribution mechanism,
so that the culprits of those heinous attacks can be
identified and held accountable. We call on the Russian
Federation to stop opposing that. The use of chemical
weapons is a serious violation of international law and
may constitute a war crime or crime against humanity.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly believes
that the international community must fully uphold
the standard that the use of chemical weapons is never
permissible. Impunity cannot, and will not, prevail.

However, should the Council continue to suffer from
the paralysis inflicted by a single permanent member,
we must not forget that the United Nations is bigger
than the Council alone. We have strong leadership at
the top of the United Nations Organization, and we have
a powerful General Assembly. Both have to consider
all instruments to advance accountability for the use
of chemical weapons. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
welcomes every option to establish an independent and
impartial mechanism, whether within the framework
of the United Nations framework or of other relevant
international organizations, as long as it results in
a mechanism that can establish who is responsible,
so that the perpetrators can subsequently be held to
account. Any new mechanism should build upon the
important work of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
and the ongoing Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission. It is therefore
crucial that the Mission have complete and unhindered
access to all information and sites it deems necessary to
conduct its investigations with regard to the attack with
chemical weapons in Douma last weekend.

The international norms against the use of chemical
weapons must be respected, and the Syrian people must
be relieved from the violence, hardship and injustice
that has haunted them for so long. To that end, we call
for a political solution and an immediate cessation of
violence, as agreed upon earlier by the Council, as well
as full, unhindered and immediate humanitarian access.
We reiterate our determination to achieve justice for the
victims. The need to collectively stand up for the fate of
the Syrian people is now more apparent than ever.

