Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I also
wish to thank Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for his visit to
New York and for the briefing he just gave us on the
progress made and on his future plans. I also wish to
thank Ambassador Andjaba, the leader of our mission,
for the manner in which he managed the Security
Council mission and led discussions and contacts with
all the parties we met with. It was successful on more
than one count. Above all, thanks to the understanding
and cooperation of all parties, it made it possible to
begin a constructive dialogue and to clarify the course
to be followed for the future of the subregion.

The Security Council mission's visit to East
Timor, at the invitation of Mr. Vieira de Mello, and to
Indonesia, at the invitation of the Indonesian
Government, was thus positive, and it will enable us,
we hope, to move ahead in the gradual and smooth
resolution of certain aspects of the situation in order to
pacify that region and strengthen peace and security
there. In that context, a point of paramount importance
that must be emphasized, in my delegation's view, is
the will of the Indonesian and East Timorese
authorities to turn a new page in their bilateral
relations, which, according to the views we have heard
from both sides of the border, are based on a future
approach that the international community should
support politically through increased financial and
institutional assistance.
On the ground we saw the work achieved by the
Secretary-General's Special Representative in record
time and with very limited resources to help the East
Timorese take control of their future and prepare for
their independence, in accordance with the process
described by Mr. Vieira de Mello.

We must emphasize our great satisfaction with
and respect for the work achieved by the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), particularly by Mr. Vieira de Mello, who
deserves to be commended. The personal commitment
of the Secretary-General's Special Representative to
implement Security Council resolution 1272 (1999) has
been the sole guarantee for success in meeting this
major challenge, particularly in View of the various
obstacles and problems faced by the Transitional
Administration throughout this period.

Our visit to East Timor was a fresh opportunity to
see at first hand the major progress made in just over
one year in the areas of security, law and order and the
humanitarian situation, thanks to UNTAET's efforts.
This was confirmed by the members of the Security
Council mission who were in East Timor after the
elections. We must continue to support UNTAET's
work in the various areas that require additional human
and financial resources. Above all, in our view, the
Secretary-General's Special Representative should be
given flexibility, for he alone can determine priorities
and their urgency. Having witnessed what has been
accomplished and what should be accomplished, we
believe that this possibility should be explored. The
judicial sector, which is so necessary for reconciliation,
is among the pressing matters to be resolved.

During our visit we noted the sincerity and
express will of the Indonesian authorities at the
legislative and executive levels, as well as of
non-governmental organizations, to take the political,
legal and legislative steps necessary to find solutions to
the issues raised. In this context, we encourage
Indonesia to continue this approach to the various
issues, such as the arrest and the prosecution of
suspects, the collection and destruction of weapons, the
return of refugees, the disarming of militias and a
commitment to ending their activities. We believe this
very complex and delicate process initiated by the
Indonesian Government must be commended, and that
the cooperation necessary between the Indonesian
authorities and UNTAET must be strengthened in order
to deal successfully with all aspects of the matter.

This cooperation must be supported and followed
up by the international community in order to swiftly
put into effect a strategy to speed up the repatriation
and resettlement of refugees under good conditions and
to begin the registration process under the auspices of
the Indonesian Government, with the participation of
the international humanitarian agencies, particularly
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, and on the basis of the freely expressed
choices of those involved.

All actions must be coordinated among all the
parties concerned through agreed mechanisms, such as
the Joint Border Commission, which will hold its first
meeting this week in Jakarta, the bilateral commission,
the security commission and so forth. The aim is to
achieve reconciliation within East Timor, between
Timorese in Indonesia and, finally, between Indonesia
and East Timor. These are two neighbours that must
coexist and cooperate for a common future. This is
what we have heard from the leaders of both countries.

Obviously, the success of this undertaking will
require resources and, above all, time to avoid
deterioration. The complexity and the interdependence
of the matters under consideration, which have been
noted in the report of the Security Council mission, call
for the matter to be considered as a whole. It could be
prejudicial to try to fragment the approach or to
establish priorities without taking into account
interrelated parameters or the local political
environment, which should be considered. The
resolution of the situation should not create other
problems whose implications could have incalculable
consequences.

We believe this is the appropriate approach to
resolving all the aspects mentioned in the mission's
report with the requisite calm and the greatest chances
for success. It must be remembered that we are dealing
with the emergence of a new State, where provincial
borders have suddenly become international borders,
with all that that implies in terms of new parameters to
be assimilated over time.

We have taken note of the fact that the East
Timorese and Indonesian leaders are conscious of this.
We must continue to encourage them, as Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello has been doing. We again thank and
support him for the work that he is undertaking
pursuant to the mandate given to him by the Security
Council - a mandate that is strengthened by his skill
and by the renown that he enjoys in both East Timor
and Indonesia.

