Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): This debate is
taking place at a time when any spark of unilateral
action or any new incident can lead to an explosion
of violence, shutting off the little that remains of the
window of opportunity to reach a peaceful settlement
to the conflict. Today, we are witnessing what
actions - such as illegal settlements, evictions and
demolitions, provocations, stabbings, acts of terror
against civilians or a disproportionate response from
security forces - can cause. In his briefing, earlier
today, Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson noted the
numbers of people killed and injured on both sides.
These numbers continue to grow. Lithuania strongly
condemns all acts of Violence, which have resulted in
injuries and loss of human life. The perpetrators of
such crimes must be brought to account. Our deepest
condolences to the families affected. We wish full
recovery to those injured.

Palestinian and Israeli political, community
and religious leaders must stand firm against terror,
violence and incitement. They must clearly and firmly
denounce all such acts and call for calm and respect for
each other. Further inflammatory rhetoric, distortion of
facts and violence - verbal or physical - will only
bring more violence, pain, death and despair and will
make the hope for living in peace and security even
more remote.

All provocations, including at the holy sites, must
cease immediately. All holy sites must be protected.
The Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount is a sacred place
for both Muslims and Jews, and it is Vital to ensure that
its status quo is respected. We welcome the repeated
reassurances by Israel's Prime Minister regarding
respect for the status quo of the holy sites and encourage
further concrete steps to reaffirm it, working in close
cooperation with Jordan.

Gaza needs urgent reconstruction and economic
development. An immediate and unconditional lifting
of the closure and a free flow of people and goods,
while addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns,
are required for effective humanitarian relief and
recovery. We see Gaza as an integral part of the future
State of Palestine and call for genuine Palestinian
reconciliation.

The latest outbreak of violence reminds us once
again that the current situation is unsustainable. The
political establishments and people on both sides must
finally understand that it is peace and not confrontation
that is in the interest of both Israelis and Palestinians.
This week, the President of the Republic of Lithuania,
Mrs. Dalia Grybauskaite', in her meetings with
Israeli and Palestinian leaders, urged both sides to do
everything within their power to curb the escalation
of violence and restore calm. Lithuania calls on the
political leadership of both sides to do everything they
can to stop incitement, end impunity and guarantee
respect for international humanitarian and human
rights law. The political leaders have an obligation to
protect innocent civilian lives. We call on both sides to
engage in direct talks to calm the tensions.

The international community, including the
Security Council, the United States, the European
Union, the League of Arab States, the Quartet and
regional actors, must play their role in supporting both
parties in their efforts aimed at creating the conditions
to make meaningful negotiations possible. We welcome
the very timely Visits to the region by the Secretary-
General and by United States Secretary of State Kerry,
as well as the meeting of the Quartet scheduled for
tomorrow.

For the conflict to end, there is no other way but
an immediate resumption of peace negotiations with a
View to reaching a final political settlement - based on
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including land for peace, the road map,
the agreements previously reached by the parties and
the Arab Peace Initiative - of two democratic and
sovereign States living side by side within established
borders, in peace, security and mutual recognition. A
peaceful and just settlement of the conflict would have
a stabilizing effect on the entire region. We call on all
the relevant actors to take immediate, courageous and
bold steps in that direction.

