Mr. Lucas (Angola): We are grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto, and to the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Mr. Fedotov, for their briefings. We are also grateful
to Ambassador Gerard van Bohemen of New Zealand,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), and we praise his
outstanding work in steering the Committee over the
past two years.

The security and development assistance
commitments for the next four years made by the
international community to Afghanistan and its
Government during the July 2016 NATO Summit, the
October 2015 Brussels Conference, in which pledges
were made to assist the country in overcoming the
enormous challenges it faces, and the recent Ministerial
Conference ofthe Heart ofAsia/Istanbul Process, which
took a strong stand against terrorism, were instances
where political will and a tangible commitment to
the country were translated into initiatives by the
international community in support of Afghanistan that
are expected to advance the vitally needed stabilization
and reform efforts embodied in the Afghan National
Peace and Development Framework.

However, persistent political tensions, increasing
numbers of security incidents, rising numbers of
internally displaced persons and returning refugees, a
harsh economic environment and a stalled peace process
are some key elements portrayed by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2016/1049). The UNODC's
Afghanistan Opium Survey 2016 reveals a substantial
expansion in areas of opium poppy cultivation and
exponentially increasing opium production and a
decrease in eradication efforts due to financing
restrictions and the security situation.

Even given the great dependence of the country
on the drugs economy and the latter's role in fuelling
corruption and in the financing of insurgents and
terrorists, with a view to translating into action the
international community consensus, assistance should
be stepped up in the eradication efforts and in finding
alternatives to poppy cultivation and opium production,
by diversifying the country's economy. We welcome
the establishment of the national drug action plan,
which serves to underscore the Afghan Government's
willingness and determination to counter illicit
production and trafficking and to reduce demand.

On a different note, despite the immense difficulties,
the measures taken by the Government to promote
women's rights and their economic empowerment
are very encouraging. The holding of Global Open
Day events throughout the country, in which Afghan
women underlined their role in fostering a peaceful
society, including in preventing violent extremism, and
the need to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and legal
frameworks protecting the rights of women, especially
from violence, are is an example of such measures.

Regretfully, little progress has been made on
the road to peace. We took good note of the peace
agreement between the Government and the Hizb-i
Islami, in the expectation that the agreement would be
fully implemented with a view to reducing violence and
promoting reconciliation, while the Taliban movement
continues to engage in a spree ofviolence and no progress
has taken place in the search for a peace settlement. In
that regard, we join special the Special Representative
in calling the Taliban to embrace dialogue and a
political process without conditions, which could lead
to the achievement of peace in the country.

The strengthening of regional cooperation is
key to the attainment of progress in the search for
peace. We regret that relations between Afghanistan
and Pakistan remain strained, and it is our hope that
dialogue will proceed positively and bear results, due to
the importance of relations between the two countries
for peace and development in the region. We commend
the renewed commitment of the trilateral cooperation
between Afghanistan, Iran and India, the deepening of
engagement of Gulf States in the pursuit of peace, and
infrastructure and security development with Central
Asian States.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
support for the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, which is operating in such a challenging
environment, and to thank it for its contribution to
peace and stability in Afghanistan. We would also like
to reiterate our solidarity with the Government and the
people of Afghanistan as they face immense challenges.
We fully share the view that the country's main priority
should be to reinvigorate the peace and reconciliation
processes and that the international community must
maintain its commitment to the economic and social
development and the establishment of peace and
stability in Afghanistan.
