Mr. Atta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, on behalf of the Egyptian delegation, I should
like to tell you, Sir, how grateful we are to your
friendly country and to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We should also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and his Special
Representative, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for their tireless
efforts and valuable contributions aimed at enhancing
and protecting the rights of children in armed conflict,
and we reaffirm our total support for those efforts.

During the past two years, the Security Council
has devoted considerable attention to children in armed
conflict, playing its role in that sphere by taking
decisions related to peace-building and peacekeeping
operations and by asking the parties to conflict to
respect international law, in particular with regard to
the protection of children. That is commendable, and
complements the General Assembly's primary
responsibility for children's issues. In that connection,
I should like to express our gratitude to Mr. Olara
Otunnu for his efforts and to draw attention to the
importance of his field visits to raise awareness, to
promote and to strengthen the protection, rights and
well-being of children affected by armed conflict. In
his report (S/2002/1299), the Secretary-General says
that Mr. Otunnu's visits had helped in the assessment
of the situation of children in armed conflict, in making
specific recommendations and in heightening the
international community's awareness of the problems
faced by children.

In that regard, we reiterate our demand that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General visit
children living under Israeli occupation in the occupied
Palestinian territories and prepare a report on effective
measures to help protect those children in
implementation of the relevant provisions of the
outcome of the General Assembly's May 2002 special
session on children, as cited by the Assembly on 18
December 2002 in its resolution 57/190. Palestinian
children are not only suffering from occupation, with
its devastating psychological consequences; they are
also deprived of their fundamental rights, including the
right to live in security in a stable family environment.
Not only are their families deprived of shelter and
work; their lives are threatened if they ask for their
legitimate fundamental rights.

The suffering of Palestinian children does not
stop there: they are deprived of a future, because they
are given no tools to improve their future. Palestinian
schools have been closed, and Palestinian children
cannot continue their studies because of the constraints
that have been imposed on them. The Secretary-
General has stated that the cordoning off of the
territories, the curfews, the barriers and the checkpoints
give rise to humanitarian problems, which result in the
deterioration of education. The suffering of Palestinian
children has exceeded all limits: unless the situation
improves, there is no hope for the short-term future.

Therefore, Egypt urges all countries to help
Palestinian children by ensuring their humanitarian and
other basic needs. We invite the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to undertake a field visit to
the region in order to raise awareness of the situation
on the ground and to enable the international
community to adopt effective necessary measures
aimed at relieving the suffering of Palestinian children
and ensuring their protection.

Egypt supports all national and international
efforts in the area of protecting the rights of children
and improving their situation. We are firmly convinced
that the economic, social, political and cultural
progress of any society depends on the overall
physical, moral, mental and educational development
of its children. Over the past decade, the international
community has undertaken many commendable efforts
and has made great achievements in that area. Despite
the success of the World Summit on Children, held in
1990, and the setting of ambitious goals to help
children, the world still witnesses a number of factors
that have had a negative impact on children, such as
the economic effects of debt, illness and epidemics.
Recent years have witnessed a prevalence of armed
conflict, a lack of respect for international law -
especially international humanitarian law - and
various violations of the rights of civilians. Hence, the
problem of children in armed conflict - despite efforts
to prevent their recruitment and to ensure their
demobilization and reunification with their families,
their protection from systematic violence and their
psychological reintegration into their homes and
communities. The Secretary-General's innovation in
his report - the list of parties to conflict that are
violating children's rights - is a commendable
initiative that should be studied with a view to taking
the necessary actions to track down those who violate
the rights of children and bring them to justice. Within
the framework of our commitment to work with the
international community on issues pertaining to
children in armed conflict, we urge that children be
enabled to live in security and stability.
