The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of Nepal for his kind words addressed to
me.

I shall now make a brief statement in my capacity
as representative of Tunisia.

I shall not repeat the points addressed by earlier
speakers, but I wish to start by stating that the
experience of past years has shown the need of the
Organization to adjust its working methods in order to
give the issue of peace-building its due priority, raising
it high on the international community's agenda.

The close link between conflict prevention and
peace-building points to the importance of maintaining
peace and approaching it in all its aspects, as has been
stressed in today's discussion. In our view, this
approach must be anchored in a comprehensive and
integrated strategy and must involve all partners. It
must identify the questions of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, poverty and
marginalization, the establishment of law and order and
the promotion of human rights as critical to peace-
building.

When we discuss the role of the Security Council
in peace-building, we must recall that the Council has
adopted many resolutions promoting peace and has
attached high priority to it as a means of addressing the
root causes of conflict and tension, including poverty,
suffering and all forms of deprivation arising from
economic and social backwardness. It is these elements
that cause violence and conflict.

I shall not repeat the statements of many speakers
during the Millennium Summit and the resolution
adopted last September by the Security Council on the
need to develop a comprehensive and integrated
strategy within the United Nations system to address
all these root causes of conflict. I do wish to say,
however, that these commitments, adopted at the
highest international political level, represent the
appropriate and optimum embodiment of the
interlinkage between and integration of development,
peace and stability.

The United Nations system is therefore called
upon to develop the basic elements necessary to
maintaining this partnership. This will require us to
adopt a new approach to addressing conflict and
tension. What is needed today from the international
community is a qualitative leap in addressing the issue
of peace-building. As I have indicated, it must do so by
focusing effectively on the root causes of conflict,
rather than on the symptoms. To that end, Tunisia feels
that there must be a comprehensive approach
predicated on three points.

First is the importance of developing innovative
mechanisms commensurate with the problems of
poverty and deprivation, along with the other inherent
causes of conflict. Such mechanisms must be flexible
and effective, providing an expeditious response to the
established requirements of the most needy areas. In
this regard, many initiatives have been proposed,
particularly in the context of the General Assembly at
its current session, to revive existing mechanisms and
to consolidate integration among all bodies of the
international community. In this context, I would cite
the General Assembly's welcome, in its resolution on
the implementation of the first United Nations Decade
for the Eradication of Poverty, of the initiative to
establish the World Solidarity Fund for Poverty
Eradication.

The other point is that a comprehensive and
integrated peace strategy must be developed to address
all aspects of peace, including political, economic,
social and humanitarian aspects. Such a strategy should
be developed with the involvement of all international
partners, and roles should be assigned to them, whether
the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations or international financial institutions and
of course the State concerned. The central
responsibility should remain with the United Nations,
given its unique stature and role in international
relations. The strategy must be put into place within
the context of respect for the mandate and
responsibility of all United Nations organs.

The third and last point, given the organic and
growing relationship between the maintenance of
international peace and security and peace-building, is
the fact that it has become essential that the Security
Council give a push to the international community's
efforts to consolidate peace, since the Council has a
special responsibility is in this area. As we can see
from today's discussions, the Council can perform this
role through mobilization of the political will of the
international community so that its resources,
especially financial, can be mobilized to establish and
promote peace in fulfilment of the provisions of the
Charter on behalf of all peoples of the world.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

With the indulgence of Council members, at the
end of this debate I would like to thank all delegations
that participated in these important discussions for their
valuable input and worthwhile ideas that underscore
the importance and relevance of the issues under
discussion.

Without being exhaustive, let me cite the
following points. First is the need to develop a
common approach between the United Nations and all
participating actors in order to develop a practical,
comprehensive and integrated strategy to promote
peace, taking into account the primary responsibility of
the State concerned. Second is the need to support the
capabilities of the Secretary-General, especially as
regards coordination of the agreed strategy. Third, we
must take into account the necessity of this strategy
focusing efficiently on the deep roots of conflicts,
especially the economic and social roots, due to the
close links between security, stability and development.
Fourth, it need be considered that the elimination of
poverty is a collective international responsibility and
that an innovative approach and mechanism must be
developed to address poverty and economic
backwardness; flexibility is essential in order to
respond expeditiously to the urgent needs of vulnerable
groups. Fifth, there is a need to focus on sound
governance, democracy and the building of State
institutions as essential ingredients for promoting
peace; also, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, while paying
special and adequate attention to children, refugees,
internally displaced persons and the promotion of the
role of women in peace-building. Sixth, there must be
coordination among all active parties and
apportionment of responsibilities in the area of peace-
building, especially with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council.

In the seventh place, let us underscore the special
importance of the Security Council in mobilizing
international political will, given its special
responsibility in the area of international peace and
security and the close relationship between the
maintenance of peace and security, conflict prevention
and peace-building. Eighth is the need to start
consultations among all active parties at an early stage,
before establishing any peacekeeping mission, for
better preparation and coordination towards that goal.
Lastly, in the ninth place, there is a need to promote
international partnership in all phases of conflict
prevention and peace-building; this partnership should
be sustainable and continuous.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The next meeting of the Security Council to
continue consideration of the item on the agenda will
take place on Friday, 16 February 2001.

The meeting rose at 7p.m.
