Mr. Al Hussein: Our discussion today - which
we welcome and thank you for, Mr. President - is a
discussion both about tolerance, that breadth of view
which acknowledges and embraces the differences
between peoples, and its opposite: a maniacal ideology
imposing conformity, harsh and cruel.

The Preamble of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court begins:

"Conscious that all peoples are united by
common bonds, their cultures pieced together in
a shared heritage, and concerned that this delicate
mosaic may be shattered at any time ..."

That mosaic of our heritage is our only hope for permanent
peace in the world. The alternative - sharply delineated
groups doomed to confrontation - will destroy us. If
we are to survive, we need pluralism - societies that
are enriched by exchange and grounded in respect.

It is easy to portray the Middle East now as
exceptionally fragmented, but in reality the history of
the region is marked by long-standing acceptance of
multiple identities. The dramatic crises and atrocities
that we see today have been fanned into flame by
discrimination and by deliberate failures to respect
equality and human rights. In Syria, for example, the
violent suppression of peaceful protests and, now,
civil war are forcing a retreat by many into the shelter
of ethnic and religious identities. The once benign,
even celebrated differences between communities are
now, tragically, being carved into bitter and lethal
divisions as the country continues to break apart.
Many communities have suffered appalling violence
and targeted attacks by all sides, often because of their
religious or ethnic affiliation.

As the chaos and violence of Syria bleed across
international borders, they have birthed Daesh, a
totalitarian-minded Takfiri group determined to
silence all dissent. Iraq's exceptionally rich cultural
landscape includes communities that have lived in
the region since the opening lines of history. But two
weeks ago, an investigative mission by my Office found
that vicious attacks against the Yazidis by Daesh may
amount to genocide. Other communities, as our report
also shows, have suffered great violence - including
crimes against humanity and war crimes - at the hand
of non-State actors and State-affiliated forces. Ancient
and deeply significant monuments have been ravaged.
All this we condemn.

Daesh is an abomination. An intricately interwoven
social fabric in Syria and Iraq is giving way to the
demented obliteration of any difference and any choice
not in conformity with the taxi world view - which is
itself impossibly thin. And yet, in what amounts to a
painful paradox and a most terrible irony, Daesh may be
more accepting of diverse ethnic origins when it comes
to its own members - so long as those same members
act in accordance with Takfiri ideology - than many
States are when it comes to their own citizens. And how
can that be?

The international community's attention to the
human rights of minorities is too often both partial
and sporadic. It is partial in the sense that States have
often focused primarily on communities with which
they share specific cultural ties, overlooking abuses of
other marginalized communities, and brushing away
concerns regarding discriminated groups in their own
countries. It is sporadic because the rights of minorities
are often highlighted only after the outbreak of extreme
violence, even though that eruption is virtually always
preceded by years of exclusion, disregard for linguistic
and religious rights, and obstacles to full participation
in the political, social, cultural and economic life of
the State. If we attend to minority rights only after
slaughter has begun, then we have already failed.

Fanaticism always finds oxygen and flourishes
where tolerance and the universal standards of human
rights are battered. It grows in States that betray their
people, that fail to respect their own Constitutions, and
that do not embrace, genuinely, the ethnic, linguistic
and religious diversity of their societies; in States where
the voice and participation of all members of society are
smothered; in States that attack civil society activists,
whose work, ironically, is the very best antidote against
the toxin of extremism. To immunize properly against
further radicalism, human rights defenders must be
promoted and defended, not imprisoned and tortured.

Sadly, there are many such States in the Middle East

and other regions, and by their actions they fertilize

the soil of intolerance, where extremism takes root.

The United Nations Network on Racial Discrimination

and Minorities, which my Office coordinates, can help

Member States develop strategies to open opportunities

to marginalized minority groups and to build in greater

protection for their human rights. It is only by insisting

on the dignity and worth of all human beings, securing
their rights and their space on this Earth properly and
meaningfully, that we will all survive.

The delicate mosaic is being shattered, and the
Security Council must take action unanimously and
decisively to end the conflicts and refer Iraq and Syria
to the International Criminal Court. It must end the
fighting in Yemen, Libya and other countries too. Or
are we going to have to wait until the strength of the
victims, of all humankind, to produce more tears has
sapped - when finally only the stones can weep? And
what good will it be then? What good will it be to all
of us if action never comes, or arrives far too late to be
effective?

Without supreme and joint resolve now, the common
bond will soon also disappear, along with the cultures
stitched by time into one heritage i a debt so dreadful
and malignant to our children that I hope it is one we
cannot bear to inflict.

