Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): For more than

three years, the situation in Syria has worsened daily.
There is no sign of improvement or calm on the horizon.
Nearly every day brings its share of new victims. Syrian
civilians, in particular women, children and the elderly,
are caught in the middle and continue to be the targets
of deliberate attacks, daily facing air strikes, artillery
fire, barrel bombs, forced displacement, car bombings,
rape, torture, abduction and kidnapping. Such acts are
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law and their perpetrators, whatever their
affiliation, should be brought to justice.

Chad has always denounced and firmly condemns
all kinds of violence and atrocities against civilians by
whomsoever. Unfortunately, we note with regret that
all such atrocities have not only gone unpunished but
have become more frequent as the conflict escalates.
We believe that the scope of violence and the lack of
prospects for a peaceful way out of the crisis jeopardize
the conditions conducive to the credible and fair
prosecution of the most serious crimes in national
courts. In that regard, not to support an initiative
seeking to combat impunity and the denial of justice
would be a serious failure by Chad as a State party to
the Rome Statute. In that strong belief and wanting to
contribute to the common effort to put an end to the
suffering of victims, Chad voted in favour of the draft
resolution that we have just voted on but, unfortunately,
not adopted.

While voting in favour on principle, Chad regrets
that the draft resolution, like those on Darfur and
Libya, provides for the discretionary treatment of a
category of State nationals with respect to the same
crime. However, such exemptions, which are in some
cases justified, are difficult for victims to accept and
undermine the principle of settling scores and the ideal
of independent and credible international criminal
justice for all, without exception, for the most serious
crimes.

In conclusion, Chad reiterates its appeal to all
parties to the Syrian conlfict to immediately meet their
obligation to protect civilians, humanitarian personnel
and medical vehicles and to allow the humanitarian
agencies unimpeded access to the entire civilian
population.

