Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I should like to begin
by commending you, Mr. President, for the able
manner in which you have led the work of the Council
during the month of January. Allow me also to express
my delegation's appreciation to you for having
convened today's open debate on the important topic of
post-conflict peacebuilding. The establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission on 20 December 2005
marked a major step forward towards achieving a more
efficient and effective Organization. It also marked a
turning point in the efforts of the United Nations to
promote peace, stability and development in post-
conflict countries and in countries emerging from
conflict.

The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan notes with
great satisfaction the launch of the Peacebuilding Fund
on 11 October 2006 and the subsequent convening of
four country-specific meetings, on Burundi and on
Sierra Leone, as a clear indication of the international
community's determination to achieve long-term peace
and stability in countries emerging from conflict.

As a country emerging from more than two
decades of armed conflict, Afghanistan is well aware of
the challenges associated with post-conflict
peacebuilding. In a relatively short period of time, we
have made significant gains towards a stable and
democratic Afghanistan. The convening of the
emergency loya jirga, the adoption of a new
constitution and the holding of presidential and
parliamentary elections are just some of our major
accomplishments.

We managed to attain those achievements against
the backdrop of numerous challenges posed to our
peacebuilding efforts. We attribute those successes to
two primary factors: first, the determination of the
Afghan people to live in peace and tranquillity; and,
secondly, the sustained support of the international
community, in particular the United Nations.

On the basis of our experience, we have come to
realize that effective peacebuilding requires a
comprehensive and multifaceted strategy encompassing
the essential components of social and economic
development, good governance, human rights, the rule
of law and national reconciliation, as well as the
proactive and sustained engagement of the
international community. In this context, we also
underscore the importance of the leadership role of the
country concerned in the process.

As His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, the former
Secretary-General, stated on the occasion of the
launching of the Peacebuilding Fund,

"Although peacebuilding is a collective
effort, involving the international community, it
is the Government of the country concerned that
carries the main responsibility for setting
priorities in ensuring that a peace process can be
sustained. National ownership is the core
principle of peacebuilding, and the restoration of
national capacity to build peace must therefore be
at the heart of our international efforts."

We are also of the View that the creation of
mechanisms with a mandate to coordinate and monitor
peacebuilding efforts will be crucial to the overall
process. As mentioned earlier by His Excellency
Mr. Kenzo Oshima, the Joint Coordinating and
Monitoring Board in Afghanistan, comprising
representatives of the Afghan Government and the
international community, has proved effective as such a
mechanism.

The initial stage of post-conflict peacebuilding
necessitates altering the conditions that gave rise to a
particular conflict. Adopting a passive stance in dealing
with dominant threats will not only complicate the
situation but also jeopardize the process in its entirety.
As in the case of Afghanistan, continuing terrorist
attacks in the south and south-eastern parts of the
country constitute the main threat to Afghanistan's
peacebuilding process. Those attacks have drastically
affected the daily lives of the people and have
hampered the reconstruction and rehabilitation process.
It is therefore essential to address both internal and
external factors that contribute to insecurity in a
particular country. In that regard, we also stress the
need to enhance the capacity of national security
institutions to effectively address prevailing security
challenges.
Equally important is the need to accelerate the
pace of social and economic development, as security
and development are not only interconnected, but also
mutually reinforcing. We have come to realize that
improving security in post-conflict countries will not
be achieved by military means alone; it will also
require sustained economic development.

The successful reintegration of ex-combatants in
post-conflict countries will depend largely on the
launching of quick-impact reconstruction projects and
the creation of employment opportunities. That will
encourage former combatants to reintegrate fully into
civilian life and to refrain from joining illegal armed
groups.

National reconciliation can be vital to a
successful peacebuilding process and can enhance
dialogue among all segments of society and the peace
processes necessary to achieve national peacebuilding
goals. An inclusive political process - one that
ensures equal representation and participation by all
national actors and stakeholders - will lead to greater
confidence-building. In that regard, allow me to
mention that the full participation of all of
Afghanistan's ethnic groups in main political parties
and the political process was one of the key factors that
contributed to the successful implementation of the
Bonn Agreement of 2001.

Finally, Afghanistan emphasizes the need for the
international community to maintain an adequate level
of aid, including the provision of financial assistance,
to countries emerging from conflict with a view to
facilitating a smooth transition from conflict to lasting
peace and stability. The political presence of the United
Nations through its country team, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, together with the
active role of development agencies under the umbrella
of the United Nations Development Programme
Resident Coordinator, will contribute significantly in
that regard.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate
Afghanistan's full support for the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We stand ready to share
with the Commission our experience and the lessons
learned in our peacebuilding efforts. We also remain
confident that this newly established Commission will
spare no effort in carrying out its important and noble
task of securing peace and tranquillity in post-conflict
countries.
