Mr. Tanin: Let me first congratulate Egypt on
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month.

The Secretary-General's report before the Council
(8/2016/407) details essential events in Kosovo and
the region, and the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
from mid-January to mid-April. However, some
developments since the Secretary-General's previous
report (S/2016/99) are of more importance than
the routine activities. Accordingly, today I wish to
highlight those and some broader considerations. I have
spent a good part of my professional life on members'
side of this table, and I am therefore aware that routine
reporting is not always the best use of time devoted to
matters on which the Council remains actively seized.

First of all, Kosovo has been and continues to be
at the centre of issues that are vital to overall security
in Europe and to relations in a wider context. As I
emphasized in my previous statement to the Council in
February (see S/PV.7637), internal political dynamics
in Pristina preoccupied our Mission - as well as
the European Union (EU) missions and many other
actors * for almost one year, culminating this April
in the inauguration of a new President of Kosovo.
Also during April, Serbian general elections were
successfully held, with a new Parliament and Cabinet
there currently in the process of formation.

The election of a new President of Kosovo, albeit
under a divisive atmosphere, and the newly mandated
Government of the Republic of Serbia provide together,
I believe, an excellent opportunity to draw a line under a
period that has often been marked by political infighting
and other distractions. I have noted with appreciation
the conciliatory messages and vision presented both
by Prime Minister Vucie and by President Thaci
following their respective electoral successes. I join
other engaged actors in the hope that these peaceful
transitions of power will help the political scene to
settle and offer more room for energy to be spent on
other, more fundamental challenges facing the region.

Less than two weeks ago, the population of Kosovo
received important and undoubtedly welcome news.
The European Commission formally proposed to the
EU Council and EU Parliament to transfer Kosovo to
the visa-free short-stay list for travel in the Schengen
area. The authorities of Kosovo deserve credit for the
efforts made towards fulfilling the conditions of the
visa liberalization road map. At the same time, they
have acknowledged that a great deal of work remains
to be done in order to translate this important step into
the concrete economic and social progress expected by
Kosovo's people.

I note that one month earlier, the EU Stabilization
and Association Agreement for Kosovo was also
announced. The Republic of Serbia's Stabilization and
Association Agreement entered into force in September
2013. Again, placed side by side, these crucial
achievements demonstrate the progress that the region
is making towards the goal of greater integration, with
all the benefits such integration brings. The links are
not always clearly spelled out between the ongoing
peace process, which is at the core of our UNMIK
mandate, and these EU processes. In fact, the links are
fundamental, stressed not simply in resolution 1244
(1999) , but also in the far-sighted European Council
Summit held in Thessaloniki, Greece, in 2003 and
ever since. The standards and conditions set forth in
EU stabilization and association agreements are not
ends in themselves, but more importantly the means for
generating peace, prosperity and well-being for people.

For Pristina and Belgrade, integration is closely
interlinked with the EU-facilitated high-level dialogue
process. The capacity to meet the standards ofintegration
directly reinforces the capacity for productive political
dialogue and other important channels of mutual
cooperation. Kosovo's recent advancement in its
European perspective should reinforce and enhance the
dialogue process between Belgrade and Pristina, which
is fundamental to Kosovo's future security and to peace
in the region.

A salient feature of the consensus on which the
EU-facilitated dialogue rests is the requirement for
flexibility and innovation. All possibilities should
be on the table and should be debated openly if this
framework of discussion is to make swifter and
meaningful progress. This moment, with electoral
processes nearly concluded on both sides, appears to be
a propitious time to re-energize the talks and build new
momentum. I believe that this must remain a central
objective on both the EU and United Nations agendas
during the coming months.

The establishment of the Association/Community
of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo, ever since
it was first agreed in April 2013, has been subject to
much misunderstanding and controversy in public
discourse among both communities. To borrow words
spoken by EU High Representative Federica Mogherini
10 days ago in Pristina, the Community/Association
represents "a step towards a stronger Kosovo, not a
weaker one, and in a more stable region". It was agreed
by both sides at the highest level in order to allow for
the livable integration of the Serb community and
other communities into public life in Kosovo. During
his inaugural address, President Thaci stressed themes
of reconciliation and spoke of the difficulty but also
the necessity of leaving the past behind. The dialogue
and agreements between Pristina and Belgrade are
essential to this process and are real steps on the path
to lasting peace.

Kosovo still faces the hard-nosed realities caused

by unemployment, inequality, the challenges of
developing a productive economy to meet sustainable
development goals and overcome legacies of impunity,
and weaknesses in its rule oflaw institutions. All these
factors are serious challenges to the mandate ofpromoting
peace and stability. International involvement should be
a central component of support that can help Kosovo's
institutions, and indeed the wider region, to meet such
difficult challenges. Resources that are applied through
international channels, including through our Mission,
should be mutually reinforcing and directed efficiently
towards meeting these common goals.

I have spoken to leaders representing all parties,
political stripes and communities during the past weeks
and months. I will do much more of this in the coming
days. The main concerns I hear are those that are
familiar everywhere in post-conflict settings: the need
for economic opportunity, positive future prospects
for communities and families, better health care and
a clean environment. While visiting municipalities in
the north and other parts of Kosovo, I saw just how
essential it is that the engagement of the international
community - including the United Nations, the EU
and Member States - be focused on the real living
conditions of the people. Real Kosovo politics are local.
What matters is how leaders, like those to whom I have
spoken in various municipalities, address the everyday
needs of the people in their communities; how they
understand their grievances; how they find solutions.
If identity politics primarily drove the wars during
the collapse of the former Yugoslavia, what we are
witnessing now is the unity or polarization of people
around issues that are foremost social, economic, and
environmental.

While visiting different parts of Kosovo, I
observed how much of what we sometimes call the "old
world" is dispensable. Militant nationalism has lost the
mandate of the heavens. What is sorely awaited is a new
alternative. When I speak with Kosovo's young people
about their concerns, "jobs" and "justice" are the two
words I hear the most often.

Within Kosovo's political sphere, continuing
differences and intense debate remain essential. I hope
those debates will move into acceptable channels where
they belong and where leaders can best work towards
meeting the real interests of people. That includes,
obviously, a strong democratic opposition. The political
profile of the Kosovo opposition has for the past year
been involved in a tense effort to change the horizon
of power in the Assembly by any means necessary,
including violence. I believe that its reconsideration
of that path, though wrongly portrayed by some as
a descent into dissent, is rather an opportunity to
revitalize the atmosphere, which still suffers from deep
mistrust, and to return to healthy democratic norms
without sacrificing the substance of political dissent
and debate. Whatever political reconfiguration may or
may not be in the cards, what is more important is that
Kosovo's political actors behave responsibly by taking
on the issues that matter most for the future.

Our Mission remains unique, not only for what it is,
but also for what it is not. UNMIK no longer administers
Kosovo. It is not aparallel structure. It is not an obstacle to
any objective, any institution or any individual. UNMIK
remains important for the support and legitimacy it can
provide; for the focus it can help to encourage; for the
experience and know-how it freely shares; and for its
role as a bridge between the Council and the people and
communities of Kosovo and the region. We have been
assessing and recalibrating our own use of resources
to assist areas where they most directly promote the
fulfilment of our mandate, on human rights issues for
example. Indeed, as the leading United Nations body
on the ground we are working closely with Kosovo
institutions as well as with international partners to
promote the realization of high human rights standards.
We are part of the broadest and most inclusive efforts to
help discourage corruption and support the rule of law
area, realize better opportunities for families and for
the younger generation, and strengthen the protection
of non-majority and vulnerable communities. We are
also drawing on expertise and resources from across
the United Nations system in areas where they may be
of assistance, for example the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and many bodies that are specialized
in pressing issues, including thejust handling ofmigrant
and refugee flows and discouraging young people from
the paths that lead to violent extremism and terrorism.

To work at its best and in order to work together
with the leadership in both Pristina and Belgrade - as
well as with EU institutions - and to remain flexible
and adapt our Mission, we depend upon the informed
support of the Council. With the Council's support, that
is where we intend to take the Mission in the days ahead.

