Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
On other occasions in which the Security Council
discussed the issue of Israel and Palestine, my country
began its statements with condemnation in the
strongest terms of the terrorist attacks that claimed
innocent civilian victims in Israel. At this meeting, my
delegation regrets that we must begin our statement by
also condemning in strong terms the destruction of the
Rafah camp in the Gaza Strip by segments of the
Israeli armed forces. Israel has no valid justification for
making innocent people living in the Palestinian
territories victims of their reprisals.

Israel is entitled to demand and have secure
borders. It also has the right to take steps to protect its
people from terrorist attacks. However, the methods
and procedures through which Israel is achieving these
legitimate objectives are contrary to international law
and therefore illegitimate. They run counter to
commitments made by the Israeli authorities,
particularly those recently agreed on under the Quartet
peace plan, which was supposed to manage efforts to
ease tensions in the region. These measures thus
contribute to exacerbating the climate of confrontation
and the vicious cycle, which adds to the insecurity in
Israel.

My country considers that the critical road map
published last 30 April is an instrument that should
promote the peace process and govern the conduct of
both Israel and the Palestinian authorities. This map
provides for actions and mutual concessions.
Unfortunately, it does not provide for any machinery to
oblige the parties to comply with it.

But one clear obligation on the parties in the
peace process is to refrain from building walls that
make the life of Palestinians more difficult and make
the peace process even more remote. We think that
building a separation wall within Palestinian territory is
unjustified. Despite the promises that it will be
temporary in nature, it is greatly aggravating the high
levels of tension in this conflict.

My delegation therefore considers that it is
appropriate and timely for the Security Council to
express its views on this item through a resolution. The
wall repeatedly strays from the demarcation line
established after 1948 between the Israeli and
Palestinian territories. It has a very serious impact on
the residents and their capacity to exercise their basic
fundamental rights. Independent non-governmental
groups such as Human Rights Watch consider the
construction of the wall to be a very significant
obstacle to the peace process and an action that
aggravates the situation in Palestine and imposes
severe restrictions on the exercise of the human rights
of Palestinians themselves.

We therefore believe that the State of Israel must
halt construction of this wall and avoid any action in
Palestinian territory that cannot be justified on the
basis of their legitimate right to secure borders or to
prevent any terrorist acts on their own territory.

