Mrs. Gatto (Italy) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the French presidency for
organizing this open debate with a focus on children
and armed conflict.

(spoke in English)

This is a very timely subject. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, the briefers and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Zerrougui, for their contributions.

My country continues to strongly support the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign and the efforts of
the Special Representative's Office to engage with
12 armed non-State actors.

Ita1y aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to make
the following remarks in its national capacity.

Armed conflicts have evolved in nature in recent
years. We are witnessing the significant involvement
of non-State armed actors along with the radicalization
of conflicts. Children are among those who suffer most
from the consequences of armed conflict. They are
recruited as soldiers, their right to education is often
denied and their lives are subject to a greater risk of
neglect, exploitation, trafficking, sexual violence and
harmful practices such as forced marriage. Girls and
boys are also increasingly the victims of abductions.
Substantial progress has been achieved. Yet as the
current news, even the most recent, reminds us, that
plague remains. We cannot let our guard down.
We therefore welcome France's invitation to make
concrete suggestions to better prevent and respond to
that scourge, and would like to contribute with five
proposals.

First, accountability at the national and international
level would insure that perpetrators are brought to
justice. For that reason, as another representative said
earlier, the Security Council might consider expanding
resolution 1612 (2005) by recognizing abduction in
armed conflict as a listing criterion in the annexes to
the Secretary-General's annual report. Abduction has
long been used as a tactic by non-State armed groups,
and is often the precursor to other grave violations. By
calling for the immediate and unconditional release
of children held captive by armed groups, we believe
that it is time for the Security Council to emphasize its
condemnation of that practice.

Secondly, with respect to peacekeeping mandates,
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council
during the 2007-2008 period, Italy strongly supported
the inclusion of specific provisions on the protection
of children in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, which has today become a
standard practice. Mandates due for renewal could
be thoroughly evaluated with a view to considering
the degree of protection given to children and to
strengthening the mandate accordingly.

Thirdly, with regard to training, since its
inception, Italy has strongly supported the work of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to develop a
systematic training programme on child protection
for peacekeeping personnel. Targeted predeployment
training for United Nations personnel on children
in armed conflict could now be fully scaled up and
become a standard practice for the United Nations, in
coordination with regional organizations.

Fourthly, concerning access to humanitarian
relief, if an armed non-State actor proves willing to
engage constructively on that matter with the United
Nations, there should be no obstruction to such
engagement. United Nations peacekeeping mandates
could encompass that priority through stricter and more
consistent norms.

Lastly, with respect to the reintegration of children
into their communities, if children are not properly
cared for after their release, they may face the risk of
being re-recruited, or may be willing to join the armed
groups again. To that end, United Nations peacebuilding
mandates should aim at involving local communities
through joint outreach programmes and peer-to-peer
initiatives.

Ending abuses by persistent perpetrators does not
altogether end impunity. While Italy holds the position
of Vice-President of the Assembly of States Parties
to the Rome Statute, we believe that the International
Criminal Court has an essential role to play in holding
persistent perpetrators accountable for their crimes. In
that regard, we also welcome the recent sentencing of
rebel leader Thomas Lubanga Dyilo for war crimes,
including the conscription of children.

Let me conclude by underscoring that prevention
is crucial. It is not only a moral responsibility, but
also a strategic investment in our future. Italy backs
development cooperation projects to support children
in humanitarian emergencies in many regions. From
that experience we have learned that preventing this
scourge is possible by empowering youth through
the rule of law and education and through economic
and civil reconstruction processes. Let us work on
developing comprehensive United Nations strategies in
this field as well.

