The President (interpretation from French): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

My delegation has already had the opportunity to
express its views on the Israeli Government's decision to
carry out expropriations in East Jerusalem. Along with all
the other countries of the European Union, France recalls
that these expropriations are contrary to international law
and violate, in particular, provisions of the Geneva
Conventions. Furthermore, these measures have been
explicitly forbidden by several resolutions of the Security
Council and disregard the spirit of the Declaration of
Principles signed on 13 September 1993.

The parties to the peace process decided to reserve for
future negotiations discussion of the most delicate matters,
including Jerusalem and settlements. In no instance can
this indicate that international law does not apply in the
meantime. To the contrary, Jerusalem remains an
occupied territory, and will remain so as long as the
parties have not agreed on its final status. Until that day,
which we hope will come as soon as possible, all
international conventions and United Nations resolutions
apply to the Holy City.

As the Government of Israel has not rescinded its
decision, despite the many appeals from Arab Heads of
State, the European Union and a large number of other
States, the Security Council had to pronounce itself on the
matter. To that end, the sponsors of the draft resolution
on which the Council has just voted adopted reasonable,
moderate wording, which my delegation welcomed all the
more since it took account of all its comments and those
of other European States.

My delegation regrets that it was not possible to
adopt the draft resolution. It stated very precisely what
the Israeli Government must agree to in order to avoid
undermining the peace process by its decision to
confiscate 53 hectares of land in East Jerusalem. We
therefore appeal to the Tel Aviv authorities not to
misconstrue what has just occurred, and to head the
unanimous expression of concern by States Members of
the United Nations. We hope they will agree without
delay to go beyond the intention they announced last
Sunday and rescind outright the implementation of the
decision that has been challenged.

The devotion of Jews to Jerusalem is understandable
and legitimate, as is that of Muslims and Christians. It is
basic to the peace process that Governments should be
careful about the political form they give to these
historical and religious ties; otherwise, reconciliation will
be impossible.

Finally, my delegation appeals to Arab authorities
and populations to rise above the disappointment they
may feel this evening and to continue to lay claim to their
legitimate rights by peaceful means, foremost among
them, and irreplaceable, the peace process. For its part,
France will continue, along with its European partners, to
support all who wish to work for Israeli-Arab
reconciliation.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

 

As no further members of the Council wish to speak
at this stage, we have now completed the voting process.

The representative of Morocco wishes to make a
statement. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

