Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): It was with
profound and deep grief that Austria learned of the
terrible earthquake that struck Haiti last night. We are
deeply moved and shocked by the tragic losses, both
among the Haitian people and the United Nations
presence on the island. Let me extend my Government
and country's deepest condolences to the Government
and people of Haiti and to the families of those who
have lost their lives in the service of the United
Nations and the international community on the island.
My country is actively engaged in emergency efforts
currently being undertaken by the European Union
(EU). We are also looking at possibilities to make the
best possible national contribution in this very difficult
and dramatic situation.

I would like to thank the Chinese presidency for
organizing today's debate and for the draft presidential
statement that is before us, which builds on the work
started with resolution 1631 (2005), nearly five years
ago. Let me equally thank the Secretary-General and
the representatives of the regional organizations for
their statements.

Austria aligns itself with the statement that was
made by the representative of the European Union to
the United Nations.

The Security Council has repeatedly reaffirmed
the role of regional and subregional organizations in
the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. In the
light of the challenges of our century, it is clear that the
United Nations cannot operate in isolation in
maintaining international peace and security, but that it
needs to be complemented by regional organizations,
with their understanding of conflicts and their root
causes and their capacity to respond. In very many
cases, regional ownership is key to the success of the
peacekeeping efforts of the international community
and the United Nations on the ground. Most often, that
regional ownership can best be provided through the
involvement of the relevant regional and subregional
organizations.

As pointed out by the Secretary-General, the
challenges for effective cooperation lie in ensuring a
clear division of labour and distribution of roles and
tasks between the United Nations and regional
organizations. With its Common Security and Defence
Policy, the European Union can make an important
contribution in the area of peace and security. It has
developed significant capacities for conflict prevention
and conflict resolution. The entry into force of the
Treaty of Lisbon last month and the creation of the
Office of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy will allow the European Union to
speak to its partners with an even stronger and more
unified voice.

The European Union's commitment to supporting
the United Nations and the Security Council in their
responses to threats to international peace and security
is translated in the Union's support to all current
United Nations peacekeeping operations. As the
example of the European Union military operation in
the Republic of Chad has shown, the European Union
can also play a useful bridging role in crisis theatres
until the United Nations and/or the respective regional
or subregional organizations are ready to take over.
Let me also commend the important work carried
out by the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), whose election observation and
field missions operative in participating States
cooperate closely with United Nations agencies and
missions. We are pleased that United Nations
representatives will be invited to address the OSCE
Permanent Council at Vienna in the course of this year.
We are also pleased with the personal interest that the
Secretary-General has continually shown in the work
of the OSCE, as well as with the cooperation between
the OSCE and the United Nations.

The joint declaration on EU-United Nations
cooperation in crisis management that was signed in
2003 established a joint consultative mechanism. It has
proven to be a useful instrument for enhancing the
partnership between the two organizations. Desk-to-
desk consultations on conflict prevention between the
United Nations and the European Union could be
increased and - as models of dialogue - expanded to
other organizations. In that context, we also welcome
the Council's intention to hold informal interactive
dialogues with regional and subregional organizations.

The challenges of today's United Nations
peacekeeping operations, including the ever increasing
demands for United Nations deployment, highlight the
need for increased cooperation with and capacity-
building of regional organizations. Enhanced regional
capabilities for peacekeeping and conflict prevention
are a prerequisite for strengthening regional ownership
and responsibility for crisis management.

Austria fully supports a stronger role for regional
and subregional actors such as the African Union (AU),
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Southern Africa Development Community in
conflict prevention and resolution. Since 2003, the
European Union has made a significant contribution,
through the African Peace Facility, to the strengthening
of the AU's ability to engage in peacekeeping
operations on the African continent. We welcome the
proposals contained in the Prodi report (see S/2008/813) and in the subsequent report of the
Secretary-General on support to African Union
peacekeeping operations (S/2009/470).

Stand-by arrangements are of particular relevance
in the area of peacebuilding. By linking or coordinating
United Nations rosters of experts with those of regional
organizations, such as the European Union, we can
increase the pool of available expertise. Furthermore,
close collaboration with regional and subregional
organizations is crucial to the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. In addition, training
activities need to be intensified to meet the rising
demand for qualified civilian personnel in peace
operations. For several years, the Austrian Study
Centre for Peace and Conflict Resolution has
conducted regular training programmes on civilian
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Many of its
participants are now serving in missions of regional
organizations, including the African Union and the
OSCE.

I would also like to point out the important role
that regional and subregional organizations are playing
and can play in implementing Security Council
resolutions of a thematic nature. Resolution 1894
(2009) on the protection of civilians explicitly stresses
the importance of consultation and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
to improve the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Consultation and cooperation are also needed to
improve women's participation in peace processes, to
ensure the protection of children affected by armed
conflict and to combat impunity, corruption, terrorism
and organized crime.

Finally, better exchange and sharing of best
practices and lessons learned on all of the issues
mentioned will be crucial, both between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations as
well as among regional organizations themselves. One
of the lessons learned from the European Union
civilian and military operations is that missions
become more effective through the mainstreaming of
human rights and gender aspects. Regional
organizations will also be in a position to make a
significant contribution to the successful preparations
for the tenth anniversary of the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) later this year.

Let me add that Austria fully supports the
presidential statement prepared by you, Mr. President,
and your delegation.

