Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Mr. President,
my delegation would like to commend China for its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and expresses its appreciation on the convening of this
important debate on threats to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts.

Recent acts of terrorism across the world have again
exposed the callous and heinous nature of terrorism.
That is demonstrated by the indiscriminate killing and
maiming, the damage to property and infrastructure,
the fostering of fear in local communities and the
undermining of social and economic confidence. While
old threats remain, new threats and vulnerabilities have
developed with the emergence of a new, technologically
advanced and skilled generation of terrorists who
harbour territorial and transnational ambitions. Those
groups are willing to sacrifice women and children in
the service of their cause.

South Africa stands firmly with the rest of the
international community in its condemnation of
those attacks and reiterates its stance that terrorism,
in whatever form and from whichever quarter, must
be condemned. We are cognizant that no country is
immune and that we are all vulnerable to this threat.
With terrorism's global reach and changing nature,
international cooperation in countering this threat is
critical. International efforts should therefore support
a comprehensive, multifaceted and integrated approach
to deal with the scourge. Efforts should be focused
on countering the radicalization and recruitment of
individuals. We need to hamper the movement of
terrorists and the flow of funds. Last but not least, we
need to contradict and dispute the terrorist narrative,
notably on the Internet.

We have all noted that no country can shoulder this
burden alone. Therefore the South African Government
wishes to renew its pledge to fully support the global
campaign against terrorism within the framework
of the United Nations. The centrality of the United
Nations in coordinating and facilitating international
efforts is pivotal if we are to succeed. We also welcome
initiatives and efforts that promote dialogue, tolerance,
diversity and understanding among peoples, cultures
and religions. Acts of mobilization directed against
individuals, communities or nations simply because of
their faith, language or race cannot be tolerated.

South Africa reiterates its view that terrorism
cannot be defeated militarily and cannot be dealt with
solely through the use of force or coercive measures.
We believe that the only way for our collective efforts

to succeed is to address the root causes ofterrorism. We
need to understand and address the conditions that make
terrorism an attractive option to the disaffected. It is
critical to engage people, including through education,
to eliminate inequalities and work with disadvantaged
groups of society, particularly the youth, and to develop
appropriate strategies at the national, regional and
international levels.

In that context, it is important to resolve conflicts
in all parts of the globe, including through the search
for lasting peace in the Middle East. Promoting
political solutions aimed at resolving conflict and
creating the conditions for a better future over the
long term will go a long way to counter that scourge.
Those solutions should be based on all-inclusive
dialogue without prejudicing any party. International
cooperation in combating terrorism should also
include a joint commitment to eradicate poverty and
underdevelopment. Countermeasures can never be
sustainable ifthose factors are not addressed in tandem
with other counter-terror initiatives.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted unanimously by the General
Assembly, is a useful and flexible collective tool for
guiding the international community's response to
terrorism. Together with the Secretary-General's plan
for countering violent extremism, it provides a holistic
and multifaceted response to the many facets of that
challenge, premised on respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the rule of law.

At the regional level, recognizing the need to
strengthen cooperation and to develop a common
and coordinated approach to counter this threat, the
Southern African Development Community developed
a regional counter-terrorism strategy, formally adopted
during its thirty-fifth Summit of Heads of State and
Government in August 2015.

At the national level, South Africa's counter-
terrorism efforts are guided by the values of human
dignity, human rights and the rule of law, as enshrined
in our Constitution. We have adopted a national counter-
terrorism strategy, which is closely aligned to the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Its pillars
are, first, understanding and prediction; secondly,
prevention; thirdly, mitigation; fourthly, combating
terrorism; and fifthly, dealing with its consequences.
Our national strategy provides a comprehensive and
proportionate response to the threat of international
terrorism and extremism to South Africa's democracy.
It takes both local and international best practices into
account, while upholding human rights and the rule
of law. Furthermore, the South African Government
works closely with various organizations established
by our Constitution to promote and foster social,
cultural, religious and linguistic dialogue, as well as
social cohesion.

In conclusion, we acknowledge the valuable role
the United Nations continues to fulfil in countering this
scourge. With its global reach and mandate and itself
the target of devastating terrorist attacks, the United
Nations is best placed to deal with this threat in all its
forms, while helping to ensure that global efforts are
rooted in respect for human rights, the rule of law and
the peaceful resolution of conflict.

