Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to add my sense
of empathy and solidarity to the feelings expressed
with regard to Sergio de Mello and his colleagues, who
sacrificed their lives for the cause of the United
Nations. Whenever we talk about East Timor, we think
about him.

I wish to express my appreciation to Mr. Atul
Khare, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his dedicated work and for his very
helpful briefing this morning. I am also grateful to His
Excellency Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa, Foreign
Minister of Timor-Leste, for affirming the strong
determination of his Government to achieve
sustainable stability.

Since the regrettable incident that occurred last
February, political leaders in Timor-Leste have
demonstrated the capacity to better handle security
disturbances. The marked improvement in the overall
security situation is most welcome. The Joint
Command of the armed forces and the national police
has effectively maintained public order. The
Government succeeded in persuading the rebellious
"petitioners" group to surrender without violence,
which was followed by the resolution of that long-
standing issue. Thus, one of the fundamental factors
affecting the security situation in Timor-Leste has been
successfully addressed.

In order to ensure its stability, Timor-Leste must
have the national capacity to police itself. The United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and the Government of Timor-Leste have jointly
developed a strategy for the phased transfer of policing
responsibilities to the National Police Force of Timor-
Leste (PNTL). We are pleased with the steady progress
made in the screening and certification of police
officers. At the same time, that process must proceed
prudently, in tandem with actual progress in the reform
and capacity-building of the national police. We should
avoid any setbacks and earn people's trust and
confidence in the process. We therefore support the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the existing
strength of the UNMIT police force be maintained
through the current mandate and that the PNTL receive
appropriate support during the transition period.

We acknowledge the positive developments in the
security sector. We must also express concern over the
reported misconduct by some military and police
officers, particularly during the period of operation
under the Joint Command. It has to be emphasized that
members of security institutions must abide by the law
under any and all circumstances. Now that the state of
emergency has ended, all PNTL officers report to the
UNMIT Police Commissioner, and the Government
needs to draw a clear distinction between the role of
the armed forces and that of law enforcement
institutions. The armed forces must be accountable to
the democratically elected Government.

In order to ensure sustained stability and pave the
way for long-term peace, it is essential to develop
economic and social infrastructures and to create
opportunities for all, particularly young people.
Focused attention should be given to socio-economic
and humanitarian issues during the current mandate
period. It is encouraging that a significant number of
internally displaced persons have returned to their
communities in recent months and that many camps
have already been closed. The vital support provided
by the International Organization for Migration,
UNICEF and other United Nations agencies under the
leadership of UNMIT is highly appreciated. We should
now intensify our efforts to finally solve this long-
standing problem without losing momentum.

Timor-Leste is fortunate to possess great
resources generated by oil revenues. While there is
some logic in utilizing those revenues to meet short-
term emergency needs, effective and well-planned use
of those funds to contribute to the country's long-term
development must be given consideration. In that
context, a good investment in the education, training
and capacity-building of Timorese personnel is

critically important for sustainable development. The
economic activities of the private sector, local as well
as international, should be supported and promoted.
This would create a wide range of opportunities for
young people.

The major challenge and the principal focus with
regard to Timor-Leste are now shifting from the stage
of simply maintaining security to that of achieving
peacebuilding and durable peace and stability.
Regional peacebuilding is a long, complex and
multidimensional process. Japan is ready, together with
other partners, to support the national efforts of the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste, who are
the principal actors in this transformation. It is
essential to bear in mind the importance of having
coordinated and planned strategies. UNMIT and the
international partners have so far made significant
contributions to the peace and stability in Timor-Leste.
In respecting the views of the Government of Timor-
Leste, Japan will continue to follow closely the
progress of peacebuilding efforts and to develop the
most appropriate ways to support such efforts. Japan
looks forward to the medium-term strategy to be
included in the next report of the Secretary-General.

