Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Director
of Operations and Advocacy of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging,
for his briefing on the very critical humanitarian
situation in Syria.

We have carefully studied the most recent report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions (S/2018/777). We
are closely following developments on the ground and
are aware of the dire humanitarian situation. Only by
ensuring the safe, sustained and unimpeded access for
the United Nations to people in need throughout the
country, across conflict lines and in areas that have
recently changed control will we be able to prevent
further deterioration of the humanitarian crisis. We pay
tribute to the United Nations system and its humanitarian
partners for their work in the dangerous humanitarian
operations in Syria, which are unprecedented in their
magnitude and scale.

The political negotiation process is difficult but, as
is said, diplomacy is the art of the possible. We must not
lose hope that a political agreement between the parties
to the conflict, as well as between the main players,
will soon be achieved.

We welcome the outcomes of the international
meeting in Sochi, held in the framework of the Astana
talks, where all parties to the negotiations agreed to
the basic postulates of peace, in particular creating
the conditions to set up a constitutional committee
in Geneva.

We consider the return of internally displaced
persons to their homes and the return of Syrian
refugees in neighbouring and European countries to
their homeland as very pressing issues. We hope that
the new constitutional committee for Syria, which is
being established under United Nations auspices, will
play an important role in that regard.

Supporting and maintaining the new momentum
and creating new conditions for peace should be our
priority, instead of saber rattling or undertaking
military interventions, which could derail everything
that has been achieved so far. Peace, not war, should be
our dictum.

Lastly, Kazakhstan believes that Syria's State
institutions should be preserved and helped to grow
along democratic lines, with proper rule of law.
The destruction of statehood or attempts to forcible
change it will only add to the chaos, as we see with the
consequences of nearly eight years of fighting. We also
endorse the Secretary-General's call on all parties to
ensure that all the necessary security guarantees are in
place for the continued delivery of services to the south,
which must be carried out in an impartial manner and
without distinction.

