I welcome Minister Kramp-Karrenbauer to the Security Council and thank her for presiding over today's meeting. I thank High Commissioner Bachelet and Special Representative Shearer for their briefings. I also listened attentively to the briefing by Mr. Dismas Kitenge Senga. The first United Nations peacekeeping operation was launched in 1948. Since then, over the past 72 years, the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping have been broadened from monitoring ceasefires to comprehensive actions in the political and security fields. United Nations peacekeeping has become an important instrument for maintaining international peace and enhancing collective security. The promotion and protection of human rights is a common ideal of humankind, but it is possible only when there is peace and stability. As a powerful instrument of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and security, peacekeeping operations have been playing an important role in upholding the rights to livelihood and peace of the people in host countries and have created basic conditions for them to realize their right to development as well as other human rights. With regard to peace operations and human rights, I wish to highlight the following points. First, the objective of peace operations is to support the political settlement of hotspot issues. Therefore, when the Security Council sets the mandate for a peace operation, the priority should be promoting political settlement. Whether human rights protection should be included in the mandate depends on the situation of the mission in question. Mandating everything under the sun without prioritizing makes it hard for peacekeeping operations to achieve their main objective. We can see in Mali and South Sudan that the issue of human rights is not the main driver of the conflicts. Accordingly, efforts to fulfil a human rights mandate should serve, not divert attention from, the central task of those peacekeeping missions. Only by promoting the peace process can we make the improvement of human rights possible. Secondly, the ownership of host countries must be fully respected in the implementation of a human rights mandate. Human rights situations come in endless varieties and differ according the specific situation in a country. Peacekeeping operations must strictly follow Security Council resolutions, fully communicate with host-country authorities and respect their unique circumstances. At the same time, the Governments of host countries have the primary responsibility of promoting and protecting human rights. Peace operations cannot do the job of Governments or parties to conflict in their place; rather, they should create a favourable environment for the relevant parties to promote and protect human rights. Thirdly, peace operations should assist countries in responding to the coronavirus disease in order to promote and protect people's rights to life and health. The health of people in countries where health systems are weak, such South Sudan, Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, are under serious threat. Peacekeeping missions should, within their mandates, assist Governments in strengthening capacity-building, help the Governments and the people of host countries fight the pandemic, put people at the centre of their efforts and safeguard people's rights to life and health in an effective manner. Fourthly, peace operations should strengthen prevention and punishment for internal human rights violations. Human rights violations by peacekeeping personnel have been reported in recent years, undermining the image of the operations and exposing deficiencies in internal management. Peacekeeping operations, whether deployed by the United Nations or regional organizations, should improve internal management, strengthen discipline and effectively address and prevent such incidents to avoid negative results. China is the second-largest contributor to the United Nations peacekeeping budget. It is also a major troop-contributing country, with more than 2,500 Chinese peacekeepers currently serving in nine mission areas. China attaches great importance to capacity-building for peacekeeping personnel. China provides strict predeployment training to ensure that peacekeepers better understand and respect local people and culture. Chinese peacekeepers are well-disciplined. They have successfully completed large numbers of peacekeeping tasks. Peace, development and human rights are the three pillars of the United Nations and are mutually reinforcing. Peace operations have the mission of bringing about the peace that facilitates development and promotes of human rights. As the first country to sign the Charter of the United Nations, China remains true to its original aspirations. It will continue to honour its commitment to multilateralism and increase its contributions to peacekeeping and the cause of human rights.
