Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, for her briefing
and for the introduction of the eighth report submitted
to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011). Jordan stresses its continued support for the
International Criminal Court (ICC) based on our
commitment to the Court's founding principles. The
Court is a cornerstone in promoting criminal justice,
ending impunity on behalf of the perpetrators of the
most egregious crimes and in the maintenance of
international peace and security and upholding the rule
of law.

As indicated in the Prosecutor's eighth report
to the Council, Jordan appreciates the continuing
consultations between the Libyan Government and the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC. Jordan stresses
that the Court's success will depend on constructive
cooperation on its behalf. In that respect we call on
the Libyan Government to fully cooperate with the
Court by facilitating the logistical support necessary
in collecting evidence, coordinating investigations,
information exchange and the detention and extradition
of individuals.

Similarly, Jordan recognizes the enormous
challenges facing Libya. We highlight the importance
of its continuing efforts in establishing the rule of
law, ensuring that all perpetrators of crimes face the
international criminal justice system with a view to
upholding justice and paving the way in facilitating the
Court's exercise of its jurisdiction. The establishment
of criminal justice is a basic prerequisite in stabilizing
Libya and guaranteeing the non-recurrence of war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

In conclusion, Jordan stresses its commitment to
respecting the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of Libya. We are committed
to comprehensive dialogue, the rejection ofviolence and
supporting the political process. We call for providing
full support to Libya's legitimate constitutional
institutions as well as the immediate cessation of
hostilities and all acts of violence on Libyan territory.
We call for the cooperation of all Libyans to enable the
Libyan State to restore stability and extend its authority
throughout the entire territory. Cooperation is necessary
to continue the democratic transition and strengthen
the political process based on open dialogue among
all political parties and their rejection of violence and
terrorism with a view to achieving agreement on a new
constitution for the country.

