Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to say how pleased we are to
see you, Minister, presiding over our meeting, and since
I have not yet had the opportunity to do so, I would
like to congratulate Germany on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for April and to wish it every
success. We are also grateful to Mr. Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), and Mrs. Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for their briefings.

As one of the three depositaries of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
Russia attaches the greatest possible importance to
its preservation and sustainable operation. It would
be hard to overestimate its contribution to ensuring
international peace and security. The Treaty has
played a crucial role in preventing the proliferation
of nuclear weapons and laid the foundation for steady
progress towards disarmament, in particular nuclear
disarmament, and for the development of broad
international cooperation in the peaceful use of atomic
energy. It can rightly be considered an example of the
effectiveness of international diplomacy and a model of
cooperation by the international community in solving
global problems. Unfortunately, despite its undeniable
successes, we must acknowledge the very difficult
circumstances in which we are approaching the Treaty's
fiftieth anniversary and its next Review Conference,
which has to sum up the functioning of the Treaty in its
latest five-year cycle.

The contradictions and disagreements among
various groups of States within the framework of the
NPT are gravely deepening. Universally recognized
norms and mechanisms in the area of non-proliferation
are being undermined or subjected to revision. To
that we have to add the recent emergence of new and
dangerous trends that are heating up an already difficult
situation with regard to nuclear non-proliferation. This
is about attempts to use the NPT review process as a
platform to settle political scores, including on issues
that have nothing to do with the Treaty. Long-standing
differences also persist with regard to a number of
items on the Treaty's agenda.

The Russian Federation shares the noble goal
of building a nuclear-weapon-free world, and as a
responsible and consistent supporter of the nuclear-
disarmament process, we have been making a
significant contribution to the further reduction of
strategic offensive arms. Last year we reached the
levels for delivery systems and warheads established
in the New START Treaty. Overall, Russia's nuclear
arsenal has been reduced by more than 85 per cent.

It is clear that consistent preliminary efforts will
be needed to lay the groundwork for future progress
towards nuclear disarmament. First and foremost, that
requires improving the strategic situation in various
regions and in the world as a whole. That can be done
only by addressing a whole range of factors that affect
strategic stability and international security. They
include, specifically, the United States' completely
unrestricted deployment of its global anti-ballistic
missile systems; the development of high-precision
non-nuclear strategic offensive arms; the possibility that
weapons will be launched in outer space; the weakening
of the system of international treaties and agreements
in the areas of security, stability and arms control; and
attempts to weaken the defence capabilities of other
countries through illegitimate unilateral sanctions that
circumvent the Security Council. If those problems
are not solved, we will hardly be able to create an
international security environment that is conducive to
furthering nuclear disarmament.

Another pressing issue related to the NPT is
the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) in the Middle East. General
Assembly decision 73/546, adopted in December by a
majority of votes, on convening a conference on the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction was intended to
begin the process of the practical implementation ofthe
1995 resolution on the Middle East and thereby make
a positive contribution to the general state of affairs in
the context of the NPT review process. The General
Assembly's decision is logical and balanced and does
not run counter to the interests of the States in the
region. The Russian Federation plans to participate in
the conference on the WMD-free zone and to promote
its successful outcome, as well as support subsequent
efforts to establish the zone. It will be important for the
other five nuclear-weapon States, but most importantly
all ofthe countries in the Middle East, tojoin the efforts
to convene and hold the conference.

The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
which was established to form a solid bulwark against
the spread and development of more sophisticated
nuclear weapons, plays an exceptionally important role
in the efforts to limit and reduce nuclear weapons.

We view the IAEA safeguards as a key element of
the nuclear non-proliferation regime. Their purpose
is to prevent the diversion of the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy to the creation of nuclear weapons.
We are determined to continue to assist the IAEA in
strengthening the safeguards system. However, it is
vital to ensure that the NPT verification mechanism
remains objective, depoliticized and technically based,
and to maintain the clarity and transparency of its
work for the parties to the Treaty. Russia supports
the universalization of the additional protocol to the
IAEA safeguards agreements, which, together with the
comprehensive safeguards agreement, should eventually
become a universally recognized norm for verifying
States' compliance with their non-proliferation
obligations under the NPT. At the same time, we note
that adherence to the additional protocol is voluntary.

One issue on which there appears to be agreement
among the NPT States parties is the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. In accordance with article
IV of the Treaty, States parties have an inalienable
right to the peaceful use of atomic energy. The current
level of technological development makes it possible
to combine nuclear power and other types of energy
production organically, opening up the prospects for
creating more advanced, flexible and efficient energy
systems. But as Mr. Amano rightly pointed out, the
use of nuclear technologies is not limited to energy but
extends to uses in various areas of activity including
industry, agriculture, medicine, climate, water use
and more. We believe that the NPT significantly
expands the possibilities for the use of nuclear power
systems for sustainable development while eliminating
risks to the nuclear-weapon non-proliferation regime.

In conclusion, I would like to express the hope that
the next Review Conference has a positive outcome
and that all NPT States parties at the very least affirm
the viability and relevance of the Treaty and their
willingness to uphold their obligations under it.

