Mr. Annabi: Last Saturday, 9 October, Afghans
went to the polls to elect a President, for the first time
in their history. That these elections should have taken
place at all - against the backdrop of extremist
threats, the very difficult terrain, adverse weather
conditions in several provinces and other challenges -
is in itself an achievement. But the impressive
participation, the enthusiasm and pride of the women
and men voting for the first time and the peaceful and
orderly environment in which the electoral operation
unfolded have made it a special event that augers well
for the journey of the Afghans towards democracy.

Many international observers feared that the
elections would be marred by violence. The fact that
they were not is a tribute not only to the Afghan voters
but also to the national army and police, who provided
a safe environment with the assistance of the
international security forces.

The elections, of course, were not perfect.
Members will no doubt have read about the trouble
experienced with the application of indelible ink, about
the allegations of intimidation and about other
irregularities. But, while the results of the election
itself will not be known for a while, the popular verdict
on the process itself is overwhelmingly positive.

I would like to begin with a very general and
preliminary account of the elections. In most ways,
they were a well-run operation, given the constraints of
geography and security. Almost every polling station
was opened on time. Polling staff acted professionally
and were properly equipped. There were no major
security incidents and, remarkably, no Afghan voter
was killed during the polling.

The reports we have heard so far from observers,
monitors, special guests, United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) staff in the field
and individual Afghans reflect a high level of popular
satisfaction with the conduct of the polling.

Initial estimates - and I stress that these are
estimates - indicate a high turnout, despite poor
weather conditions and a call by opposition candidates
for a boycott, to which I will return in a moment.

The only serious problem that occurred during
voting concerned the handling of the indelible ink.
Polling stations were supplied with one of two
products with which to ink voters' left thumbs: voter
ink pens or ink sponge containers. Both products
appear to have functioned satisfactorily when used
properly. However, the voter ink pens could be
confused with marker pens intended for marking ballot
papers, and the ink sponge containers could be
confused with a bottle of ink intended for replenishing
stamp pads. It appears that polling officials did indeed
confuse the products on many occasions. This
produced, in the early hours of polling, fast-flying
rumours that the ink was in fact erasable and that the
election was therefore compromised. Some polling
staff decided to halt voting until they could receive
clarification from the Joint Electoral Management
Body (JEMB). The JEMB rapidly issued a decision
that polling should continue, and it reissued
instructions on how to properly use the ink. The
problem was identified and resolved within the first
hours of polling, and complaints had ceased by early
afternoon. Voters continued to turn out in significant
numbers throughout the day, and a number of polling
sites actually extended their closing time from 4 p.m.
to 6 p.m.

Despite the resolution of the problem and the
evident enthusiasm of voters, 15 opposition candidates,
at about 2 p.m. on 9 October, issued a statement calling
for the suspension of the polling and declaring that the
results of the election would not be legitimate. They
cited a multiplicity of alleged irregularities, including
allegations that JEMB staff were instructing people to
vote for President Karzai, that candidate and party
agents had been barred from some polling stations and
that blank ballot papers were being distributed.

The JEMB rejected that demand as unjustified
and stated that to shut down voting on the basis of
unproven allegations by candidates would deny the
fundamental right to vote to those who had not yet
reached the polling centres. The JEMB acknowledged
in its statement that there had been some technical
problems and allegations of other irregularities but
reminded the candidates that a complaints mechanism
existed and that they would be able to participate fully
in the investigation of the complaints.

As polling went on without incident, voters
increasingly stated their opposition to the boycott, and
the position of those advocating the boycott weakened.
The day after polling, a number of candidates began to
suggest that they were not actually boycotting the
election results but that they felt a strong need for an
independent investigation into the alleged
irregularities.

The JEMB took that issue seriously and requested
UNAMA to nominate a panel of independent electoral
experts to assist it in its investigations. The electoral
law, it should be noted, empowers the JEMB to
establish such a panel. Yesterday, 11 October, the
Board announced the establishment of three-member
panel that will fully investigate the candidates' protests
and present recommendations to the JEMB for its
adjudication. The Board asked the presidential
candidates to submit their detailed complaints by 6
p.m. today, Kabul time.

I would like to focus for a moment on the
question of security, given our longstanding and often-
stated concern that the election presented a number of
very vulnerable targets. In the end, security conditions
on election day greatly exceeded our expectations.
Nonetheless, there were some incidents. In several
areas, particularly in the south and east, rockets were
fired at or near polling centres. In the central
highlands, there was a case of polling station workers
being assaulted by voters who had attempted to engage
in multiple voting. In Uruzgan province, insurgents
destroyed a bridge linking one community to a village
centre, with the aim of preventing people from
travelling to the centre to vote. There were several
reports of intimidation, though none so far is
considered to have greatly affected the voting.
Allegations are being processed, and, as I have already
said, they will be investigated.

Credit must be given to the Electoral Security
Operations Centre, which was established in
cooperation with the JEMB and national and
international security forces. That mechanism allowed
intelligence from various sources to be pooled and
shared, and it allowed particular threats to be
responded to as necessary by the approximately
120,000 Afghan, coalition and International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) forces that were present to
provide security during the election. We are very
grateful to ISAF and the coalition in particular for the
additional forces that they deployed. Those forces gave
Afghan voters confidence and surely deterred a number
of incidents. We believe that we need to build on that
success and that those forces should remain in
Afghanistan until the parliamentary elections,
scheduled to be held next spring, are over.

The presidential electoral process, of course, is
not over, and attacks could still occur. Polling has
ended, but a number of technical tasks remain to be
performed. Ballot boxes are being transported to the
counting centres in the eight main population centres
of Afghanistan. Most have now arrived, despite some
attacks on convoys, including one that killed three
Afghan policemen in Uruzgan province. The
reconciliation of votes is under way. That means that
the number of ballots in each ballot box is being
checked against the number of people who appeared at
the polling station and the number of ballots that were
used at that station. Once reconciliation is complete,
the counting of ballots will begin, in the presence of
observers and party agents. We expect the counting
process to continue for some two to three weeks. The
results will be transmitted every hour to the Media
Results Centre, where they will be published. Once the
counting is completed, and if the JEMB concludes after
its investigations that the irregularities reported did not
affect the overall credibility of the election, the results
will be announced.

An important part of the election was the out-of-
country voting in Iran and Pakistan, conducted on
behalf of the JEMB by the International Organization
for Migration (IOM). There, as in Afghanistan, order
was kept, voters turned out, and balloting took place
under secure conditions. Initial estimates suggest that
some 540,000 Afghans voted at the 1,657 polling
stations set up in Pakistan, representing a satisfactory
turnout of about 75 per cent. In Iran, an estimated
260,000 voters voted at 1,126 polling stations. That
represents approximately 50 per cent of estimated
eligible voters. Given the abbreviated time for public
education in Iran, as well as the fact that in Iran - as
opposed to Pakistan and Afghanistan - polling fell on
a working day for many voters, that is also a
satisfactory participation rate. With a total of about
800,000 Afghans voting outside Afghanistan, the out-
of-country exercise represents the largest-ever refugee
vote. This was organized in only 78 days. The IOM
and, in particular, its teams in Pakistan and Iran
deserve significant praise for that achievement.

I also want to seize this opportunity to commend
the Governments of Iran and Pakistan for the
commitment they have shown to the process.

An important element in enhancing the credibility
of the election was the presence of observers. In
Afghanistan, 5,321 domestic and 121 international
observers were present on polling day. The European
Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe sent election support teams,
both of which have issued generally positive
preliminary statements. The participation of domestic
observers through the Free and Fair Elections
Foundation of Afghanistan was particularly welcome
and we are pleased that the domestic observation effort
was as thorough as it was.

Equally important for the credibility of the
process was the presence of political party and
candidate agents. There were 22,000 party agents and
52,000 candidate agents accredited, and agents were
present in every province of Afghanistan. Many of
those agents continued to observe the polling even
after their candidates had called a boycott and
requested them to leave the polling stations. The agents
continue to play an active role in observing the
counting process and by doing so have contributed to
strengthening the credibility of the process.
As members know, before the election, much
effort went into creating an environment in which a
credible, meaningful election was possible. A list of the
benchmarks to guide that effort was circulated to the
Security Council in August last year. I would like to
emphasize one of those benchmarks today: the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process. It is clear that much more progress is needed
on DDR before the parliamentary elections are held. At
the same time, the electoral process itself has helped to
add momentum to disarmament efforts.

A specific pre-election DDR framework was
finalized through a presidential decree signed on 7
September. Additional momentum was gained from the
requirement that all parties sever their links to military
formations in order to be registered for the elections.
As a result, the Ministry of Defence, as requested by
the Joint Electoral Management Body on 10 August,
appointed new and non-factional commanders to three
core units affiliated with electoral candidates: President
Karzai's running mate Khalili and presidential
candidates Muhaqqiq and Dostum.

The political momentum generated by the
electoral process has had an evident effect on the
demobilization of soldiers, as well as on the
defactionalization of military forces. By the end of
September, about 5,480 soldiers had entered the DDR
programme under the new plan, representing about 40
per cent more than had been disarmed since the
programme started in October 2003. By election day,
more than 22,500 personnel had been disarmed and
2,780 serviceable heavy weapons had been disabled or
cantoned. That corresponds to 33 per cent of estimated
actual personnel targets and to 68 per cent of the heavy
weapons target.

Those results suggest that, just as disarmament is
an important ingredient in the holding of credible
elections, the electoral process itself helps advance
disarmament. That is one more reason to ensure that
the international community continues to provide
assistance to both processes, particularly in the context
of the upcoming parliamentary elections scheduled for
next spring. Planning and budgeting for the elections
will begin shortly and the plans will be made available
as soon as they are finalized.

In conclusion, I have tried to present some very
preliminary observations on a process that is still under
way. We should guard against complacency and be
aware that difficult challenges continue to lie ahead,
but the past few days - and first and foremost the
patience, resilience and determination demonstrated by
Afghan women and men - are a source of optimism
that the election will result in achieving a central
objective of the Bonn Agreement.

