Mr. Choi (Republic of Korea): Five days ago, on
ll April 1997, the people of Angola put behind them two
decades of tragic civil war and ushered in a new era of
peace and concord. More than anything else, the
inauguration of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation is a historic triumph for the Angolan people.
It is a triumph of their long-standing aspirations for peace
over the lingering forces of hatred and antagonism. The
Republic of Korea extends its warmest congratulations to
the people and the leaders of Angola on their
achievement. We wish the very best for the people of
Angola and for the new Government as it moves forward
on the road to healing the scars of war and rebuilding the
nation. The Republic of Korea will do its best within its
capabilities to assist the Angolan Government in the
daunting task ahead.

The inauguration of the unified Government in
Angola is also a triumph for the international community,
and for the United Nations in particular, which has
invested a significant amount of its scarce resources in the
largest United Nations peacekeeping operation in the
world. Truly, Angola will go down as another instructive
model of success in the annals of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We commend the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, Maitre Beye, as
well as all the men and women of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) for their
dedication and sacrifice.
We also pay tribute to the troika of observer
countries, Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United
States, for the vital role they have been playing in
facilitating the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.
The Republic of Korea is proud of having taken part in
the peace effort through its contribution of an engineering
unit to UNAVEM. III.

As we welcome the dawn of a promising new stage
in the long and arduous peace process in Angola, we
must not forget that there are still unfinished political and
military tasks. We trust that the commitment of the
Angolan people and their leaders to peace and
reconciliation is strong enough to overcome the last few
remaining obstacles in the peace process. We therefore
look forward to speedy progress in the normalization of
State administration throughout the country, the
completion of the formation of the unified armed forces
and the national police and the demobilization of
ex-combatants. We believe that the continued presence of
the United Nations in Angola is necessary until the hard-
won peace takes firm root through the full implementation
of the Lusaka Protocol. For this reason, we will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the Council.

As President Dos Santos stated in his inaugural
address, the future of Angola now lies in the hands of the
Angolan people. There is a time for all things, and now
is the time for peace, the time for concord in Angola. We
sincerely hope that the energies and resources of the

 

Angolan people, which were once squandered on the
battlefield, will from now on be devoted to the
reconstruction of their war-tom country. In the same vein,
we look forward to seeing the Angolan leaders devote their
energies and wisdom to winning the new battle to build a
new country from the ashes of war, make it more
prosperous, and ensure that the people enjoy the dividends
of peace. This is a new test facing Angola's leaders, and
history will judge them on how well they fare at this test.

