Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation would like to thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this wrap-up meeting to
discuss the work of the Council. We have listened
attentively, particularly to the statements of the
representatives of delegations whose Council tenure
will conclude at the end of this year. We reiterate our
thanks to your delegation for presenting accurate daily
information to Council members concerning our work
programme, a practice that we believe should become
permanent within the framework of improving the
Council's working methods.

This meeting coincides with the end of the year,
which allows us to review and assess our work, not
only over the past month but throughout the year. Here,
we should like to express our appreciation to the
representatives of the five States that will leave the
Council in a few days' time for their great
contributions to its work, particularly in the area of
developing its working methods and procedures and in
carrying out its responsibilities through the adoption of
many important and historic decisions. Because Syria
still has a full year and a few days until the end of its
tenure in the Council, we promise to present further
comprehensive views with regard to the Council's
performance at this time next year.

The importance of today's meeting is based on
our deep conviction that we all must strive to improve
the Council's performance and its working methods, so
that its work can become more transparent and more
effective, which in turn will enable it to address the
challenges that are included on its agenda, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter. Here, we
must add that respect for the Council's working
methods and equal treatment of all its members are
crucial in order to preserve the Council's unity and
credibility. We would have liked to have had the
compulsory procedures and working methods of the
Council followed in dealing with the Iraqi declaration,
since we made our position clear in that regard in a
letter that was circulated as a Council document. We
are hopeful that the Council will rectify the error that
was made, particularly since a large number of its
members stated in our recent consultations their desire
to receive a full copy of the Iraqi declaration in order
to form their opinion and views independently and
responsibly. This is also important in order to maintain
the unity of the Council's work with respect to
significant issues, as has been affirmed by many
Council members.

It is well known that we have achieved tangible
progress in the area of the transparency of the
Council's work. The Council has held an
unprecedentedly large number of open meetings, and
non-member States have participated in the Council's
work more than ever before. They had the opportunity
to express their views with regard to the political issues
being discussed and to express their vision for finding
solutions for these issues. The Council has also held a
number of wrap-up meetings in which members and
non-members reviewed its work.

The Council has achieved tangible improvements
in the past period. Having regular briefings on the
situation in the Middle East was one of the
achievements that deserve mention here. The Council,
throughout its working years, did not have such an
opportunity to discuss the situation in an explosive
region that constitutes a real threat to international
peace and security. At the same time, we should all be
aware of the fact that the Council has not followed up
on the implementation of a number of its resolutions
which negatively impacts its work and prevents the
achievement of real progress to reach a settlement in
this and other regions that are conflict-ridden.

Dealing with Council resolutions and the
importance of implementing them should be based on
equality and a single standard. Syria considers
international legality, as represented by the United
Nations and all its bodies, including the Security
Council, which is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as one of the main
pillars on which it relies in seeking a comprehensive
and just peace, particularly in the Middle East, and
generally in other conflict-ridden areas of the world.

In this context, Syria views any attempt to keep
the Council from dealing closely with the issues
relating to the Middle East, under different pretexts, a
matter that is not just improper, but actually contradicts
the concept of collective security, the Charter and the
willingness of the international community to
cooperate to find solutions for the challenges faced by
our world.
We believe strongly that any attempt to equate the
Palestinian people, who are subject to a hateful and
continuous Israeli occupation with the terrorist policies
of the Israeli Government that contradict a just and
comprehensive peace is a clear and flagrant
contradiction of the Charter. This is an unacceptable
violation of the United Nations role, and of that of the
Security Council.

The Israeli occupation of our land, which
constitutes the highest form of terrorism, is a question
that our Council should confront when there is a
discussion of the Arab-Israeli conflict. It is a matter
that should be terminated as a matter of priority in the
Council's work in order to reach a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, instead of
talking about alleged terrorism undertaken by the
Palestinian people, who are the real victims of Israeli
terrorism.

The Security Council has made great efforts to
deal with African issues in order to reach a settlement
for conflict-ridden areas. The establishment of the
Working Group on the prevention and settlement of
conflicts in Africa, which was headed by Mauritius
very seriously and efficiently, helped to consolidate the
role of the Council and contributed to dealing with
African issues. The Council has followed up on the
developments that have occurred in Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Sierra
Leone, and has given specific importance to Somalia
during the period under consideration. We still have a
lot to do in this area. We would like to state here that
the Security Council's missions to conflict-ridden areas
have contributed largely to ending these conflicts and
to reaching a settlement, because it has allowed
members to get acquainted with the real situation there.

The Council has also discussed many substantive
issues in the areas of peacekeeping, women, security,
peace, children and civilians in times of war, as well as
the issue of terrorism. The Council has achieved many
successes in dealing with many of these issues and has
achieved progress that cannot be overlooked.

Syria will continue to work actively to
consolidate transparency in the Council's work and
looks forward to more serious work to improve the
machinery of the Council and to make it more credible
and responsive to what the Charter states.

