Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arabic Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The statements made by some Member States
before the Council as well as elsewhere, as well as
statements by the Secretary-General himself, continue
to stress that there is there can be no humanitarian or
military solution to the crisis in Syria. We agree with
that suggestion in principal because the humanitarian
suffering cannot be ended in full by providing some
humanitarian assistance in one region or another. This
is despite the fact that we fully understand the need
for providing such humanitarian assistance and the
important role that it has to play in alleviating suffering
in the areas affected. However, we differ with some
States in as far as we believe that this suggestion should
not be limited to words but that those words should be
associated with serious and responsible action and that
the matter should be discussed in a holistic manner.
This has its own consequences, including the following.

First, we should discuss the main reason for the
emergence of the humanitarian crisis in Syria, which is
primarily the widespread terrorist phenomenon being
supported by outside forces. However, and regrettably,
instead of that, some States are attempting to dissociate
the phenomenon of terrorism from the humanitarian
situation in Syria so as to prolong the crisis and the
two issues as separate, with a view to blackmailing the
Syrian Government under the pretext of repercussions.
This is in addition to attempts to avoid shouldering
responsibility, in particular in implementing Security
Council resolutions on combating terrorism, including
resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015).

Can we call the actions of some States, including
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Turkey, in spending billions
of dollars in supporting and financing terrorism, which
has been condemned by the Security Council, anything
like concern over the humanitarian situation in Syria?
Is it not the epitome of hypocrisy, while the 2015 Syria
response plan did not receive even 9 per cent of the
requested funding and the regional response plan for
refugees received less than 6 per cent?

I would like to draw the attention of Council
members to the fact that the cost of international staff
and their skyrocketing salaries usually comes at the
expense of the beneficiaries - those who are benefiting
from humanitarian assistance in Syria. We therefore
call on the Secretary-General to submit a report on that
topic.

Secondly, a political solution should be supported
through a Syrian-led intra-Syrian dialogue. As such, the
Syrian Government continues to combat terrorism and,
in parallel, is seeking to achieve a political solution. It
openly and positively participated in the consultative
meeting held in Moscow in January, and intends to
participate in the second Moscow meeting, scheduled
to be held within two weeks.

The Government has also responded positively to
the proposal made by Mr. de Mistura, in accordance
with the information he conveyed in his briefing to the
Council last month, in the hope that such a proposal can
contribute to improving the humanitarian situation in
Syria. However, the terrorist groups and their driving
force - which includes States - are the ones who
refused to implement the proposal of Mr. de Mistura.
Still some members of this Council refuse to address
this negative aspect with the attention and follow-up
that it deserves.

The report of the Secretary-General before
us (S/2015/l68) has many shortcomings and gross
misrepresentations. I shall, by way of example, discuss
some of them.

We noticed that the report depended in many of
the charges levelled at the Syrian Government on what
it calls "reports". However, the report is Secretary-
General failed to disclose the sources of those reports
or their credibility and worthiness. Secondly, the
report says that the United Nations sought access to 33
besieged or hard-to-reach areas. However, the United
Nations was denied access to 31 areas and is still
waiting authorization to access others. I would also like
to say that, making such proposals in this poisonous
manner is political and misleading, and that it fails to
convey the full picture. The situation is as follows.

In the second half of February, the field offices of
the United Nations in Homs, Aleppo and Tartus sent
those 33 requests to the governors of the areas directly
without the Resident Coordinator's Office sending any
such information to the main focal point in the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs. The Ministry learned about this
later on from then United Nations on 9 March, one
month later. This is against standard procedures,
whereby delivering assistance to hard-to-reach areas
requires prior agreement between the United Nations
and Syria. That requires a meeting of the joint Syrian-
United Nations commission to discuss the details with
regard to requests by the United Nations to provide
assistance, in particular regarding then roads to be
followed according to the security situation as well
as assessing the number of beneficiaries and the
distribution points so that we can guarantee the safe
delivery of assistance material.

Despite all of this, the Syrian Government was
ready to facilitate the operation of the convoys
whenever possible, provided that such assistance would
not end up in the ends of terrorist groups, in addition
to guaranteeing the safety and security of humanitarian
workers.

Thirdly, the report states that the Syrian
Government is attacking the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) in some cities and towns, which refutes
some of the naive assertions made by some of my
colleagues in the Council to the effect that the Syrian
Government is not fighting ISIS. That is something we
have heard many times in the Council. However, despite
all of the foregoing, the report of the Secretary-General
claims that such attacks led to the killing of civilians
and the destruction of infrastructure. The question that
must be posed here is how could the authors verify
their authenticity of reports in areas controlled by
ISIS unless the sources were the Chechen Abu-Usama,
the Saudi Abu-Moussab, the Libyan Abu-Suhaib, the
British Abu-John or the Jordanian Abu-Abdullah?

I would like to rdaw the attention of Ms. Amos to the
total destruction ofa school for deaf and dumb children
in the city of Raqqa, as a result of one of those air raids
by the so-called coalition. What adds insult to injury
is that the report does not even attempt to discuss the

loss of life and the destruction of Syria's infrastructure
caused by the international coalition's raids.

The report says that the Syrian Government
declared three of its staff persona non grata. But the
question that should be asked here is what really is
the mandate that the UNICEF personnel are working
under in this case? The question I have for those who
are quick to criticize the Syrian Government's decision
is about the relationships that the UNICEF employee
had to other groups in Aleppo. Why would he contact
the armed groups without the knowledge of the Syrian
Government? Is there any justification for the continued
demands of another staff member wanting to know the
location of the Syrian army or the kinds of weapons
being used in Aleppo? Did the supervisor of those two
staff members explain that paragraph sub-paragraph
35 (d) of the annex to General Assembly resolution
46/182 requires of United Nations staff working in
humanitarian assistance that they obtain the consent,
inter alia, of the host Government, in particular here
the Syrian Government, the principal party with which
they should be in touch in order to ensure their access
to emergency areas.

The drafters of the report persist in blaming the
Syrian Government for laying siege to some areas and
preventing humanitarian access to them. However, the
report fails to explain how weapons and ammunition
can continue to reach those regions or how come those
weapons are used to launch indiscriminate rocket
attacks and other terrorist attacks in safe areas. The
fact is that those are areas that are under siege from
inside by armed terrorist groups, and it is they who
are preventing humanitarian assistance from getting
access - or, if they allow it to enter, they steal the aid.
The report did not discuss the negative consequences
for the humanitarian situation in Syria resulting from
the coordinated unilateral measures imposed on the
Syrian people. Those negative consequences were
acknowledged in the reports of the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs and the Economic and
Social Commission for Western Asia.

I would like to stress that the Syrian Government is
committed to meeting its responsibilities with regard to
alleviating the humanitarian suffering of its people. We
are willing to take every possible measure to achieve
that. We are willing to cooperate with the United
Nations and facilitate its work, but such cooperation
is not a one-way street. In return, the United Nations
must commit to abiding by its guiding principles in
providing humanitarian assistance. It must cooperate
with the Syrian Government, coordinate its actions
with the Government and consult with the Government
regarding the various humanitarian situations, rather
than attacking it with unconstructive criticism. The
United Nations and various humanitarian organizations
have succeeded in providing humanitarian assistance
to more than 4 million Syrians every month inside
Syria's territory, thanks to the Syrian Government's
cooperation.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the people
under siege in Syria number not 440,000 but the
23 million citizens of Syria, who are suffering under
the various coercive measures and sanctions imposed
by the European Union and the United States, among
others.

