Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative Abou Moussa for his
briefing this morning.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) has blighted
the heart of Africa for over 20 years. It remains what it
always was - a thuggish band of criminals who prey
on civilians, target women and children, and terrorize
communities. It is incumbent upon all of us to ensure
that the LRA can no longer inflict its odious brand of
suffering.

An end to the scourge of the LRA is within sight.
The concerted efforts of the affected countries, the
African Union (AU), the United Nations and other
partners have substantially weakened the LRA, but
we must not lose focus. The permanent eradication
of the LRA requires our continued attention and the
creation and consolidation of security and stability in
the affected countries. Events in the Central African
Republic, as others have already noted, threaten to
undermine progress. The United Kingdom calls upon
all regional countries to participate fully in the fight
against the LRA. We must not allow the LRA to regroup,
as it has done previously when close to extinction.

The United Kingdom welcomes the development of
an implementation plan for the United Nations strategy
on the LRA. It is essential that the priority tasks
identified in the plan be swiftly carried out, that the
timelines be met, and that the United Nations articulate
effectively to donors which elements of the strategy are
currently underfunded.

The United Kingdom also welcomes the advocacy
undertaken by Special Representative Moussa and AU
Special Envoy Madeira with LRA-affected countries
and the finalization of the strategic documents for the
operationalization of the African Union Regional Task
Force against the LRA. That will significantly improve
tactical coordination, information-sharing and joint
planning between the relevant armed forces.

I would now like to comment on the broader role
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA). The United Kingdom welcomes the
efforts of UNOCA to facilitate and encourage closer
regional collaboration in Central Africa. Helping the
subregional organizations and their Member States to
develop strategies and capabilities for addressing the
problems they face is a crucial task. The evidently
close working relationship that Special Representative
Moussa and UNOCA have developed with the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) can
valuably help improve regional cooperation.

Events in the Central African Republic require

a regional solution. The United Kingdom expects

UNOCA to remain engaged with ECCAS on this and to

play a key role in achieving a unified regional position.

It is important that UNOCA support the work of Special

Representative of the Secretary-General Vogt and her
team.

The United Kingdom remains concerned by the
threats to maritime security on Africa's western
seaboard, and welcomes the leadership shown by the
United Nations on that issue. UNOCA has an important
role to play in ensuring that the international community
works together to build maritime security capability. A
regional response is essential to minimizing the impact
on economic development and stability. Timetables
must not be allowed to slip.

UNOCA should be playing a strong role in all the
challenges for which regional coordination is essential.
At a time when resources are tight and demands on
the United Nations are high, UNOCA must add real
value to regional and subregional efforts. The United
Kingdom would therefore welcome greater clarity in
the Secretary-General's next report on what specifically
UNOCA is doing to add such value and what outcomes
it has helped to achieve.

Lastly, I thank Council colleagues for their support
for the presidential statement, which the United
Kingdom delegation prepared and which the Council
will shortly adopt.

