Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Mr. Guehenno for the briefing he has just given
us on the developments in the situation in Kosovo.

The violence that broke out in March this year
show that the situation in the province is so fragile that
the slightest incident can lead to an explosion of
widespread inter-communal violence. That means that
Kosovo continues to experience a deep-seated malaise
that must be monitored by all institutions. We wish to
commend the prompt response of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the United Nations Interim Administration
in Kosovo (UNMIK), which has made it possible to
stabilize the situation and limit the damage.

We reiterate our condemnation of ethnic
cleansing and the deliberate destruction of cultural
property, which constitute a serious violation of the
heritage of the communities living in Kosovo, as well
as of the common heritage of humanity. We believe it
is imperative that the perpetrators of those acts be
identified and that the most vigorous measures be taken
to find them, because impunity will only encourage a
relapse into similar acts that would be harmful to peace
and security in the province. That is why we welcome
the investigations under way and stress the need to
conduct them objectively so that they may contribute to
calming tensions among all the communities
concerned.

In that regard, we welcome the adoption of the
standards-before-status policy, which deals in detail
with actions to be taken, on the identification of
competent frameworks in which to carry them out and
on the means and timetables prescribed to implement
them. However, following the tragic events of last
March, a review of policy measures is also necessary.
In View of the recent events in Kosovo, we welcome
the fact that firmly reaffirmed in that plan is the
guiding goal of the standards-before-status policy: the
creation of a multi-ethnic Kosovar society that is
inclusive, free from discrimination and within which
all communities feel that they are effectively
participating in the management of public affairs.
The need for unequivocal commitment by the
Kosovo Provisional Institutions of Self-Government,
with a view to achieving that goal has been correctly
translated into very significant concrete actions, such
as the creation of a reconstruction and rehabilitation
fund under the consolidated budget of Kosovo to repair
destruction and damage caused by the events and
envisaging the adoption of regulatory and legislative
measures to protect the right of property and to
facilitate the return of displaced persons to the
province.

The major challenges that KFOR and UNMIK
must face together, as well as the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government, remain ethnic hatred
and the question of parallel Serb structures in the
province. We believe that the decision to integrate the
parallel institutions into the new institutions of Kosovo
is sound and that the cooperation of Belgrade
authorities should be sought so that that can be done
without difficulty. We welcome the priority given to
restoring the dialogue with Belgrade by establishing
working groups on basic issues that have been
identified.

We believe it is extremely important that the
elections scheduled for next fall take place under
optimum conditions of security, fairness and
transparency. The decision to gradually hand over
responsibility to the Central Electoral Commission to
manage the elections is wise because it will contribute
to ownership of the electoral process by the
communities living in Kosovo. The ability to integrate
refugees and displaced persons in the province into the
process will, in our view, make it possible to ensure
credibility of the elections, which must strengthen the
conviction that each community is effectively
exercising its right to participate in the management of
public affairs in the province.

In conclusion, we welcome the positive role
being played by the Kosovo Protection Corps,
alongside KFOR, in events and the measures envisaged
to strengthen its contribution to stabilizing the situation
in the province in the sound interest of all components
of Kosovar society.

