Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of today's debate
on the importance of preventive diplomacy in conflict
prevention and resolution, which is fully in line with
the priorities set in the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security. We commend Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres and today's briefers for their
presentations, which among other things have informed
the Council on the quality of the cooperation between
the two institutions. My delegation also welcomes the
participation of representatives of civil society in our
debate and the relevance of their briefings.

The signing on 19 April 2017 of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework institutionalized
more predictable, systematic and strategic cooperation
between the two organizations. It enables both
institutions to intervene rapidly, coherently and
decisively in order to prevent, manage and resolve
conflicts on the continent. My statement will focus
on three areas - the importance of early-warning and
rapid-response mechanisms as tools for anticipating
and preventing conflicts; the need to support the efforts
of regional and subregional organizations in the areas
of mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding; and the
importance of an inclusive approach to integrating civil
society, women and young people in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts.

The new types of threats to peace and security in
Africa require a coordinated response from several
actors, including the United Nations, the African
Union (AU), subregional organizations and civil
society. The efforts of those actors in the context of
a preventive approach will be effective only if they
are based on identifying the early signs of conflict
through various sociopolitical, economic, climate and
environmental indicators. It is on the basis of that
condition that they can prevent crises from occurring,
or, where they have already occurred, provide effective
and sustainable responses. By placing the Continental
Early Warning System at the core of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, the African Union is
demonstrating its willingness to increase its capacity
to anticipate and prevent conflicts. Its interaction with
the early-warning and rapid-response systems of the
regional economic communities enables it to identify
the signs and underlying structural causes of conflicts
and develop more effective preventive responses.

In the same spirit of anticipation, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has set
up the ECOWAS Early Warning and Response Network,
also known as ECOWARN, which, in synergy with
its expanded implementation by States members, has
enabled it to carry out numerous preventive diplomacy
efforts in recent years. Alerts that are signalled during
the run-up to elections, or at times when internal
political tensions threaten to become open conflicts,
enable mediation efforts and good-offices missions
to be directed at the political actors and civil-society
organizations in the countries concerned. Overall,
despite the many challenges they face, including
disparities and weak cooperation among central,
regional and national systems and the gap between early
warning and rapid response, the early-warning systems
of the African Union and subregional organizations
have made significant progress. They are now essential
links in conflict prevention and resolution mechanisms
in Africa and therefore deserve support.

My country believes that in order to be effective,
conflict-prevention and -resolution efforts must be part
of a collective and coordinated approach that enables
the United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations to align their initiatives. That is the case
with the partnership between the United Nations and
the AU, which among other things enables a shared
understanding of the root causes of conflicts and joint
visits, as we saw recently in the Central African Republic
and Libya. Such concerted preventive diplomacy
efforts facilitate support for political processes aimed
at resolving crises and peacebuilding in countries
emerging from conflict. Cote d'Ivoire is pleased to see
the expansion of that cooperative dynamic in conflict
prevention to African subregional organizations. That
is why African Union representatives and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) take part in meetings of the ECOWAS
Mediation and Security Council, ministerial meetings
and summits of Heads of State and Government, the
main decision-making bodies on regional peace and
security issues.

My country commends the exemplary cooperation
between ECOWAS and UNOWAS, whose effectiveness
was fully borne out in the prevention and management
of crises in their successive interventions in Guinea-
Bissau, Mali, Burkina Faso and the Gambia. That
cooperation has helped to strengthen national and
regional capacities in terms of conflict resilience,
anchoring democracy, good governance and creating
environments conducive to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals.

My delegation is of the view that the prevention
of conflicts by building stable and resilient societies
must necessarily take into account the indispensable
contribution of civil-society organizations, women
and young people. Women and young people should
therefore be mobilized and their energy and creativity
put to the best possible use by involving them more fully
in negotiations and political processes aimed at ending
crises, as well as in peacebuilding activities such as
national reconciliation, social cohesion, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, and
security sector reform.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its
commitment to multilateralism as an appropriate
framework for providing concerted responses to
challenges related to the maintenance of international
peace and security. In that regard, we reiterate our call
for solidarity on the part of the international community,
as well as for strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in their efforts to preserve or restore
peace and stability.

