Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): May I first congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We are convinced that,
given your experience and enormous professional skills,
the work of the Council will, under your leadership, be a

 

complete success. You may rest assured of the complete
support and cooperation of our delegation. I also
congratulate Ambassador Albright for so successfully
discharging her responsibilities as President of the Council
in February.

Since the Security Council's adoption of resolution
1040 (1996) on 29 January, no significant progress has
been made in establishing a dialogue between all the
political elements of Burundi as a means of finding a
permanent solution or as a way of creating conditions to
promote national reconciliation in that country, thereby
avoiding a recurrence of the humanitarian tragedy that
recently struck the subregion of the Great Lakes.

My delegation believes that the promotion of dialogue
among the parties in Burundi remains one of the most
realistic means of finding a solution to the crisis there. That
is why we believe the international community must make
every necessary effort to facilitate that politial dialogue. In
this context, we wish to applaud the steps being taken by
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative, along
with the leaders of Burundi, to begin a dialogue as soon as
possible under the auspices of the United Nations.

We attach equal importance to the talks being
conducted to that end by former Presidents Nyerere and
Carter and by the other mediators designated by the Cairo
Conference, as well as to the efforts being made by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the European
Union. We believe that the international community must
not wait until the current political, economic and social
crisis in Burundi swells to the point of a humanitarian
disaster such as that which occurred in Rwanda. Urgent
measures should be taken to prevent the rise of tensions
and to eliminate any possibility of genocide in Burundi or
of an exodus of refugees. That is why we consider it
important that the Secretary-General continue his
consultations with the Member States concerned and with
the OAU with regard to the measures that could be adopted
in support of a broad dialogue and a rapid humanitarian
response should the situation in Burundi worsen.

My delegation also believes that the political support
given by the international community to the National
Debate, agreed to by the signatories of the Convention on
Governance, should be accompanied by broad cooperation
with the Government to support the economic rehabilitation
of Burundi's economy and judicial system and reform its
armed forces and police.

It is a source of great concern that over the past year
acts of violence have increased against civilians, refugees
and international humanitarian assistance personnel in
Burundi. Incitement to Violence and ethnic hatred can
only contribute to destabilizing the security situation in
that country even further. My delegation therefore agrees
that the Council should condemn such acts in the
strongest terms and demand that those responsible refrain
from them.

As long as the situation of insecurity persists, it is
impossible to expect refugees and internally displaced
persons to return voluntarily to their homes. The high risk
involved in returning to Burundi has been recognized by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other international organizations. Even if
refugees and displaced persons decided to return, there
would be little possibility of their being able to live a
normal life, since in many areas of Burundi economic and
social activities have been hampered or paralysed by the
crisis.

There have already been several attempts by the
countries of the region to work together to find solutions
to the refugee crisis. Those attempts have been deferred
or abandoned because of the lack of political will shown
by some of the parties in Burundi. My delegation believes
that it is important to take up this issue without further
delay at a regional level. We believe that the proposed
Regional Conference for Peace, Security and
Development in the Great Lakes Region could constitute
the appropriate framework to deal with the refugee crisis.
We therefore support the initiatives of the Secretary-
General and the Governments of the region to promote
the holding of that Conference.

We wish to conclude by appealing to all the parties
in Burundi to cooperate with the Commission of Inquiry
established by the Council through resolution 1012
(1995), and to the Government to provide security and
protection for the Commission's personnel, as well as for
the personnel of humanitarian organizations, so that they
can function effectively. For all those reasons my
delegation supports all the terms of the draft resolution
now before the Council.

