Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): We too
would like to welcome the Foreign Minister of Georgia,
who is with us here this afternoon.

The United States remains committed to the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). We
believe that it can continue to play a constructive role in
the overall peace process in Georgia. Therefore, we
unhesitatingly support its renewal.

We note, however, that, despite the recent
confidence-building meetings held in Athens and Istanbul,
we are concerned about the absence of real progress on
the negotiating front. There have been too many false
hopes of important agreements that were dashed at the
eleventh hour. The United States and the rest of the
international community want the peace process to go
forward. For that to happen, the sides must demonstrate
the will to proceed. The international community and the
Friends of the Secretary-General on Georgia are ready to
help with assistance, particularly with the refugees from
Gali. But the sides need to demonstrate their commitment
to that goal. With the upcoming Georgian elections, both
sides may see excuses to delay. We hope that this is not
the case, because time may not be on the side of peace.

We owe much of the progress that has been
achieved in the past two years to the contributions of
Mr. Liviu Bota, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative in Georgia during this period. Mr. Bota's
leadership, supported by that of the Secretary-General,
was indispensable in bringing about the ceasefire in May
1998 and was a subsequent impetus to negotiations that
led the parties to Athens and Istanbul, and that will lead
them to Yalta in the fall. We thank and compliment the
United Nations leadership on this issue, and would like to
express our gratitude and admiration to Liviu Bota for his
devotion to the search for peace in Georgia. We wish him
well in all his future endeavours. The vital role played by
Mr. Bota underlines the need for swift appointment of his
replacement. The new Special Representative should be
chosen on the basis of qualifications, not nationality.

We also take note of last month's five-year
anniversary of the Commonwealth of Independent States
peacekeeping force in Georgia.

Finally, we again call upon the two sides to
negotiate seriously and in good faith, to honour their
commitments and the ceasefire, and to fulfil their
obligation to safeguard international peacekeepers. The
ultimate success or failure of the peace process is their
responsibility. These are clear and unambiguous standards
that form the foundation for the durable peace that we all
seek.

 

