Mr. Serrano (European Union): I thank you, Sir,
for giving me to floor to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States and for
organizing this important debate.

The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the
countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Serbia; as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.

At the outset, I wish to welcome the participation
in this meeting of the President of the Republic of
Nauru and to thank him for his important statement. I
also thank the Secretary-General and the representative
of the United Nations Environment Programme for
their presentations.

The European Union and its member States
believe that climate change has important security
implications, since it acts as a threat multiplier. The
scarcity of natural resources, economic damage, sea-
level rise, desertification, migratory pressures and
energy supply tensions may increase instability in
fragile States and pressures on international
governance. The European Union and its member
States are examining these issues jointly with the
United Nations, notably through the United Nations
Interagency Framework Team for Preventive Action.

I would like to focus on two issues for our debate
today: sea-level rise and food security.

The European Union fully shares the view that
small island developing States are among the world's
countries hardest hit by climate change. In particular,
Pacific islands face unique structural constraints due to
the combination of their remoteness, small size, limited
natural resources and vulnerability to natural hazards.
Adaptation to climate impact is indeed vital for the
future of Pacific islanders, but the Pacific Ocean also
represents a vital resource for the future of our planet.

In the Pacific area, the European Union has a
longstanding development partnership, with 15
countries and 4 overseas countries and territories
associated with the European Union. Climate-targeted
activities have been addressed through a
comprehensive mix of EU policies and instruments. We
are currently reflecting on how to further enhance the
EU-Pacific development partnership.

Long before any island might be submerged,
progressive deterioration may render some islands
uninhabitable. We should reflect on a common strategy
for the region while considering actions tailored to
meet specific needs. Coordination between international
donors and regional bodies will be crucial to ensure
efficient implementation.

Increasing global temperatures will multiply extreme
weather events such as drought, flooding and tropical
cyclones, and their effects will become more intense and
destructive. Coastal areas, where urban centres, economic
activity, population and critical infrastructure are often
located, are particularly vulnerable.

While moving forward towards a global agreement
under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, meaningful measures can already be
taken. Support to the poorest and most vulnerable countries
should come first. Disaster preparedness should be
enhanced, as the economic impact of natural disasters
significantly curtails sustainable development and thus
increases instability and can lead to conflict. Close links
between countries' national adaptation plans and their
disaster preparedness plans are necessary, and investment
in technology and innovation should be promoted.

I move next to food security. Ensuring food security
for the world's growing population is one of the major
challenges we must address as a global community. The
impact of food insecurity is both local and global. It results
in the erosion of individual and family livelihoods, breaks
up communities and causes malnutrition. It undermines
children's and nations' abilities to reach their full potential.

Climate change stands at the centre of a confluence
of pressures that will have an impact on food security over
the coming decades. It is already having a dramatic impact
on crop yields, livestock production and the availability of
water. These trends are predicted to worsen in the future
and make it ever more unlikely that we will achieve the
increase in food production needed to feed the world's
growing population.

The cost of not addressing climate change is further
instability of food supplies, increased volatility of food
prices, additional pressure on water resources and greater
migratory pressures - all of which threaten the political
stability of already fragile States and risk undermining
progress towards the Millennium Development Goals.

The European Union and its member States actively
support food security through development and
humanitarian policies. In March 2010, we adopted a policy
framework aimed at strengthening coordination between
the EU and its member States in the fight against world
hunger and malnutrition. Ensuring that all food security
assistance is based on environmentally sustainable practices
is a crucial step to achieve success.

As it is clear that the effects of climate change will hit
the most vulnerable the hardest, particular attention should
be devoted to the empowerment of people and communities
facing poverty and hunger with limited resilience, as well
as of countries and regions exposed to multiple stress
factors and fragile States characterized by weak institutions
and vulnerability to conflict.

Work on security implications must proceed in
tandem with action to address climate change itself. The
EU will continue to do so in the context of its policies for
global climate action, development, humanitarian aid,
conflict prevention, crisis management and post-conflict
reconstruction.

Just two days ago, on 18 July, the EU Foreign Affairs
Council recognized the need to act to reduce systemic risks
resulting from climate change before they trigger systemic
crises. The Council also noted that climate change and
environmental deterioration should be monitored by EU
early-warning mechanisms, particularly in vulnerable
regions, and called for the work undertaken on climate
change and international security to be built upon.

Climate-induced risks are numerous and straddle
development and security. Much more analysis remains to
be done. We could suggest two issues that merit deeper
research: water security and deforestation. Access to water
and water availability may be both a great human security
threat and a threat to regional stability, which may lead to
serious disputes. Forests are a major source of food and
subsistence for those who live in forest areas and their
surroundings and are an essential means to combat climate
change. Unsustainable deforestation may lead not only to
displacement of population and environmental degradation,
but also to damage to indigenous civilizations and their
cultural and spiritual heritage.

In closing, I would like to underscore that the EU
remains committed to broadening its understanding and
mainstreaming climate change and its security implications
in its foreign and security policies.

