The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1997/987, which contains the text of a letter dated 17
December 1997 from the Executive Chairman of the
Special Commission established by the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of Security Council
resolution 687 (1991) addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of 17 December 1997 from the Executive Chairman of
the United Nations Special Commission (S/1997/987)
on his discussions with officials of the Government of
Iraq, which took place in Baghdad 12 to 16 December
1997.

"The Security Council recalls all its relevant
resolutions, including resolution 1137 (1997), and the
statement of its President on 3 December 1997. The
Council reiterates its demand that the Government of
Iraq cooperate fully with the Special Commission in
accordance with all relevant resolutions and that the
Government of Iraq allow the Special Commission
inspection teams immediate, unconditional access to
any and all areas, facilities, equipment, records and
means of transportation which they wish to inspect
in accordance with the mandate of the Special
Commission.
"The Security Council stresses that failure by
the Government of Iraq to provide the Special
Commission with immediate, unconditional access to
any site or category of sites is unacceptable and a
clear violation of the relevant resolutions.

"The Security Council expresses its full support
for the Special Commission and its Executive
Chairman, including in his ongoing discussions with
officials of the Government of Iraq. The Council
acknowledges that discussions are continuing on
practical arrangements for implementation of all its
relevant resolutions. The Council reiterates that the
effectiveness and speed with which the Special
Commission may accomplish its responsibilities is,
above all, determined by the degree to which the
Government of Iraq cooperates in disclosing the full
extent and disposition of its proscribed programmes
and in granting the Special Commission unimpeded
access to all sites, documents, records and
individuals. The Council calls upon the Government
of Iraq to cooperate fully with the Special
Commission in the implementation of its mandate.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/56.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.25 pm.
