Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I am confident that your wisdom,
experience and wide-ranging knowledge will lead us to
the desired success. May I also express our deep
appreciation to your predecessor, the representative of
Mali, for the skill with which he presided over the
deliberations of the Council last month. May I
furthermore express my thanks to you for convening
this emergency meeting of the Security Council
following a request by the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Movement of Non-Aligned States.

The convening of this emergency meeting at this
time to take up the situation in the Palestinian occupied
territories is a clear expression of how aware and
concerned the Security Council is about the latest grave
events that threaten our region with a new wave of
violence and bloodshed. His Majesty King Abdullah
Bin Al Hussein has warned of the threat of such acts to
the peace process. These events once again reaffirm the
urgent need for peace in the Middle East as well as the
right of the Palestinian people to be rid of the injustice
and occupation under which they have languished for a
very long time.

The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan condemns the attacks and the heinous crimes
committed against Palestinians in Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and the occupied territories by the Israeli occupation
forces. We call on the Israeli Government to withdraw
its forces from the territories and towns under
Palestinian authority without delay.

The events in Al-Quds Al-Sharif are a direct
consequence of extremism and provocative practices
perpetrated by those who reject peace inside Israel
against Palestinians and against the feelings of Arabs
and Muslims. The Prime Minister of Jordan, Mr. Ali
Abul Ragheb, has stated that condoning extremism will
only lead to further extremism and strife and will
overcome the voice of dialogue, which we have all
accepted in the region as the only effective means to
reach just, lasting and comprehensive peace.

The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan calls on the Israeli Government to shoulder its
responsibilities vis-a-vis this critical situation at this
delicate stage of the peace process in the region. We
call upon it to cease harming the Palestinian people. In
particular, it must stop the harm being meted out by
short-sighted extremists who, by their acts, are
undermining the peace process and working to renew
strife, violence, hatred and enmity in the region.

Jordan, its King, its Government and its people
reaffirm their solidarity with our brothers, the
Palestinian people, as they seek to achieve their
legitimate rights and establish their independent State
on their national soil with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital.

May I, on behalf of my Government, express our
condolences and sympathy to the Palestinian leadership
and to our brothers, the Palestinian people, and with
their innocent martyrs.

