Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): On
19 April, the Security Council adopted a resolution
welcoming the Secretary-General's initiative to send a
fact-finding team to the Jenin refugee camp. The
Security Council supported that initiative. At the time,
we were delighted that, after difficult negotiations,
such action could be taken to shed light on events in
Jenin and in the Jenin refugee camp during the 13 days
in which we witnessed Israeli aggression against the
camp and saw the Israeli military forces defiantly use
aggression as they destroyed homes and the
infrastructure of an entire city. The Israeli occupation
forces committed atrocities and violated international
humanitarian law. The resulting acts can be described
as war crimes.

Since 19 April, the Secretary-General has
ceaselessly made intense efforts to implement the
mandate entrusted to him by the Council. On 25 April,
he quickly established a fact-finding team including
personalities with internationally recognized skills. It
caused the first episode in a long series of delaying
tactics on the part of Israel, which continues to this
very day. It showed the extent to which Israel defies
the Council, its resolutions, the provisions of
international legitimacy and the international
community, and holds them in contempt.

During the past two weeks, the Secretary-General
has kept the Council informed of the Israeli
Government's repeated delays in allowing the dispatch
of the fact-finding team. The Council's credibility was
thus jeopardized. Despite all this, the Secretary-
General attempted to satisfy the Israeli requests
through negotiation. The fact-finding team was to
include military and legal experts. The Secretary-
General responded to requests for clarification.
However, there were further delaying tactics and
further attempts to gain or to waste time.

On every occasion, at the request of the
Secretary-General, the Council agreed to delay the
dispatch of the fact-finding team for 24 hours in order
to meet the requests of the Israeli Government, because
the Council and the Secretary-General believed that
Israel would promptly give its approval. Regrettably,
Israel continues to defy the Council, to show its
contempt for Council resolutions and to hide behind
certain powerful States members of the Council,
convinced that those States will protect it and will
disregard its actions, which are in violation of
international law.

We have no doubt that the Security Council has
failed in the responsibility entrusted to it by the
Charter: to maintain international peace and security. In
fact, the Council has completely failed to preserve its
credibility and that of its resolutions. The Secretary-
General had to face those delaying tactics and tricks
alone. Anyone who reads the Secretary-General's most
recent letter to the Council will reach the same
conclusion. In our view, the letter represents an
indictment of all those manoeuvres.

We deeply regret that today the Security Council
is sending a clearly disturbing message to the
Palestinians and to other peoples around the world that
might some day come before the Council to plea for
protection and justice. The Council's message is one of
powerlessness and silence, revealing the Council's
inability to maintain international peace and security; it
demonstrates that the Council is often strong and
united in the face of the innocent and the weak but not
in the face of aggression.

At this stage in the Council's discussions, my
delegation has decided not to refer to all the events that
have occurred in the West Bank and its cities. We have
decided not to refer to the acts of aggression and the
attacks that have occurred over a period of weeks. We
prefer to make this particular statement before the
Council in order to point out once again the
unprecedented policy of double standards - this moral
dysfunctioning - which is extremely dangerous and
which jeopardizes the world order that emerged after
the Second World War and its accompanying tragedies.
Images of that war are now repeated before our eyes.
The most recent such image was that of a heavy Israeli
tank that just yesterday stopped in a street of Nablus
and shelled the surrounding buildings. The Security
Council looks on in silence.
The Security Council has lost not only its
credibility before the international community in the
context of this conflict, but also its authority in the face
of a State that violates and derides international law
and legitimacy and all the noble principles of that law.

