Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to share my views on the work of
the two subsidiary bodies that I had the honour to chair
in the past two years, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1572 (2004), concerning C6te d'Ivoire.
Let me express at the outset my gratitude for the
cooperation that the wider membership has extended to

the activities of both Committees. We had an enhanced
dialogue with all the concerned stakeholders, which
contributed to the effectiveness of the Committees'
work.

The sanctions Committee concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has made important
strides in recent years. Over all, the cooperation
between the Group of Experts and the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
positive. It has led to a fruitful exchange of views
regarding the main aspects of the sanctions regime.
The same goes for other countries in the region and
relevant regional organizations. The Committee has
strongly encouraged the strengthening of such channels
of dialogue. I also hope that Member States, especially
those in the region, will continue to inform the
Committee about measures taken at the national level
to implement the sanctions regime.

I am glad to underscore that the sanctions
Committee on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has also made its contribution to the fight against child
recruitment and sexual violence. We heard briefings
from Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
on those issues. Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Radhika Coomaraswamy briefed the
Committee in May 2010 on the recruitment of children
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Margot
Wallstrom addressed the Committee on 6 December,
presenting information on sexual violence in the
country. That was the first time that both of them
appeared before a sanctions committee. I believe that
their briefings provided important information for our
work and I strongly encourage the continuation of such
interaction in the future.

The Committee has also strived to keep the
sanctions list up to date. Building on information
provided by the Group of Experts, Member States and
the United Nations system, new listings were approved
and information and narrative summaries regarding
names already on the list were updated. We must also
reflect on ways to make the sanctions regime more
effective and consider alternative tools to better target
individuals or entities that might not travel or hold
bank accounts. It is also important to encourage the use
by the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
means of mass communication, such as radio, to help
prevent criminal activities and disseminate information
about individuals and entities that are sanctioned.

The implementation of the due diligence
guidelines will be a focus of the Committee's work in
the future. I hope that compliance with those guidelines
will increasingly contribute to averting the risk of
directly or indirectly financing illegal armed groups in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Committee
should continue to interact with Member States and
regional organizations, such as the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, in order to
exchange views on this subject and discuss ways to
raise awareness of the importance of following good
practices in the area of natural resources.

Another aspect that may merit the Committee's
continued attention in the future is the flow of weapons
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As the
Group of Experts highlighted in its most recent report
(see S/2011/345), it is essential that the international
community support efforts to enhance local capabilities
to mark and control the circulation of weapons in the
country with a View to cutting off sources of arms for
illegal groups.

I now turn to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Cote d'Ivoire. In
the past two years, the Committee has continued to
undertake tasks related to the arms embargo,
restrictions on travel, the freezing of assets and the
embargo on diamonds. In fulfilling its mandate, the
Committee relied on the information and
recommendations of the Group of Experts and on the
reports of the United Nations Operation in C6te
d'Ivoire. The activities of the Committee were greatly
affected by the post-electoral crisis in Cote d'lvoire,
which, according to reports of the Group of Experts,
led both the Government and the opposition to actively
seek additional weapons and related materiel. New
elements, including foreign mercenary forces, were
drawn into the conflict, in violation of the sanctions
regime.

During the post-electoral crisis, the Committee
followed the situation on the ground closely, with the
assistance of the Group of Experts and the relevant
resolutions adopted by the Security Council on the
matter. In this regard, the Committee sought, within its
mandate, to adapt its measures to the Security
Council's evolving decisions - for example, by taking
appropriate measures to update the list of targeted

individuals after the adoption of resolution 1975 (2011)
added five persons to the financial and travel sanctions
list, and by modifying, in line with resolution 1980
(2011), the exemption procedure concerning arms and
related material, vehicles and technical training.

Looking ahead, it is important to be aware that
many challenges remain to full compliance with the
sanctions regime. Sanctions-related issues that are still
unresolved include the redeployment of State
administration over the entire territory, the continued
de facto presence of command zones in the north, slow
progress in disarmament and reintegration, as well as
the widespread availability of small arms and
ammunition and the presence of elements from the
former regime in neighbouring States. On this point, it
is key that the Committee and the Council guard
against backsliding in the progress made in Cote
d'Ivoire.

At the same time, there are positive signs, such as
renewed cooperation between the Government of C6te
d'lvoire and the Group of Experts, as well as increased
recourse on the part of the Ivorian Government to the
aforementioned exemption procedures set out in
resolution 1980 (2011). In this context, I also trust that
the Committee will continue to stand ready to grant
travel-ban exemptions for those listed individuals who
are indicted by the International Criminal Court, as was
the case on 29 November with the transfer of former
President Laurent Gbagbo to The Hague.

In spite of a challenging situation, I am confident
that the 1572 Committee will remain in close
cooperation with the Group of Experts, a key actor in
promoting compliance with Security Council measures
and therefore in contributing to sustainable peace and
stability in Cote d'Ivoire.

In closing, let me thank all the members of the
Committees for all the support they have extended to
Brazil and for their active and meaningful participation
during the past two years. I would also like to express
my gratitude to the members of the Secretariat,
especially Mr. David Biggs, for their hard work and
readiness to help. I am certain that both Committees
will continue to strengthen their relationship with all
Member States and relevant stakeholders, allowing for
the increasingly effective implementation of their
respective mandates.

