Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at this Council meeting to reiterate my thanks and
congratulations to Ambassador Rosenthal and to the
entire delegation of Guatemala for having effectively
executed the presidency of the Council last month in an
outstanding manner. I would also like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your entire delegation on your
assumption of the presidency for this month. You can
count on our full backing and support in carrying out
your tasks.

I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for
her fourth report on the implementation of the relevant
section of resolution 1970 (2011) and for the additional
information that she has provided us today. As this
is her first time to address the Council, on behalf of
my Government, I would like to welcome her and to
congratulate her on her appointment. I assure her that
Colombia is fully ready to contribute to her work and to
cooperate as far as we can in the successful fulfilment
of her mandate.

The fourth report contains an update on the status
of proceedings that originated from the Council's
referral to the Court through resolution 1970 (2011).
We appreciate the information about the investigations
under way that could give rise to the opening ofa second
case related to gender crimes, as well as those relating
to possible crimes committed by the rebel forces.

My delegation believes that a fundamental aspect at
this stage is the actual implementation of the necessary
cooperation with the International Criminal Court on
the part of all of the actors involved, including States
parties and non-parties to the Rome Statute, INTERPOL
and the United Nations Commission of Inquiry.

We take particular note of the fact that with respect
to the two legal proceedings under way for the crimes
of murder and persecution for political reasons - the
case against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and the case
against Abdullah Al-Senussi - the Government of
Libya has expressed a clear willingness to cooperate
with the Court. We feel that it is very positive that
the country's authorities have made a commitment to
moving forward with national proceedings that would
satisfy the admissibility requirements of the Rome
Statute.

However, a reading of the report clearly indicates
that those good intentions have not been reflected
in practical steps that would allow us to promote the
necessary actions. Specifically, although the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court has received
authorization to move forward with investigations
on the ground and to collect evidence that comes
from spontaneous sources, the episode involving the
unjustified detention of four Court officials last June
shows that there is still much that remains to be done
for the Government to deliver on their commitments.

Likewise, due to the difficulties we have seen in
the formation of the new cabinet and in the timely
appointment of competent authorities, including those
appointed to liaise with the Court, the proceedings
on the admissibility of the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi has not been able to move forward in a
satisfactory manner. In particular, the judges involved
in the process on admissibility still do not have all of
the necessary information to conduct an appropriate
assessment of the circumstances in which the principle
of complementarity could apply in this case. We must
thus presume that for the same reasons the Libyan
authorities have not yet been able to present a challenge
to the admissibility of the case against Abdullah
Al-Senussi, as was repeatedly announced.

It would seem therefore that the institutional
weaknesses that have been mentioned have seriously
affected Libya's interaction with the International
Criminal Court, and that undermines the effective
application of the Rome Statute and the relevant
Council resolutions.

We believe that the international community,
including the Court itself, must make an additional
effort to provide assistance to the Libyan authorities
so that they can acquire the technical and logistical
ability that would enable them to move forward with
the required investigations and proceedings. In the
particular circumstances of Libya, we believe that
the best way to ensure accountability and the end of
impunity would be for the Libyan courts to be able to
effectively carry out the respective trials, for which we
believe there is the necessary political will.

For all the foregoing reasons, we are convinced that
the unwavering support of the international community
and the timely provision of technical assistance are
increasingly important so that the Libyan authorities
can stay on the adopted course. That should ensure that
the serious crimes committed in Libya that have been
condemned by the Security Council and global public
opinion will not go unpunished.

