Mr. Torstila (Finland) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) on
this important subject today.

(spoke in English)

The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania, the
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro
and Serbia, and the European Free Trade Association
(EFTA) countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway,
members of the European Economic Area, as well as
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves
with this statement.

I will abide by the schedule envisaged for today's
debate; the full statement of the European Union is
available in writing.

I also wish to express my appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms.
Coomaraswamy, for her valuable contribution to today's
meeting. The European Union truly appreciates her recent
appointment. Further, I wish to express my appreciation
to the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Veneman, for
her statement and for the commendable work done by
UNICEF.

Ten years ago, the Graca Machel report laid the
foundation for the agenda on children and armed conflict,
and today's discussion is therefore more than timely.
While resolution 1612 (2005) was an important step in
taking forward the "era of application", we must now
ensure that we take renewed joint action in order to
improve the situation on the ground.
The situation of children affected by armed conflict
continues to be grave. To give one serious example, we
continue to have deep concerns as to the negative impact,
including the health and psychological consequences, of
violence on the present and future well-being of children
in the Middle East region as a whole.

The Secretary-General identified the six grave
violations that should receive priority attention in the
reporting and monitoring mechanism. It remains critical
that urgent action be taken in those areas. Grave and
persistent violations must lead to targeted and concrete
measures in response.

The European Union is encouraged by the work
already carried out by the mechanism. Dialogue with
parties and time-bound action plans are central. We
welcome the reporting and monitoring efforts by United
Nations field teams, including UNICEF, Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) child protection
advisers and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), in
coordination with civil society partners and concerned
Member States. We look forward to the upcoming review
on the mechanism, with a view to further strengthening it.

The European Union welcomes the recent report by
the Security Council Working Group on children and
armed conflict. We appreciate the important work
undertaken by the Group as well as its transparency. We
look forward to receiving the Group's reports in future as
well.

The presentation of the first country report on
children and armed conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo was an important development. The
European Union urges that its recommendations be taken
up effectively. Further, the European Union considers it
important to continue the practice of reporting on specific
situations, as well as to make full use of the briefing by
the Special Representative.

The Security Council has noted that the information
compiled by the mechanism may be considered by other
international, regional and national bodies, within their
mandates. The European Union will seek to find ways to
best support the mechanism and its implementation.

For its part, the European Union is determined to
continue to mainstream issues related to children and
armed conflict.

The European Union has continued to implement
its Guidelines on Children and Armed Conflict.
Action- be it political or financial - has been
focused on selected priority countries. At the same
time, urgent situations in other conflict areas have been
closely monitored.

The European Union adopted an implementation

strategy for the Guidelines in order to pay special

attention to the issue of children in countries affected

by armed conflict. In doing so, it is important to work

closely with the United Nations agencies and other
actors in the countries concerned.

In European Union crisis-management operations,
the protection of children is a priority. The EU has
recently adopted a checklist for the integration of the
issue into its operations from the early planning through
to the implementation stages.

A gender-sensitive approach also has to be
applied when it comes to children. The European
Union has devoted particular efforts to protecting girls
from sexual violence, abuse and exploitation. Further,
all disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and
security sector reform, programmes should pay special
attention to the specific needs of girls.

We must ensure close collaboration between the
United Nations, non-governmental organizations, civil
society and Governments in order to achieve a shared
ownership. Moreover, the participation of non-
governmental organizations is central also in providing
support to protection mechanisms and programmatic
responses.

The European Union continues to actively
support and work closely with the Special
Representative and other actors with the goal of
relieving the suffering of children in situations of
armed conflict and ensuring that those responsible for
atrocities against children are held accountable. We
look forward to further consideration of these issues
later this year.

