Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
situation in Timor-Leste. We also thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Hedi Annabi, for his comprehensive presentation
of the Secretary-General's report (S/2004/669), and we
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste for his efforts and for those of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) in helping the people of Timor-Leste to
build that new nation, which we in the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries cherish dearly.

We took note with pleasure of the remarkable
progress accomplished by the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste in national reconciliation,
peace-building and launching the foundations of a self-
sustainable State, of which the recent assumption of
responsibility for internal and external security is a
major milestone. The progress achieved - as
portrayed by the Secretary-General's report - in the
three core programmes that are the main object of
UNMISET's activities in Timor-Leste stands as a
gauge of hope that a modern and democratic State
based on the rule of law will become a reality in the
near future.

While the Timorese State evolves towards those
objectives, we deem it essential to provide Timor-Leste
with a degree of economic sustainability, guaranteeing
that the far-reaching reforms under way become
irreversible in the long term.

The international financial institutions, the
bilateral and multilateral partners of Timor-Leste and
the international community at large should redouble
their efforts to provide the needed economic assistance
to Timor-Leste in order to ensure that the modern State
and society being built in Timor-Leste are matched by
a corresponding economic structure. Steady growth and
the development of the Timorese economy are thus
fundamental to the attainment of a sustainable and
progressive society in Timor-Leste. It is the view of my
delegation that the advances achieved might be
jeopardized if tangible progress is not made in
establishing the foundations of a modern economy and
the full integration of Timor-Leste in the regional and
world economy.

Relations between Timor-Leste and the
neighbouring countries, particularly Indonesia, remain
a crucial element of the current consolidation phase in
the nation-building process. My delegation welcomes
the high-level cooperation established between Timor-
Leste and Indonesia on the common land border issue.
The conclusion of that process, as well as negotiations
with Australia on the maritime boundary and on the
sharing of petroleum and natural gas resources, are
crucial endeavours for Timor-Leste and for
strengthening the Timorese people's prospects for
security and socio-economic development.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's report,
to whose concerns and recommendations we fully
subscribe, Timor-Leste has reached a crucial stage on
the road to self-sufficiency, with a still fragile
foundation of a sustainable society. When, in October,
the Council again takes up the issue of Timor-Leste
with the purpose of reviewing UNMISET's current
mandate, we will strive for a sustained international
presence in the country until a clear threshold on the
way to the State's self-sufficiency has been crossed.

My delegation acknowledges the important role
played by the United Nations system in ensuring better
economic and social conditions for the people of
Timor-Leste through the rehabilitation of
infrastructure, job creation, poverty reduction and the
better provision of health care and education to the
population.

In conclusion, we would like to praise the
excellent work of UNMISET advisers in supporting the
public administration and the justice and law
enforcement systems and in strengthening the security
and stability of Timor-Leste.

