Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I should
first like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, on India's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month ofNovember, as well as
to echo your appreciation of Guatemala's stewardship
of the Council during the month of October under the
able leadership of Ambassador Rosenthal.

The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2073 (2012), which achieves two important
objectives. First, it provides the necessary support
and stability to an important Mission that the Council
highly values. Secondly, it enables the Council to
respond promptly once the African Union and and
United Nations reviews have made recommendations
on a range of important issues that have an impact upon
on the mission ofthe African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM).

Over the past year, working alongside Somali
forces, AMISOM. has achieved significant security
gains. The Security Council is united in its admiration
for the achievements and sacrifices of AMISOM
and its troop-contributing countries, specifically
Uganda, Kenya, Djibouti and Burundi. The additional
civilian staff that the Council has authorized through
resolution 2073 (2012) will ensure the delivery of
urgent stabilization efforts in areas freed from the
dark shadow of Al-Shabaab. That increased effort will
also help to restore the Somali people's faith in local
Government structures, which have been sorely lacking
in recent times.

The situation in Somalia is changing rapidly. We
have a more legitimate political leadership than ever
before. A new Council ofMinisters, which includes two
women, awaits parliamentary approval. But as today's
deplorable attack on the Somali Parliament shows, the
situation remains perilous. I offer my Government's
condolences to those affected and their families. But
the message from the Council to those who seek to deny
the Somali people a better future is clear: you will not
succeed.

The Security Council must examine its approach to
Somalia in the context of that changing environment.
As we know, the African Union has asked the Council
to review the arms embargo. The charcoal situation in
Kismayo requires urgent attention. At the Secretary-
General's high-level event on Somalia in September, we
all committed to supporting a Somali-led next phase
of State-building. That means consulting fully on key
issues that have an impact on Somali sovereignty.
We must allow the new Government the space to set
policies and priorities.

It is in that context that my Government will
continue to work urgently with the President and the
Government of Somalia and with Council colleagues
over the next few months to find a Somali-led solution
to those important issues. The African Union and the
United Nations reviews are of vital importance in
enabling the Security Council to decide on the future
of both organizations in Somalia. Equally important,
they will allow the Council to set a clear division of
responsibility between the two.

After two decades of despair, Somalia's people at
last have hope. The Security Council must continue to
do all that it can to turn that hope into reality.

