Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to express our thanks and appreciation to all of the
members of the Council, especially those members with
whom we have maintained contact since the draft was
presented for the extension of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I
should like also to express our profound appreciation
to all those who have made every effort to study and
consider the viewpoint of my delegation as well as the
undeniably true information that we have submitted on
the situation in Darfur.

I should like also to welcome the general
assessments and statements made by the various
members of the Council in which they explained that
the situation in Darfur has improved. In our assessment
of the security, humanitarian and political situation in
Darfur, we do not rely only on random documents; there
is much information we could invoke and advance, but
the fact is that we rely on the realities on the ground,
not coloured by any prior position or objective that
could distort or in many cases undermine the truth.

When the events that have befallen the five states
of Darfur during the period covered by the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/510) and by resolution 2296
(2016), which has just been adopted by the Council, the
events in Darfur cannot be denied, ignored or refuted.
Darfur today has no rebellion or armed movements; the
presence of those armed movements and groups was
the reason for the deployment of the African Union
forces in Darfur until 2006. This led to the deployment
of UNAMID since 2007; that is the reason why we
have UNAMID in Darfur. This is its raison d'etre.
If the purpose of UNAMID is no longer there, then
its presence is no longer necessary. UNAMID is not
there for any other reason. It has not come to secure its
supplies from Port Sudan on the Red Sea coast; this is
something that we leave to the administrative bodies
responsible for that matter.

The resolution that was adopted today extending
UNAMID's mandate for another year is replete with
contradictions between its various paragraphs and
contradicts the facts on the ground that we see in Darfur
today. After the conclusion of the military operations
in most parts of Darfur and recently in Jebel Marra,
the humanitarian situation has started to improve,
and Darfur has seen the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons - 800,000 returnees - according to
the May 2016 statement made by the humanitarian aid
commission. The last of those movements came after
the Jebel Marra incidents; 24,000 people returned,
according to the UNAMID sector chief for central
Darfur, who had visited the area of Jebel Marra only
three days prior.

Also, there has been some improvement and
progress in connection with the plan to collect weapons
from civilians and in terms of all of the efforts that are
being made to reach a political solution through the
implementation of the various provisions of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, which remains the
single internationally agreed forum for the achievement
of peace and security in Darfur.

Today Darfur is free of any organized military
presence of military armed movements, as I said
earlier. Those movements had been wreaking havoc in
Darfur since 2003. The military operations that have
been undertaken by the Sudanese armed forces in
Jebel Marra have put end to the excesses committed
by the Abdul Wahid faction. We have put an end to his
brigandry and to his targeting of civilians, and ensured
the safety of the land roads that connect that area with
other parts of the Sudan. Our efforts have enabled
students, for the first time in 13 years 7 I repeat, for the
first time in 13 years 7 to go back to school and take
examinations for various educational certificates in the
Sudan although they had exceeded the normal age for
taking such examinations. That was the fate of children
given the acts carried out by the Abdul Wahid factions,
which threatened their parents and their property if
they did not send their children to his camps to fight
alongside his soldiers.

This is something that cannot be denied. The
Government of the Sudan has been asking since 2014
that UNAMID start to devise its exit strategy. The
Joint Working Group was formed as a result, with
the participation of the Government of the Sudan, the
African Union and the United Nations. The Group has
carried out two assessment visits to the five states of
Darfur, the last of those visits was in the month of May.

The Working Group showed clearly that the
situation in Darfur had developed in a way that would
permit the drawdown of the mission and the withdrawal
ofUNAMID units from a number ofpositions. However,
some in this international Organization unfortunately
refused to accept this recommendation, despite the
fact that it had been accepted by the representatives
of the African Union, a regional organization whose
recommendations constitute a significant dimension in
the decisions taken by the Council. We can therefore
see no justification whatsoever for paragraph 27
of resolution 2296 (2016). We see no justification
for limiting the task of the Joint Working Group in
presenting recommendations; this is something that the
Government of Sudan totally rejects.

Let me convey to the Council our categorical view
that it is extremely important for the Group to continue
its work to implement the exit strategy in the manner
agreed at previous meetings. I must also underline
that our Government believes that in the work of the
Secretariat, especially the work of the Department for
Peacekeeping Operations, we see a lot ofprocrastination
and delaying tactics, which do not serve the cooperation
and coordination efforts that are being made by the
Government of the Sudan. Therefore it is necessary
for this administration to take into consideration the
need to formulate an exit strategy, view our opinions
with respect, and stop prevaricating and the use of
delaying tactics. The Government of the Sudan has
been asking for an exit strategy for nine years, during
which a great deal has been attained. This is the only
way to underline the success achieved by UNAMID
in attaining its purpose and letting it be known to the
members of the Council. The Government of the Sudan
is fully prepared to undertake its own assessment or
to welcome another Security Council visit to assess
the situation in Darfur and to collect the evidence that
some wish to ignore or refute.

Despite all the complications and obstacles, we
reiterate our resolve to achieve peace and justice and
to ensure the return of displaced persons to Darfur, in
full, sincere, impartial and faithful cooperation with the
Council, so that we can rebuild our beloved homeland
and contribute thereby to world peace and security.

The meeting rose at 11.30 am.
