Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lacroix and
Mr. Chergui for their briefings.
The inhabitants of Darfur have lived with this war
for years and do not expect miracles. They want security
and to be able to return home. The challenges facing
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) therefore reflect the broader factors
that continue to fuel the conflict. Today, achievements
such as improvements in security remain fragile.
Nearly 2 million people are displaced and outbreaks
of violence continue.

There is a risk that UNAMID may leave Darfur
without a comprehensive political agreement in place
that encompasses all groups and that its transition
may leave significant protection, human rights,
peacebuilding and development challenges that require
long-term solutions.

In order for the mission to prevent that, consolidate
its achievements and continue to build on them, it is
necessary for the Council to provide sufficient flexibility
to adjust the transition activities to the political
environment. In addition, any post-exit presence should
be equipped with the capabilities required for ceasefire
monitoring, disarmament and demobilization. In terms
of peacebuilding, it is also necessary to have the tools
to address the root causes of the conflict and to monitor
and address intercommunal violence, widespread
displacement and human rights violations.

The situation in Darfur is linked to the ongoing
political process. For that reason, it is imperative that
the UNAMID exit process be planned in conjunction
with a viable political process that includes all parties
in order to ensure sustainable peace.

On a very positive note, on 17 August, four months
after a protest movement that removed Omar Al-Bashir
from power, the opposition Freedom and Change Forces
coalition signed a power-sharing agreement with the
ruling military junta. This agreement will pave the
way for elections after a three-year period of reforms
monitored by civilians.

In that context, the Security Council should give
UNAMID the flexibility it needs to navigate this fragile
political situation and continue considering options for
an international presence after withdrawal from Darfur.
That will allow us to address the outstanding political,
peacebuilding, security, human rights and development

challenges and will ensure that Darfur remains on the
path to lasting peace.

