Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): A year ago, during the last open Security
Council debate on Somalia, the situation in that country
seemed heartbreaking. The reconciliation process was a
dead letter, the nation was coming apart, the humanitarian
situation was deteriorating daily. We wondered whether
the international community could undertake something it
had never done before. Regional initiatives seemed to
provide the only hope for re-launching the peace efforts.

For a year now it has indeed been the regional
initiatives that have taken the lead in making it possible
to progress towards a resumption of negotiations among
the Somali factions. We must pay a tribute to these

 

efforts, in particular those of Ethiopia, Kenya, Egypt and
the relevant regional organizations. We also appreciate the
activities of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
as well as those of the Special Envoy of the European
Community, Mr. Elling, and those of the Italian
representative, Mr. Cassini. We also pay a tribute to those
who are working in Somalia, under difficult circumstances,
to provide assistance to the Somali population.

The resumption of negotiations among Somalis is
encouraging. This process can be successful only if all
Somali parties participate in it, which is as yet not the case.
The international community must try to convince Somali
leaders that there is no alternative to negotiations to achieve
national reconciliation. This effort must involve in
particular those who might be tempted by the idea of
secession. As is the case throughout Africa, the
maintenance of the territorial integrity and national unity of
Somalia is essential to any settlement.

At the moment, the best chances for progress lie with
the continued efforts of States of the region, of other
interested States and of regional organizations such as the
Organization of African Unity, the League of Arab States
and the Intergovernmental Authority for Development,
based in Nairobi. Strengthening the United Nations role
does not seem possible unless it is very gradual - and
unless it is accepted by the Somali leaders, who must
demonstrate that they sincerely want to participate in
negotiations to achieve national reconciliation.

