Archbishop Gallagher: My delegation wishes
to thank Russia's presidency of the Security Council
for convening this timely open debate on the theme
"Settlement of conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa and countering the terrorist threat in the region".

In his address to the General Assembly last Friday,
Pope Francis said

"I must renew my repeated appeals concerning
the painful situation in the entire Middle East,
North Africa and other African countries where
Christians, along with other cultural and ethnic
groups, and including those adherents of the
majority religion who have no desire to be caught
up in the hatred and madness, have been forced to
witness the destruction of their places of worship,
their cultural and religious heritage and their homes
and property, and are faced with the alternatives
of either of fleeing or of paying with their lives or
with enslavement for their devotion to goodness
and peace." (A/70/PV3, p. 5)

The migration crisis in the Mediterranean and in
many parts of Europe has been provoked in a significant
manner by violence and persecution perpetrated by
terrorist groups in the Middle East and North Africa.
The body of the three-old Aylan Kurdi, washed
ashore in Turkey, represents the thousands who have
perished in the perilous journey to flee from Violence
and persecution. Aylan's limp and lifeless body cries
to the international community, in particular to the
Council, to do all it can to stop the madness, so that
other innocent lives like his may be spared from the
same tragic fate. Whatever we do from this moment
on will be too little and too late for Aylan and for the
thousands whose lives were ended due to our collective
indifference and geopolitical and national rivalries.
But from now on, every action to spare even just one
Aylan from death and from all forms of atrocity is not
only timely but urgent. The Holy See is calling on the
international community not to remain silent and inert
before all the tragedies happening even as we speak and
before the watch of the Council.

Enumerating the multiple and complex emergencies
that the Middle East and North Africa continue to
face on an unprecedented scale once more before
the Council is unnecessary. But the Holy See feels
compelled to echo the pleadings of the 12 million
Syrians in need of humanitarian assistance, of whom
7million are internally displaced and 5 million have
become refugees in other countries. My delegation
also considers it a grave duty to denounce the utterly
senseless destruction of some of the world's priceless
cultural patrimony in Syria. The situation is extremely
grave and is worsening day by day. The settlement of
the conflict in Syria must therefore be at the top of the
priorities of the Council and of all the authorities in
Syria and in the Middle East.

My delegation avails of this opportunity to reiterate
the Holy See's profound gratitude to those countries in
the region that, in spite of their own difficult situations
and limited resources, have welcomed and taken care
of the millions of refugees. On its part, the Catholic
Church remains active at the forefront in providing
humanitarian aid to all those in need with all the means
at its disposal.

Flooding the region with more and more destructive
weapons will not end the violence and the suffering.
What the region needs are negotiated political solutions
to the conflicts that continue to engulf it. The region
needs those solutions now, if it is going to win the war
against terror; if its populations are not going to be
constrained to flee; if freedom and stable democracy
are going to have any chance to flourish in the region;
if the leaders of the region are going to learn to settle
disputes peacefully; and if outside forces and Powers
are going to refrain from imposing their wills in the
region.

Any lasting solution to the conflicts in the Middle
East, and indeed to all conflicts in the world, must
consider the centrality of the inviolable dignity and
rights of the human person, regardless of race, religion,
political belief or differences. Many individual citizens
and groups in the region have suffered and continue
to suffer death and all forms of violence because of
their religion, ethnicity or political beliefs. Terrorists
must never be allowed to destroy centuries of peaceful
coexistence between Muslims and Christians in the
region. The lie of terrorist groups that claim to kill and
oppress in the name of religion must be denounced in
the strongest possible terms. How can we stand by as
our fellow human beings are being persecuted, exiled,
killed, burned or beheaded solely because they hold a
different religious creed or they happen to belong to a
minority group?

In conclusion, I would like to return to the address
of Pope Francis to the General Assembly last Friday,
when he said,

"War is the negation of all rights and a dramatic
assault on the environment. If we want true integral
human development for all, we must work tirelessly
to avoid war between nations and between peoples."
(ibid)

Now is the time for life-saving action.

