Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I have the honour of
briefing the Security Council today in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic. In my statement, I intend to reflect on my
role as Chair, which I have played since January 2016,
and in so doing to highlight the work of the Committee
and the Panel of Experts since the start of the year.

There have been a number of developments in the
Central African Republic that have had a direct impact
on the work of the 2127 Committee, in particular
the second round of presidential elections, new
parliamentary elections that took place on 14 February,
and run-off elections that took place on 31 March. The
new Parliament, the election of President Touadera and
the formation of a new Cabinet by the new President
have heralded the start of a new chapter that holds great
promise for the future of the Central African Republic.

It was against that backdrop that I Visited the
Central African Republic from 24 to 27 May. The
timing of the visit was opportune, as it provided a
welcome opportunity to engage with the newly elected
and appointed authorities. I was accompanied by the
French representative to the Committee, and members
of the Panel of Experts also joined me in many of my
meetings in Bangui and during the field trip to Bambari.

During our discussions with the authorities, we
stressed that the Security Council continued to accord
a great deal ofimportance to the situation in the Central
African Republic. Our visit also served to reinforce
the message that the Committee should be viewed as a
partner of the Central African Republic, since we shared
the same goal of promoting peace and security in the
country and curbing the activities of spoilers. The need
for strengthened collaboration among the authorities
of the Central African Republic, the Committee and
the Panel of Experts was therefore a central theme that
resonated during the visit.

I also felt that the exchange of views with the local
authorities during the field trip to Bambari, including
with representatives of civil society such as the Akpe
community of internally displaced persons, helped
enrich my understanding of the situation on the ground
and provided me with an opportunity to witness at first-
hand the issues that the country faces. I would also like
to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the
Secretariat and to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), which provided me with full
support in preparing and conducting the visit.

Following my visit, on 13 June Ibriefed the members
of the Committee on the trip. Among the conclusions
set out in the visit report concerning the way forward,
I cited the need to encourage the United Nations Mine
Action Service (UNMAS) to continue efforts to ensure
safe storage of weapons and ammunition in the entire
country. I also askedthe Secretariat to request MINUSCA
Public Information Service to read out the text of the
Committee's press releases on United Nations Radio,
particularly as they related to sanctions designations. I
encouraged Member States to contribute to the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine
Action and to earmark their contributions for weapons
and ammunition management in the Central African
Republic. I also set out a number of recommendations
involving the dispatch of letters and a note verbale, the
majority of which were agreed upon by the Committee
and dispatched during the third week of June.

The visit also provided me with a timely
opportunity to engage with the new Government on
the nature and purpose of the sanctions measures,
namely, the arms embargo, the travel ban and the assets
freeze. Concerning the arms embargo, the Council may
recall that, under the chairmanship of my predecessor,
the Committee had been in continuous contact with
the Central African Republic transitional authorities
and regional States concerning the purpose and
implementation of the embargo, and had in particular
provided information on the relevant exemptions
procedures.

I reiterated similar information to the members of
the new Government with whom we met. I emphasized
in particular that the embargo was intended to protect
the people of the Central African Republic from armed
groups determined to bring weapons and ammunition
into the country. I further encouraged dialogue and
discussions between the Government, the Panel and the
Secretariat concerning the drafting and submission of
embargo exemption requests to the Committee.

Along those lines, let me also note thatthe Committee
has been actively working with the Panel of Experts
and other stakeholders on the embargo. On 3 February,
the Panel briefed the Committee on a progress update
it had submitted in January. Among other things, the
Panel touched upon the increased number of attacks by
armed groups, especially the Lord's Resistance Army,
which had been responsible for attacking and abducting
civilians. The Panel further highlighted that security
continued to be a major concern and a challenge, with
armed groups controlling large areas of the country and
continuing to operate illegal administrations that taxed
and racketeered the population.

On 9 March, the Committee held a discussion via
video teleconference with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of MINUSCA, as well as UNMAS. Special
Representative Onanga Anyanga informed members
that the activities of armed groups continued to be a
cause of concern in the country. He further noted that
MINUSCA forces and police had reported having
seized or recovered significant numbers of assault
rifles, hand-made weapons and ammunition of various
calibres, from armed groups and/or armed civilians.

The Special Representative also reported that
the Mission had continued to receive information on
suspected arms smuggling into the Central African
Republic, especially reports of the trafficking of small
arms, ammunition and military uniforms. MINUSCA
had also interceded in attempts to smuggle, via road,
ammunition destined for armed groups in the country.
UNMAS further informed the members that, while
significant efforts were being made to destroy weapons
and tons ofunserviceable ammunition, the country was
still in need of adequate safe storage sites for weapons
and ammunition.

On 29 April, the Committee met via video
teleconference with the European Union regarding the
establishment of the European Union training mission
in the Central African Republic. The representatives
of the European Union informed the members that the
Government of the Central African Republic had been
in contact with them and had requested assistance to
help transform the Forces armees centrafricaines into a
professional force. The European Union training mission
for the Central African Republic therefore intends to
work with the Forces arme'es centrafricaines in the
areas of administration, command and organization,
including operational training. The Mission also
intends to support the preparation and implementation
of the security sector reform of the armed forces. A
key concern remains the vetting of the members of the
Forces armees centrafricaines to be trained to ensure
that elements previously involved in human rights
abuses are not included in the training.

On 18 May, the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts
provided an overview of the Panel's second progress
update submitted to the Committee in 2016. The Panel
highlighted that most armed groups had refused to
collaborate with the newly elected President in terms
of issues related to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. Some elements of the Forces armees
centrafricaines had been engaged in racketeering local
populations. Armed groups remained in control of
security and taxation in many areas, and the national
police, gendarmerie and customs authorities had
reported exercising little to no effective authority. The
Panel further reported concerns about arms smuggling
and some armed groups having possession of assault
rifles that were in better condition that those in the
possession of other armed groups.

To date in 2016, the Committee has received a total
of six requests for exemption from the arms embargo,
of which five were approved. The Committee has also
received three notifications concerning exemptions
to the measures. Of those three, one was in relation
to supporting the reform of the security sector in the
Central African Republic, while the other two were in
relation to the assets freeze.

Concerning the travel ban, the Committee
has continued to engage with the regional States
concerned, namely, Chad, Kenya and South Africa, via
letters, advising them of the importance of ensuring
that sanctioned individuals alleged to have travelled
from or to their countries were impeded from doing
so. The Panel has also actively been engaging with
the States concerned and providing information to
members on reported violations of the travel ban.
The Committee continues to work on this matter and
to ensure the effective implementation of the travel
ban. If no feedback is forthcoming, I would suggest
that the President of the Council and I endeavour to
engage bilaterally with the States oncerned, as was the
case in December 2015 when my predecessor and the
representative of the United States, then President of
the Council, met with the representatives of Kenya and
South Africa.

Concerning the asset freeze, during my trip to the
Central African Republic, I raised an issue that the Panel
had brought to the Committee's attention, namely, that
a sanctioned individual, Mr. Alfred Yekatom, had been
elected to the National Assembly of the Central African
Republic and had been receiving monthly salary

payments which, in the absence ofan exemption request,
constituted a violation of the assets freeze. With the
Committee's agreement, I sent a letter on 21 June to the
Ministry of Finance concerning Mr. Yekatom. During
my visit, I outlined the relevant exemptions procedures
to the assets freeze and underscored the importance of
the authorities' cooperation with the Committee, the
Panel and the Secretariat in that connection.

During the course of this year, the Committee has
also been engaged on other issues of importance to
the sanctions regime. In the lead-up to my visit to the
Central African Republic, on 18 May the Committee
met with representatives of the humanitarian
community, namely, the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The briefers highlighted
the need for continued vigilance on human rights and
humanitarian-related issues in the Central African
Republic, where children continue to be recruited and
used as fighters in armed groups, and acts of sexual
violence continue to be perpetrated with the attackers
going unpunished. Later this month, on 22 July, the
Committee is scheduled to hear a briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, who
last briefed the Committee in May 2014.

In conclusion, I firmly believe that the sanctions
measures continue to be relevant in the context of
the Central African Republic. As Chair, I will make
every effort to ensure that the Committee remains
fully engaged, including by regularly updating its list
of individuals and entities that meet the designation
criteria for sanctions, and by considering new sanctions
designations. I will also strive to ensure that the Panel
of Experts receives the information that it requests from
Member States, particularly the regional States and the
relevant authorities of the Central African Republic,
many of whom I met during the visit.

