Mr. IliicheV (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia supported resolution 2271 (2016),
which extends for a month and a half the existing
Security Council sanctions on South Sudan. On the
one hand, the technical nature of the resolution reflects
the lack of unity in the Council on maintaining or
expanding the current the sanctions regime. On the
other, it illustrates the extreme importance and the
sensitivity of the present moment in resolving the
armed conflict in Southern Sudan.

We note that significant progress has been made
in that regard, including the overall decrease in the
intensity of the fighting, the launch of the mechanisms
provided for in last year's peace agreement, the
continuing withdrawal of Government troops from the
capital and the appointment of armed opposition leader
Riek Machar as first Vice-President.

Currently on the agenda is the implementation of
the measures agreed by the parties last week, including
practical steps to ensure security in the capital. That
would open up opportunities for the formation of the
transitional Government of national unity.

We welcome the efforts of international partners,
in particular the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the African Union, to promote the
peace process. However, the main responsibility for
normalizing the situation lies in the South Sudanese
themselves. They now need time and support. Pressure,
on the other hand, especially more sanctions pressure,
could complicate the resolution of the conflict and
harden the positions of the parties. We need to be very
sensitive at this stage in resolving the conflict - the
Council in particular.

First of all, that pertains to introducing new
sanctions measures and personal restrictions against
the leaders of the opposing sides. We in principle
oppose a situation where, instead of serious political
and diplomatic efforts, someone tries to use Security
Council sanctions. It is no accident that the January
communique of Peace and Security Council of the
African Union is silent on the issue of restrictive
measures against South Sudan.

We note with satisfaction that reason once again
prevailed this time among the members of the Security
Council. We hope that members will adhere to the same
healthy approach in the work on future draft resolutions
on sanctions against South Sudan.

