The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first public meeting of the Security Council for the
month of October, I should like to take this opportunity
to pay sincere tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
Her Excellency Mrs. Nikki Haley, Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, for her service as President of the Council
for the month of September. I am sure that I speak
for all the members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Haley and her delegation
for the excellent diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council's business last month.

Expression of sympathy for the Victims of the
earthquake and tsunami in Sulawesi, Indonesia

The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Council, I would like to remember all those who lost
their lives on Friday in the devastating earthquake and
tsunami that struck Sulawesi, Indonesia. The members
of the Council offer our deepest condolences to the
families and loved ones of the victims, as well as to the
people and the Government of Indonesia.

I request members to stand and observe a minute of
silence in solemn memory of those who lost their lives
in that natural disaster.

The members of the Council observed a minute
ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council


The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

At the outset, I will make ajoint statement on behalf
of the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004). Following that joint statement, the
Council will hear briefings by the Chairs of those
three Committees.

I shall now make a joint statement on behalf of the
1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees.

On behalf of the Chairs of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities;
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism; and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), I have the honour to brief the Security Council
on the work of the three Committees, including the
ongoing cooperation between the three Committees
and their respective Groups of Experts.

The three Committees carry out their work in a
strategic context in which the global security landscape
has become significantly more complex, volatile and
challenging. Terrorism continues to pose a grave threat
to international peace and security. Terrorists, terrorist
organizations and their affiliates and cells continue
to adapt their tactics and methods, including by using
modern means of communication to recruit followers,
finance, plan and execute attacks against soft targets,
and incite the commission of such acts.

Returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters pose new threats and challenges to their
countries of origin and nationality and third
countries. Globalization, rapid advances in science
and technology and the continuously evolving trading
environment bring not only great benefits, but also
new risks, including with respect to the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and terrorism. The
three Committees highlight the importance of bearing
in mind the potentially devastating effects that nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons could exert in the hands
of non-State actors, including terrorists.

The three Committees are aware that terrorist
groups and their supporters are ready to commit
extreme violence on a wide scale, which could have
catastrophic humanitarian, economic, social and
political consequences. The three Committees and
their respective Groups of Experts strive, within the
limits of their respective mandates, to promote the
most updated and effective measures based on human
rights, the rule of law and gender issues in the areas of
non-proliferation, sanctions, countering the financing
of terrorism, border management and law enforcement,
international judicial cooperation, prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration, countering terrorist
narratives and engaging communities.
In the light of that broad spectrum of measures,
the three subsidiary bodies continue to attach great
importance to coordination and cooperation among
their respective Groups of Experts, the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team establihed
pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolutions 1526 (2004); the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED); and the Group of Experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). The
three Committees are maintaining their efforts to
enhance information-sharing through joint meetings
and encourage their associated Groups of Experts to
further step up their cooperation.

Pursuant to resolution 2368 (2017), the 1267
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) have undertaken a series of coordinated and
more targeted outreach activities. The Committees
convened a joint briefing on Central Asia on 2 July.

The three Committees continue to believe that
those coordinated activities are very important tools for
strengthening their dialogue with Member States, for
helping to improve the overall understanding of their
distinct yet complementary mandates, and for assisting
Member States in implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The expert bodies associated with the three
Committees continue to cooperate closely in working
with Member States by exchanging information,
coordinating visits in the context of their respective
mandates, when appropriate, and facilitating and
monitoring the technical assistance provided to
Member States to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In that context, I would like
to highlight that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Group of Experts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) participated in two joint visits to Armenia
and to Georgia in July. The Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) participated
in the Executive Directorate's visit to Ethiopia and to
the Niger in July and will also take part in the visit
to Mali in October. This month, the Monitoring Team
and the Group of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) will participate in
a joint workshop to be held in Zimbabwe to support
capacity-building activities in the areas of countering
the financing of terrorism and proliferation.

The three Committees have maintained close
cooperation with the United Nations counter-terrorism
bodies. On 28 September 2017, the Chairs of the 1267
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
addressed the Council, together with the Under-
Secretary-General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the Officer-in-Charge of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
at a briefing on "Threats to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts" (see S/PV.8059). On
28 June, the Chairs of the 1267 Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee addressed the United
Nations High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-
Terrorism Agencies of Member States, convened by
the Secretary-General. Furthermore, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Monitoring Team continue to work closely in drafting
the Secretary-General's reports on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

The three expert bodies continue to work with
and reach out to various international and regional
organizations of common interest in order to explore
ways to further enhance the implementation of
their respective mandates in a coordinated and
complementary way. The three expert bodies continue
to participate in platforms of common interest, such as
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
its working groups and the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF). The Executive Directorate and the Monitoring
Team took part in missions on an in-depth review of the
Advance Passenger Information System and will do the
same with regard to passenger name records.

The Executive Directorate also acts as the FATF

focal point for the United Nations expert bodies based in
New York and coordinates the preparation of reports on
joint activities three times a year, which are presented
at each FATF plenary. The Executive Directorate also
plans and coordinates annual meetings between the
FATF secretariat and the expert bodies in New York.
The Executive Directorate is a United Nations focal
point for the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering
and collects relevant information from the other United
Nations entities, such as the 1267 Monitoring Team
and the Expert Group of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), in order to draft and
to present a United Nations observer report to the Asia/
Pacific Group annually. The Executive Directorate
actively facilitated the dialogue between the Eurasian
Group on Combating Money Laundering and Financing
of Terrorism and the Monitoring Team, which resulted
in granting the Monitoring Team observer status within
the Eurasian Group in May.

When two or more groups participate in the
same event, particularly the FATF and FATF-style
regional body plenary meetings, they usually exchange
information. In May 2017, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate involved the
Monitoring Team in a regional workshop on counter-
terrorism financing, held jointly by the Eurasian
Group International Training and Methodology Centre
for Financial Monitoring and the Commonwealth
of Independent States Anti-Terrorism Center. The
Executive Directorate and the Monitoring Team
jointly contributed to the United Nations inputs into
the final declaration of the conference on combating
the financing of Da'esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris
in April.

The three expert bodies continue to hold regular
informal meetings. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
also regularly invites the other two expert bodies to its
thematic briefings and official meetings. The Committee
invited the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities to take part injoint open briefings, such as that
on challenges in countering terrorism in West Africa
and that held together with the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
on challenges in countering terrorism in Libya, both of
which took place in June 2017. In addition, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee invited the other two Committee
expert bodies to its briefings on the role of financial
institutions in combating terrorism, in October 2017,
and on virtual currencies and the misuse of new
technologies to finance terrorism, in December 2017.

In its presidential statement S/PRST/2018/9 of
8 May, the Security Council requested the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
and the Committee pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)
to hold a special joint meeting within 12 months on
addressing the issue of the nexus between international
terrorism and transnational organized crime. The
expert bodies also shared their up-to-date expertise and
experience at a number of internal thematic professional
training activities and briefings by external partners
and interlocutors.

The three Committees and their respective expert
bodies will continue to cooperate and to coordinate
their work in line with their respective mandates, with a
view to ensuring an effective and efficient approach to
countering terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction by and to non-State actors. The
three Committees reaffirm their continued engagement
in supporting Member States in those global efforts.
The Chairs of the three Committee are committed to
meeting on a regular basis, at least twice a year, to
improve coordination and to discuss the main priority
areas for possible joint actions. The three Committees
look forward to receiving further guidance from the
Security Council on areas of common interest and to
further strengthening their joint activities.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Ambassador Kairat Umarov,
Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities.


