Mr. Kolby (Norway): I would like to welcome
you to New York, Sir, and to commend you for
convening this meeting and presiding over it yourself. I
congratulate Bulgaria on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council.

I would like to thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing
and, through him, Special Representative Steiner and
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for their efforts to implement
resolution 1244 (1999), including the realization of
benchmarks.

In particular, we fully support Mr. Steiner's
efforts to establish the rule of law in Kosovo and
UNMIK's firm policy when it comes to arresting
individuals suspected of criminal activity, regardless of
their ethnic or political affiliation. These tasks are
clearly mandated in resolution 1244 (1999). Only by
bringing criminals to justice can a society based on the
rule of law be established.

Norway strongly emphasizes that political leaders
in Kosovo must fully support UNMIK's efforts to
enforce the rule of law in Kosovo. Allegations against
UNMIK of having political motivations for the arrests
are completely unacceptable, as is incitement to non-
cooperation with UNMIK and any attack on personnel
of the United Nations and the KFOR. We note that the
Prime Minister and Assembly President have
moderated earlier statements criticizing UNMIK's
arrests and urge them and other Kosovo Albanian
leaders to work with UNMIK and KFOR to promote
the rule of law, as well as to secure conditions for
returns.

My Government is concerned about the financial
situation of the Housing and Property Directorate.
Regularization of property rights is a precondition for
returns and economic investments, which are priority
tasks for UNMIK. Norway welcomes the increased
emphasis placed on the return of displaced persons by
the Special Representative. At the same time, we
encourage giving more attention and resources to the
Housing and Property Directorate's work in order to
increase efficiency and case processing. We also call
upon donor nations to provide more resources to the
Directorate. This would help in finding sustainable
solutions for thousands of internally displaced persons
currently living under harsh conditions and unable to
return to their homes. Norway has contributed
€375,000 and is now in the process of seconding five
lawyers to the institution.

We understand that a large number of apartments
belonging to displaced Kosovo Serbs and other
minorities have been illegally occupied by other
residents of Kosovo. This is a major challenge to the
rule of law and the return internally displaced persons.

Norway welcomes progress in preparations for
the local elections in October and prospects for broad
participation from all communities in Kosovo. This
election will be the third democratic election to be held
in Kosovo since 2000. Previous experience shows that
implementation of election results is a challenge.
Elections are more than a technical exercise. Elected
representatives and local administrations must assume
responsibilities, demonstrate accountability and focus
on the tasks mandated to them.

At the municipal level, this pertains first and
foremost to the delivery of public services to the local
communities. Allocations of resources must be done in
a transparent way. The provisional institutions must
promote civil society and human rights; this is also a
responsibility for the municipal assemblies and their
administrations. Not least, members of ethnic
minorities and women must be secured proportionate
representation in the local Governments, as well as
meaningful participation as civil servants. Only in this
way can the Special Representative's benchmarks for
the realization of effective, representative and
functioning institutions throughout Kosovo be
achieved.
