Mr. Poirier (France) (spoke in French): The
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom has
spoken on behalf of the European Union Presidency.
France fully associates itself with that statement.
Nevertheless, I would like to add a few brief
comments.

Like those of previous speakers, our thoughts
naturally turn to the Victims of the attacks in London
on 7 July and in Kusadasi, Turkey, on 16 July, as well
as the attacks that are hitting the Middle East,
particularly in Baghdad, each week.

The activities of the three committees, as
described today by their Chairs, reflect our chosen
approach to counter-terrorism action within the United
Nations framework. France is extremely committed to
that multilateral approach. We are also aware that
progress is necessary to enhance the effectiveness of
this collective effort.

First, cooperation among the three committees on
issues of common interest within their respective
mandates continues to be the priority. Such cooperation
already exists; it needs to continue. Whenever possible,
they need to ensure that they exchange information,
avoid overlap and seek synergies. The draft
presidential statement that you, Sir, will read out at the
end of this discussion, is geared to that effort.

Secondly, I would like to make some comments
with respect to each of the three committees.

We understand that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) will finally
be operational in September. That will be an important
step, because the CTED has an essential role to play in
the Committee's work. In that context, we commend
Ambassador Loj on her central role in the action of the
CTC and the CTED.

The CTC has many avenues for action, of which I
shall cite two. The first concerns good practices in the
area of financing and monitoring terrorist financing.
We believe that it is essential to endorse as soon as
possible the special recommendations and the
interpretive notes of the Financial Action Task Force
on Money Laundering (FATF) for the fight against
terrorism, as well as the Forty Recommendations on
money-laundering. We hope that all members of the
Committee be able to endorse those recommendations.

The second avenue of action that we wish to
mention today has already been brought up by
Ambassador Loj in her statement, and that is technical
assistance to States that require it in order to complete
their reports and effectively fight terrorism. We
encourage regional organizations and States with the
appropriate resources to contribute to that effort.

With respect to the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee, the sanctions regime has been
greatly enhanced since the adoption of resolution 1267
(1999) in order to adapt it to the evolution of the
menace. That work needs to be continued, and
negotiations on a new resolution have begun. We hope
that the text will be adopted before the end of the
month. That would permit the further enhancement and
strengthening of existing sanctions - travel bans, the
freezing of assets and arms embargoes - and of lists
of targeted individuals and entities. We thank the
Committee's Monitoring Team, which has made a
critical contribution to the action and the thinking of
the Committee.

In the negotiations under way on a new
resolution, which I have just mentioned, France is
closely following three key issues: the effectiveness of
existing sanctions; respect for the right of defence and
procedural guarantees, which, we believe, are an
important part of the sanction regime's effectiveness;
and support for good practices in the financial area, in
particular those of the FATF.

Finally, with respect to the 1540 Committee, we
are very satisfied with the work done and the quick
analysis of national reports. However, 74 countries
have not yet submitted their reports. France therefore
associates itself with other Council members that have
expressed their concern at that delay. Finally, I
welcome the recruitment of the new experts to help the
Committee in its task.

