Mr. Prendergast: It has been a bad month in the
Middle East. We have seen a marked increase in the
number of casualties on both sides, and a resumption of
suicide bombings.

Nor is there good news to report in terms of a
return to the negotiating table through a start on
implementation of the road map. On the contrary,
Prime Minister Sharon is reported to have said publicly
that Israel is not following the road map and that Israel
might stay in the West Bank long after any withdrawal
from Gaza. Meanwhile, new decisions have been
announced on settlement activity and Palestinian
reform remains stalled.

In terms of specific events, the past five weeks
were overshadowed by the first major suicide bombing
since March this year, as well as by a number of Israeli
military operations, incursions and acts of destruction.
On 31 August, 16 Israelis were killed and more than
100 injured as a double suicide bombing hit two buses
in the southern Israeli city of Beer Sheva.
Responsibility for that terror attack was claimed by
Hamas, which stated that it was an act of revenge for
Israel's assassinations of its spiritual leader and his
successor in the spring.
The Secretary-General has unreservedly and
repeatedly condemned such acts of terror. We again
call on the Palestinian Authority to bring those
implicated in terrorist acts to justice and to fulfil its
obligation under the road map, as well as under
international law, to do its utmost to prevent such
attacks.

In all, 80 Palestinians and 17 Israelis have been
killed in the past five weeks; 630 Palestinians and 133
Israelis have been injured. The latest grim toll means
that since the eruption of the current intifada in
September 2000, 3,633 Palestinians and 966 Israelis
have been killed, and 35,400 Palestinians and 6,235
Israelis have been injured.

Israeli military operations continue to result in
death and injury to Palestinian civilians. For example,
on 30 August, a 9-year-old Palestinian girl was injured
when a missile hit her home instead of a car during a
targeted killing operation in Gaza City. And on
7 September, a 10-year-old girl from the refugee camp
in Khan Younis was hit in the head by a bullet while
sitting in her classroom in a United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) school. She underwent major surgery but
remains in a coma in critical condition. We again call
on the Government of Israel to respect its legal
obligations to ensure the safety of Palestinian civilians.

Violence in and around Gaza continued during
most of the reporting period. On several occasions,
Palestinian militants launched Qassam rockets and
mortar shells against Israeli settlements in Gaza, as
well as against the town of Sderot inside Israel, causing
damage and requiring a number of people to be treated
for shock. On 6 September, Israeli helicopter gunships,
tanks and warplanes attacked a Hamas training site in
Gaza City, killing 14 Palestinians - mostly
militants - and injuring 30. Palestinian militants then
fired a number of Qassam rockets. On 8 September,
Israeli troops, backed by tanks and helicopters, entered
the Gaza Strip in the south and the north and continued
operating near Beit Hanoun and the Jabaliya refugee
camp in the northern Gaza Strip for four days. Eight
more Palestinians, including at least two children, were
killed and more than 50 were wounded.

On 15 September, 11 Palestinians were killed,
among them an 11-year-old girl, in Israeli operations in
Nablus and Jenin in the West Bank. Earlier, at least two
Palestinians, one of them a lO-year-old boy, were
killed in a two-week-long Israeli operation in and
around Nablus, after an Israeli had been killed by a
Palestinian attacker near the settlement of Itamar on
13 August. Dozens of Palestinians were wounded in
the course of the operation. On 26 August, a 9-year-01d
girl and her father were injured as a helicopter fired at
their house in the Old City of Nablus.

Israel carried out targeted assassinations during
the reporting period, killing five Palestinians and
injuring seven in an explosion that was set off in the
house of a Hamas activist in Gaza city on 18 August.
On 13 September, an Israeli helicopter strike killed
three Palestinian militants as they travelled in their car
in the Jenin area. We, again, have repeatedly stated that
extrajudicial killings are illegal. We call on the
Government of Israel to cease such acts immediately.

As we have also made clear previously, the
widespread destruction of Palestinian property by
Israeli forces raises concerns about collective
punishment, and it fuels more violence and bloodshed.
Between 11 August and 14 September, Israeli forces
demolished 63 houses and several multi-storey
buildings, leaving hundreds of Palestinians homeless.
On 31 August, a 14-year-old Palestinian boy was killed
during one of the frequent incursions to demolish
houses in the Rafah refugee camp. Another 14-year-old
was killed in an incursion on 2 September, and around
20 Palestinians were wounded.

Worryingly, ambulances and medical teams
operating in the occupied Palestinian territory continue
to be delayed and subjected to searches - and
sometimes even physical assault - by Israeli forces.
For instance, on 31 August, an ambulance of the
Palestinian Medical Relief Society was fired on while
waiting at the Abu Houli checkpoint in the Gaza Strip,
resulting in the injury of the ambulance driver as well
as of one member of the five-strong medical team.

United Nations agencies are affected by Israeli
restrictions on movement. During an especially strict
closure of the Erez crossing, begun on 31 August,
UNRWA Commissioner-General Peter Hansen was
unable to leave the Gaza Strip for the West Bank. That
was a violation of Israel's obligation under
international law and as a United Nations Member
State to guarantee United Nations personnel freedom of
movement. Since March, United Nations national staff
have not been permitted to cross Erez in vehicles, even
though crossing Erez on foot has been determined to be
unsafe. We call on Israel to allow national staff to pass
the crossing in a safe manner, as international staff do.

But it is Palestinian civilians who suffer by far
the most under the severe movement restrictions that
Israel imposes. As has often been its practice in recent
years, Israel instituted a complete closure on the entire
occupied Palestinian territory from 9 September
onwards, ahead of the Jewish holidays. That closure,
which is expected to remain in place at least until late
September, has brought life in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip to a virtual standstill and is effectively
undermining all efforts to resuscitate the ailing
Palestinian economy. In addition, the Palestinian
school year, which began on 1 September, has already
been severely disrupted by checkpoints, curfews and
other restrictions on movement.

The Israeli policy of confiscating and/or levelling
Palestinian land has continued. In the past month,
several hundred more dunums of olive groves and fruit
trees and other agricultural land in the West Bank and
Gaza were seized and uprooted by Israeli forces in the
context of military operations and for the construction
of Israel's barrier. We are still awaiting further details
to be published on the exact routing of the parts of the
barrier that remain to be constructed in the West Bank.
Israel is currently revising long sections of the barrier
route in accordance with a ruling of the Israeli High
Court of Justice. The Israeli High Court, while hearing
a number a petitions on the routing of the barrier, has
also instructed the Government to respond to the
advisory opinion rendered by the International Court of
Justice on 9 July, and that may have a further impact on
the route of the barrier.

Meanwhile, however, Israel continues to
construct the barrier to the east of Jerusalem. In
addition, there have been reports that construction will
be speeded up to the south of Jerusalem. We call on
Israel to abide by its legal obligations, as expressed in
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice and in the General Assembly resolution of
20 July, which took note of the opinion and demanded
that Israel comply with its legal obligations, cease
construction work, dismantle the wall and compensate
the affected population. The Secretariat is currently
working on detailed terms of reference for the
establishment of a registry of damages, as requested by
the General Assembly. The Secretary-General hopes to
present his plans to the Assembly by the end of this
month.

It has been said many times i but it is no less
true for being repeated - that only a negotiated
settlement between Israelis and Palestinians can
ultimately put an end to the conflict, halt the violence
and stop the suffering of both peoples. In the absence
of any political dialogue between the two parties, the
Quartet's road map for peace is the only realistic and
viable path out of the current hopeless situation and
back towards the resumption of dialogue and
negotiations. The Council endorsed the road map in
resolution 1515 (2003). The Secretary-General remains
convinced that implementation of the road map is the
only way forward. However, both parties continue to
fail to meet their minimum obligations under it.

On 17 August, the Government of Israel released
tenders for the construction of 1,001 new housing units
in West Bank settlements. Only a few days later, media
reports indicated that the Israeli Government had also
approved the rezoning of land to allow for the
construction of a further 533 housing units. This recent
drive of the Israeli Government to expand settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, together with that
Government's continued failure to remove all
settlement outposts erected since March 2001, stands in
clear contradiction to Israel's road map obligation to
freeze all settlement activity, including natural growth,
as well to the report of the Sharm el-Sheikh Fact-
Finding Committee: the Mitchell report. We call on
Israel to meet its obligations under international law
and under the road map.

For its part, the Palestinian Authority has failed
to make progress on its obligation to take immediate
action on the ground to end the violence and combat
terror and to institute meaningful measures of reform.
Progress on the implementation of reform continues to
be slow and uncertain - which, as we have been
saying persistently, can be explained only by a lack of
political will to advance along that road.

In a speech he delivered before the Palestinian
Legislative Council on 18 August, President Arafat
acknowledged past mistakes and reiterated the
Palestinian Authority's commitment to reform,
pledging that more support would be given to the
security organizations and to Prime Minister Abu Ala.
Such statements are welcome. They need to be
translated into tangible action. We reiterate our call on
President Arafat to institute tangible reform of the
security services. The existing system should be
consolidated into three main services, to be supervised
by a professional leadership under the authority of an
effective interior minister. The interior minister should,
in turn, report to an empowered Prime Minister. Real
progress cannot be postponed any longer.

It is important for the Council to note that reform
is a priority item on the domestic agenda of the
Palestinians themselves. The Palestinian Legislative
Council announced that it would suspend its sessions
from 7 September to 7 October in protest against
President Arafat's refusal to sign 12 laws passed by the
Council.

Yet it is encouraging to see that, despite the
difficult circumstances and limitations on freedom of
movement, the voter registration process began on
4 September under the auspices of the Central
Elections Commission, as the international community
had persistently demanded. However, much work
remains to be done to ensure that the local elections,
which are slated to begin in 36 out of 128 cities and
municipalities on 9 December and to be staged over a
period of one year, meet minimum international
standards and can be deemed free and fair by the
Palestinian people and the international community.
Even more important, we hope that Palestinian national
elections will follow soon. At the same time, it is
regrettable that the Israeli authorities closed three
registration centres and detained five Palestinian
Commission staff on 13 September. That action is an
unacceptable interference with the registration process
in East Jerusalem, and we call on Israel to facilitate,
rather than hinder, voter registration.

The Israeli initiative to withdraw all armed forces
from Gaza and from parts of the West Bank and to
evacuate all settlements in the Gaza Strip, as well as
four settlements in the northern West Bank, has
considerable backing in Israel. According to the polls,
public support for the plan remains steady at about 60
per cent, despite vocal opposition from segments of the
settler community. Practical preparations for the
implementation of the initiative are progressing. On
31 August, Prime Minister Sharon underlined his
commitment to implement the initiative and outlined a
detailed timetable for the legislative process arising
from the plan, which has already begun. On
14 September, the security cabinet approved the
legislative package for the implementation of the
disengagement plan, including principles for the
evacuation of settlements and compensation for
settlement residents. The Government also approved
advance compensation for those settlers relocating
voluntarily, and is slated to discuss - on 24 October,
before the Government plans to present it to the
Knesset on 3 November - the wider legislation
pertaining to the initiative.

We have consistently made clear the extreme
importance of the context within which the Israeli
withdrawal takes place. At the outset of this briefing, I
noted the absence of any progress towards a return to
the negotiating table or towards implementation of the
road map. We were accordingly extremely concerned
by recent remarks by Prime Minister Sharon to the
effect that Israel is not following the road map and that
Israel might stay in the West Bank long after any
withdrawal from Gaza.

As we have said numerous times before, the
Quartet believes that the Israeli withdrawal initiative
provides an opportunity to create a new momentum for
progress towards peace, but that can be achieved only
if the four fundamental requirements the Quartet set
out in its 4 May statement are met. First, the Israeli
withdrawal must be full and complete; secondly, it
must lead to an end of the occupation of the Gaza Strip
and it must be accompanied by similar steps in the
West Bank; thirdly, it must take place within the
framework of the road map and the two-State Vision;
and fourthly, it must be fully coordinated with the
Palestinian Authority and the Quartet. Those
requirements are the very same elements that lay the
basis for successful implementation of the road map.

The Quartet principals are due to consult
informally next week here at the United Nations in
order to discuss the withdrawal initiative and to review
developments on the ground. A few days ago, the
Quartet envoys met to prepare for that meeting. The Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee, which is the main donor
coordination body, has decided to delay its meeting
scheduled for later this month, but remains in close
consultations over how the donor community can assist
the parties to turn the Israeli withdrawal initiative into
a significant step forward and how to enable it to
contribute to a sustained recovery of the Palestinian
economy and begin the long-awaited process of nation-
building.

The revitalization of the Palestinian economy is
an indispensable element on the path towards peace
and remains the chief concern of the donor community
at this extremely critical stage. Forty-seven per cent of
the Palestinian population currently live in poverty.
Unemployment among Palestinians stands at 34.3 per
cent, according to the Palestinian Bureau of Statistics.
At present, the UNRWA and the World Food
Programme are providing regular food aid to almost
1.5 million beneficiaries - 39 per cent of the total
Palestinian population in the occupied territory - and
UNRWA is now supplying 10 times more food than it
was before September 2000. In the absence of access to
other employment opportunities, the Palestinian
Authority employs 41 per cent of all waged workers,
each with a large number of dependent relatives. Even
with the currently large-scale external support for the
Palestinian Authority, the Authority faces budget
problems and may be unable to continue paying wages
soon. The consequence would be a complete economic
collapse throughout the Palestinian areas.

As regards the situation on the Blue Line, a
number of Israeli air violations have taken place. After
an initial period of calm following last month's
briefing, two air violations were recorded on
30 August. On 8 and 9 September, a total of 13 air
violations took place. We reiterate our call on Israel to
cease these violations and we remind all parties that
one violation cannot and does not justify another.

If I may turn briefly to Security Council
resolution 1559 (2004), I would like to report that the
Secretary-General has taken note of the request to him
to report on implementation of the resolution. I would
like to inform the Council that contacts and
consultations have started to that end. The Secretary-
General expects to report back to the Council within
the 30-day timescale set out in resolution 1559 (2004).

I regret to report that no progress has been
achieved on the Syrian-Israeli track. Tension increased
in the aftermath of the double suicide bombing in Beer
Sheva on 31 August, but we hope that neither side will
be tempted into any action that might raise the risk of
instability throughout the region. On a more positive
note, President Assad was reported in the media again
to have expressed interest in renewing negotiations
with Israel. It remains of utmost importance that Israel
and Syria resume their suspended peace negotiations,
so as to implement resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). Our objective must remain a just, lasting
and comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.

In conclusion, let me say that, as has too often
been the case in recent months, there is little positive
and much discouraging to note and report. The
continuing void in terms of an active peace process is
especially troubling. As we all know, nature abhors a
vacuum. Absence of hope for a peaceful settlement
leads to despair, strengthens extremists and is a sure
recipe for continuing violence and instability.
Nevertheless, the Israeli withdrawal initiative, if - and
I repeat, if - moved forward in the right way,
could lead Israelis and Palestinians back to the
negotiating table. If it does, it could become a turning
point and ultimately also lead to progress on the Syrian
and Lebanese tracks. For that to happen, the parties
will no doubt need much encouragement and support
from the international community.

