The President (interpretation from French): Ishould
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Tajikistan in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kaynmov
(Tajikistan) took a place at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan,
document S/1995/390.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l995/337, which contains the
text of a letter dated 27 April 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan
of 12 May 1995 (S/l995/390).

"The Security Council welcomes the Joint
Statement of the delegation of the Government of
Tajikistan and the delegation of the Tajik opposition
signed in Moscow on 26 April 1995 as a result of
the high-level consultations through the good offices
of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy with the
assistance of the representatives of all countries
acting as observers at the inter-Tajik talks
(S/ 1995/337, annex). The Council expects the full
implementation of the agreements reached in
Moscow and, in particular, supports the convening
of the fourth round of inter-Tajik talks on 22 May
1995 in Almaty and looks to the parties to cooperate
fully in those talks.

"The Security Council commends the efforts of
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, the Russian
Federation as a host country and all observer
countries which significantly contributed to the
positive outcome of the high-level inter-Tajik
consultations held in Moscow from 19 to 26 April
1995.

"The Security Council is concerned over the
actions of both sides in the past three months, which
posed obstacles to the peace process, as noted in the
report of the Secretary-General. The Council stresses
the urgent need for the Tajik parties to resolve the
conflict and to confirm, by taking concrete steps,
their commitment to achieve national reconciliation
in the country exclusively through peaceful political
means on the basis of mutual concessions and
compromises. In this context, it welcomes the
agreement by the President of the Republic of
Tajikistan and the leader of the Islamic Revival
Movement of Tajikistan to hold a meeting, which
took place in Kabul on 17-19 May 1995.

"The Security Council notes with concern the
recent inactivity of the Joint Commission and is
therefore encouraged by the parties' decision to
strengthen the Commission and its mechanism for
monitoring the Cease-Fire Agreement of 17
September 1994 (S/ 1994/ l 102, annex I). It welcomes
the commitments by some Member States to the
voluntary fund for contributions established by the
Secretary-General in accordance with its resolution
968 (1995), and reiterates its encouragement to other
Member States to contribute.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties to
agree on a substantial extension of the Cease-Fire
Agreement of 17 September 1994 and to achieve
substantive progress during the fourth round of inter-
 

Tajik talks, in particular on fundamental institutional
issues and consolidation of the statehood of Tajikistan
as defined in the agenda agreed upon during the
Moscow round in April 1994. It stresses that strict
compliance by the parties with all the obligations they
have assumed is a necessary condition for successful
political dialogue.

"The Security Council notes the observation of
the Secretary-General contained in his report of 12
May 1995 that grounds exist for continuing United
Nations efforts and maintaining the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan and recalls its View
that extension of the cease-fire is necessary for this."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/28.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.40 17.171.

