Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I,
too, would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Angelo for his briefing this morning.
We appreciate the work of the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) in contributing to the security of
refugees and internally displaced persons in those
countries. The United States is also grateful to the
Governments of Chad and the Central African Republic
for their support of MINURCAT and their commitment
to providing humanitarian organizations access to those
in greatest need.

Today, I would like to discuss briefly four issues:
MINURCAT's deployment; the activities of the United
Nations-trained Chadian special police; increasing
levels of violence in the Central African Republic; and
the deterioration of relations between Chad and the
Sudan.

First, we recognize the difficulties of deploying
to Chad and the Central African Republic, and we
acknowledge that it has been only four months since
the 15 March transfer of authority from the European
Union Force to MINURCAT. Nonetheless, we are
concerned that the deployment of troops has been
impeded by delays in the procurement of contingent-
owned equipment. The current deployment of the
contingent at 46 per cent of its authorized strength is
insufficient to provide the level of security and
assistance required in MINURCAT's mandate.

We share the concern of the Secretary-General
that a security gap of any duration leaves the Mission
unacceptably vulnerable. The United States will
continue to provide equip-and-train programmes to
deploying African contingents. We urge all
organizations assisting with the deployment to take
immediate steps to expedite troop deployments and to
ensure that those troops are adequately trained and
equipped to perform the Mission's mandate.

Secondly, we are pleased that the activities of the
United Nations-trained Chadian special police, the
Detachement integre de securite (DIS), have resulted in
improved security in and around refugee and internally
displaced persons camps. However, we continue to be
concerned about deficiencies in training and equipping
DIS. Recent attacks on DIS sadly demonstrate that it
must enhance its capacity to defend itself against
armed bandits.

There also have been cases of serious misconduct
on the part of some DIS officers, and we are glad that
appropriate action has been taken in those cases. We
believe that the DIS would benefit from further United
Nations training on weapons handling and police
conduct. We look forward to receiving additional
information from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations on its assessment of DIS.

Thirdly, we are deeply concerned about the
growing violence in the Central African Republic,
caused by inter-ethnic disputes, banditry and
lawlessness. Internal displacement around Birao has
increased. MINURCAT's mandate in north-eastern
Central African Republic includes limited operations to
extract civilians and humanitarian workers in danger,
along with protecting United Nations personnel and
equipment. We urge MINURCAT to maximize its
capabilities to protect civilians and humanitarian actors
in the area by ensuring that the troop contingent
deployed to Birao remains at full strength at all times
and by maximizing the number of patrols conducted.

Fourthly, the insecurity caused by the operations
of armed groups in Chad and in the Sudan jeopardizes
the peace and security of the entire region. We urge
both Chad and the Sudan to work towards easing
tensions and cooperating in implementing the Doha
accord and previous agreements aimed at normalizing
relations between the two countries. Both Governments
must end all military and logistical support to armed
groups operating within their respective countries.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our strong support
for MINURCAT. The Mission functions in the midst of
a complicated regional conflict and fragile security
situation that no single actor is capable of resolving.
We strongly encourage regional actors, such as the
African Union and the Arab League, along with
regional Member States, to use their good offices to
influence the Governments of Chad and the Sudan to
abide by existing peace agreements, end support to
rebel groups, and take all necessary steps to protect and
assist the vulnerable citizens within their borders.

