I would like to thank Ms. Deborah Lyons for her comprehensive briefing today. I would also like to thank Mr. Saad Mohseni for his excellent presentation relating to media freedom in the country. Let me start by presenting our condolences for the recent terrorist attack perpetrated in a prison complex in Jalalabad on 2 August. Our thoughts are with the families of the victims, as well as those affected by last week's devastating floods in north of the country. The Dominican Republic welcomes the political agreement signed in May between President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah Abdullah, and we recognize the efforts made to appoint the Cabinet. We believe that the formation of an inclusive Government can stabilize the country, advance the peace process and strengthen the response against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which remains challenging. Likewise, the appointment of the members of the High Council for National Reconciliation is a clear signal of positive steps that will lead the way to meaningful peace negotiations. In such an arduous process, it is critical that constructive steps continue to be taken. This is a historic moment for Afghanistan. It is a first step in a long path towards peace. In that sense, we are concerned that women's hard-won gains could be compromised, especially if a peace settlement is limited to the core security issues of terrorism. The protection of women's rights, child protection and addressing the needs of young Afghans must be some of the main objectives of this process and any future agreement. We therefore encourage an inclusive Afghan-led process, with the full, equal and meaningful participation of women and youth in order to achieve a sustainable solution that includes guarantees for the protection and promotion of fundamental rights and freedom for all Afghans. We are deeply concerned about the security situation in the country. Even though the Eid Al-Fitr and Eid Al-Adha ceasefires offered some pause, the conflict remains one of the deadliest in the world. We deplore in the strongest terms the attacks against civilians, particularly women, children, human rights defenders, media workers and civil society activists. We call on all parties to cease such violence and immediately establish a humanitarian ceasefire. We reiterate that all parties must respect their obligations under international humanitarian and human rights law and take immediate measures to prevent civilian casualties. We recognize the progress made by the Government of Afghanistan on child protection, including regarding the prevention of the recruitment and use of children, in line with the action plan, through the Law on Protection of Child Rights. However, Afghanistan continues to be the deadliest country for children. There continue to be attacks on schools and hospitals, and increases in child marriage and sexual and gender-based violence, exacerbated by social norms and gender inequality. Since the COVID-19 outbreak, there has been an increase of more than 100 per cent in the recruitment and abduction of children by armed forces and armed groups. We urge the parties to the conflict to fulfil their obligations under international law and call on the Government of Afghanistan to swiftly pass the child protection law through to the Parliament in order to prevent future violations against children. We also call for the release of children detained for their actual or alleged association with armed groups and for them to be treated as victims. The country is facing harsh economic conditions during the COVID-19 pandemic. Afghanistan needs continued and reliable assistance to address their humanitarian needs and the long-term social challenges they face. We commend the close cooperation of the Government of Afghanistan with the United Nations and other international agencies, and we urge all sides to continue to fully cooperate with the United Nations agencies and other stakeholders. In conclusion, the Dominican Republic acknowledges the important role that the United Nation Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is playing through its outstanding contributions, particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic.
