Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to
thank you, Madam President, for your kind words
about me and my delegation.

Given the topic of our discussion today, I would
like to start by remembering Ambassador Holbrooke
and his vast legacy. At the time of his passing he was
doing his utmost to help yield a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. His loss will be deeply felt, and the world
will miss this outstanding diplomat, who worked
tirelessly for international peace and stability.
10-70462

Turning to the subject of our meeting, I wish to
warmly salute Ambassador Tanin. It is always a pleasure
to see him. I also would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2010/630) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his valuable efforts and his comprehensive
and insightful briefing.

Let me emphasize once again that we very much
appreciate the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and Mr. De Mistura
in Afghanistan, in particular the assistance provided
during the elections. We are heartened that the United
Nations is determined to do its utmost, even in the face
of attacks.

Turkey condemns in the strongest terms the
terrorist attack on the United Nations compound in
Herat on 23 October. Such deliberate terrorist attacks
should not deter us. They should only strengthen our
determination to assist the Afghan people in
establishing lasting peace and stability. We salute the
courage of the UNAMA staff and assure them of our
continued support and solidarity.

The year 2010 was an important year and a
milestone for Afghanistan. Although the situation
continues to be serious and requires constant intensive
and coordinated efforts, we believe that the Afghan
Government and the international community are on
the right track in Afghanistan. At the London and
Kabul conferences earlier this year and at the NATO
summit in Lisbon more recently, the international
community and Afghanistan have sealed the process of
sustainable transition to Afghan ownership and
responsibility.

All along, we have believed that ensuring the
durability of the achievements made so far in
Afghanistan is directly linked with cementing Afghan
ownership and empowering the Afghan people. In that
regard, we are glad to see that the Afghan Government
is showing strong political will to take that process
forward and is doing its part to implement the Kabul
process. At the same time, transition should in no way
be interpreted to mean "exit". It is a gradual and
irreversible process that will be defined by the needs
and requirements of Afghan institutions. Therefore, the
international community should be steadfast in its
commitments and should align its assistance to
conform to the conditions, priorities and requirements
of the Afghan Government.

We believe that the United Nations in general and
UNAMA in particular have an important role to play in
the civilian aspects of transition. For transition to be
effective and irreversible, Afghan institutions will need
to be strong and capable, and in that the support of the
United Nations is critical. Therefore it is incumbent on
us to make sure that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNAMA have the means and
resources they need to provide the assistance that will
be required.

Lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan
ultimately require political reconciliation. That process
should seek to embrace all segments of society, give
them fair opportunities to serve the Afghan cause and
enable their representation. Thus we welcome the
creation of the High Peace Council by President Karzai
and the implementation of the Afghan peace and
reintegration programme. We also welcome the setting
up of the Salaam Support Group within UNAMA to
provide support to that process as required.

We believe that elections are another requirement
for peace and stability and the normalization of the
political space in Afghanistan. In that regard, the
holding as planned of the second parliamentary
elections since 2001, on 18 September, in spite of the
difficult security conditions, was an important stage in
the vital political process. Turkey commends the
Government of Afghanistan for its determined efforts
under the effective leadership of President Karzai to
make that possible, with the support of the
international community.

We also commend the Afghan people on their
active interest and participation in the elections. We
condemn all the attacks and attempts to undermine the
election process by violence. We offer our condolences
with regard to those who have lost their lives.

While recognizing that there were irregularities,
we appreciate the critical role played by the Afghan
electoral bodies to make sure that the election results
were as transparent and credible as possible. It is our
sincere wish that the results of the parliamentary
elections announced by the Independent Election
Commission will benefit the people of Afghanistan.
The swift commencement of the work of the new
parliament will directly contribute to the success of the
process by which Afghan authorities are assuming
responsibility in their own country. It will also
reinforce national unity and solidarity, which are
imperative for lasting peace and stability.

While the support of the whole international
community for the process in Afghanistan is essential,
many of the challenges Afghanistan faces require, first
and foremost, the constructive support of its regional
partners. That is why Turkey has been particularly
active in ensuring cooperation between Afghanistan
and its neighbours, as well as across the region, with a
view to encouraging the countries involved to jointly
address the challenges that affect them as a whole. In
this regard, we hosted the fourth Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan (RECCA) in
Istanbul in November, and held in its margins a
meeting of the Academic Platform for Afghanistan,
with the participation of academics from RECCA
countries.

The fifth summit-level meeting of the Turkey-
Afghanistan-Pakistan Trilateral Summit Process will
take place in Istanbul on 24 December. The Trilateral
Summit Process, launched in 2007, has evolved into a
vibrant platform that permits the development of
multidimensional cooperation on a wide spectrum of
areas.

Turkey is confident that Afghanistan's stability,
as well as its social and political harmony, will grow
stronger in the future. The implementation of the
process requires determined leadership on the part of
the Afghan authorities, and close coordination by
Afghanistan's partners. For its part, Turkey is ready to
its utmost and to support Afghanistan as long as is
required.

