Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): It is a pleasure to see you,
Mr. President, preside over this meeting today. Let me
thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco for his comprehensive briefing. I also thank
the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for their statements.

The briefing highlighted the many uncertainties
and difficulties prevailing in the Middle East. In the
midst of that scenario, the contacts entertained by
Palestinian and Israeli representatives in Jordan offer a
glimpse of hope, which must be nurtured. Brazil
recognizes and praises the immense amount of political
effort on the Palestinian side to participate in those
talks and to present concrete proposals. We commend
the Palestinian Authority for its concrete and
appreciable efforts towards peace, which show vision,
political resolve and the disposition to achieve peace
through negotiations.

The Palestinian gesture is yet to be met with
equivalent boldness. We therefore urge Israel to engage
in a constructive way. We strongly encourage Israel to
promptly present meaningful proposals on borders and
security, in accordance with the time frame set forth by
the Quartet (see SG/2178).

Israeli settlement activities are contrary to
international law and the single most important
obstacle to peace. The Israeli authorities themselves
are being faced with security challenges emerging from
the counterproductive environment that settlements
produce. Settler violence against Palestinian citizens
and their property is a clear expression of the silent,
but undeniable violence contained in settlement
construction itself.
We cannot expect a culture of peace to breed
where settlements, demolitions, attacks and evictions
are the rule. The international community and the
Security Council, in particular, have clear
responsibilities to uphold. A clear condemnation of
settlement activities is needed. We cannot allow the
very principles of peace negotiations to be turned
upside down and to become a logical incentive for
further expropriation and unilateral alteration of the
realities on the ground, particularly around East
Jerusalem.

We reiterate our call on Israel to stop all
settlement activities. That is not a concession to be
made in the course of negotiations, but rather an
obligation under the various resolutions of the Security
Council and international law.

We welcome the fact that the Council heard a
briefing last week by Under Secretary-General Valerie
Amos on the humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Regular briefings by the
Secretariat are certainly useful to Council members and
the whole membership.

However, the Council should go beyond that and
resort to other diplomatic tools that would truly allow
it to fulfil its Charter responsibilities in what is perhaps
the single-most demanding challenge on the
international peace and security agenda. Its greater
involvement in search of a solution to the conflict is an
urgent imperative. As a first step, we propose that the
Quartet regularly and fully report to the Council on its
progress or lack thereof. We also welcome the
Secretary-General's decision to visit Palestine in early
February. We look forward to hearing from the
Secretary-General upon his return, and to continuing to
discuss the dire situation of Palestinians living under
occupation.

On the situation in Gaza, allow me to mention
Brazil's decision to donate $7.5 million to the activities
34

of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East related to
reconstruction. This contribution is an expression of
Brazilian solidarity with the people of Gaza. It adds to
the projects already developed in Palestine with the
support of the India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA)
Fund. Alongside our IBSA partners, we will continue
to call for the immediate, urgent lifting of the
inhumane blockade imposed on 1.5 million human
beings in Gaza.

Brazil remains deeply concerned over the
situation in Syria. We will continue to follow closely
the implementation of the important commitments
made by the Syrian Government to the Arab League,
including allowing foreign media access to the country.
We condemn the continuation of violence. The
complete and immediate end of violence continues to
be of the utmost priority. Resort to armed struggle will
not bring Syria or the region closer to the realization of
legitimate aspirations to democracy, freedom and equal
socio-economic opportunity.

At the same time, the complete cessation of
political repression and full respect for fundamental
freedoms are necessary conditions if reforms are to be
truly credible and effective. We have been following
very closely the efforts of the Arab League to help find
a peaceful and negotiated solution to the current
situation in Syria. The role of the Organization remains
critical in ensuring that such a solution is found
through a nationally-owned political process. The
Security Council can best help if it is able to send a
clear unified message against violence and in support
of such a process.

