Mr. Wilmot (Ghana): I follow preceding speakers in
expressing the pleasure of my delegation at seeing you, Sir,
preside over this meeting, and I convey my gratitude for the
opportunity to address the Council as it considers the
Lockerbie affair.

Ghana condemns international terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations in view of the dangers it poses to
international peace and security. In particular we condemn
all illegal activities directed against international civil
aviation or that interfere with international civil air travel.
We believe that all those responsible for any such activities
must be apprehended and prosecuted in accordance with the
relevant international law and conventions and within the
framework of the United Nations Charter.

Security Council resolution 731 (1992) rightly
condemned the destruction of Pan American Flight 103
over Lockerbie and of UTA Flight 772 and the resultant
loss of hundreds of lives, and it sought the establishment of
responsibility for the tragic incidents. It is in the search for
those responsible that an issue has arisen. The parties
directly concerned - namely, Libya, the United States of
America and the United Kingdom - have put forward rival
claims to exclusive judicial competence to establish
responsibility and to do so in their own respective
territories.

In the face of the rival claims and in an effort to
advance the cause of justice, the Organization of African
Unity, the League of Arab States, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement have
all at various times proposed a compromise mechanism that
would allow for the determination of responsibility for the
tragic incidents in a neutral venue by either a neutral
judicial body or a judicial body of one of the parties.
Specifically, these bodies, which together constitute a
large section of the international community, have proposed
the following options: the first is to try those suspected to
be responsible for the tragic incidents in a neutral third
country to be designated by the Security Council; the
second, that the suspects be tried by Scottish judges - that
is, by the judges of one of the parties - at the seat of the
International Court of Justice in The Hague, under Scottish
law; and the third, to establish an ad hoc criminal court at
the seat of the International Court of Justice at The Hague
to try the suspects.

This proposal was formally presented to the Security
Council on behalf of the Organization of African Unity
by its current Chairman, His Excellency President Robert
Mugabe, when he addressed the Council on 25 September
1997.

We call on the Council to give serious consideration
to the proposal with a view to adopting one of the
alternatives for immediate implementation in order to
secure a speedy settlement of the dispute that would do
justice to the victims, the bereaved families - with
whom we deeply sympathize - and the suspects.

Security Council resolutions 748 (1992) and 883
(1993) imposed sanctions on one of the parties directly
concerned, Libya, on the grounds that it had failed to
provide a full and effective response to certain requests
made of it in Security Council resolution 731 (1992) of
21 January 1992. What are these requests? They relate,
inter alia, to certain judicial procedures carried out by the
other concerned parties and which, among others, call for
the surrender by Libya of the suspects in the tragic
incidents for trial in the territories of those other
concerned parties.

Libya's contention, among other things, is that the
request for surrender of the suspects for trial in the
territories of the other concerned parties infringes on its
rights under the 1971 Montreal Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil
Aviation. On the other hand, the Security Council
resolution 731 (1992), and subsequent resolutions 748
(1992) and 883 (1993) imposing sanctions on Libya, all
assume as their point of departure that there is no dispute
between the parties concerning the interpretation or
application of the Montreal Convention.

Article 14 of the Montreal Convention states:

"Any dispute between two or more Contracting
States which cannot be settled through
negotiation, shall, at the request of one of them, be
submitted to arbitration. If within six months from
the date of the request for arbitration the Parties are
unable to agree on the organization of the
arbitration, any one of those Parties may refer the
dispute to the International Court of Justice by
request in conformity with the Statute of the Court."

Availing itself of this article, Libya applied to the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) after failing to secure
settlement through negotiations or arbitration.

 

It is the understanding of my delegation that on 27
February 1998 the International Court of Justice in The
Hague decided that a dispute indeed exists between the
parties concerning the interpretation of the Montreal
Convention. The Court decided further that it has
jurisdiction to hear the dispute between the parties as to the
interpretation or application of the provisions of that
Convention.

The above decision of the International Court of
Justice appears to us to weaken the foundations of the
Council's resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993), which
imposed sanctions on one of the parties. For if, as is
evident from the decision of the Court, there is a dispute as
to judicial competence to establish responsibility for the
tragic incidents, then it was premature for this Council to
impose sanctions on one of the parties to the dispute in
support of the rival claims advanced by the other parties.

We therefore disagree with those who hold the view
that the preliminary, or procedural, judgement of the ICJ
does not affect the Security Council resolutions imposing
sanctions on one of the parties. In the light of the
foregoing, we propose that the Council should, as a matter
of urgency, revisit resolutions 731 (1992), 748 (1992) and
883 (1993) with a view to suspending or lifting the
sanctions imposed on one of the parties pending the
determination of the substantive issues involved in the
dispute between the parties, or pending the establishment of
responsibility in accordance with the fair and just
compromise proposal advanced by the Organization of
African Unity, the League of Arab States, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement.

In conclusion, we wish to remind the Council that in
exercising its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it does so on behalf of all
the Member States of the United Nations, as stipulated in
Article 24 of the Charter. Therefore, to retain its legitimacy,
the Council ought to take cognizance of the reasoned views
and sentiments of the wider membership, which in this case
call for an end to sanctions against Libya and the pacific
settlement of the dispute over the Lockerbie affair.
