Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
The Secretary-General's first report on the issue of
trafficking in persons in armed conflict (S/2017/939),
drafted pursuant to resolution 2331 (2016), provides an
excellent point of reference for considering the activities
undertaken by the United Nations agencies in that regard.
It also offers an insight into the best practices developed
by Member States. It is encouraging to see that several
issues have been acted on that were discussed and
recommended at the Council's previous open debate
in 2016 (see S/PV.7898). Nevertheless, the report once
again shows the scale ofthe repercussions on peace and
security - including human security - resulting from
trafficking in persons. For that reason, Switzerland
thanks the Italian presidency for organizing this open
debate on trafficking in persons in armed conflict and
for submitting today's timely resolution 2388 (2017),
which addresses, inter alia, the particular vulnerability
of children in conflict situations.

Trafficking in persons can be a consequence
of crisis and armed conflict. Migration and forced
displacement, including internal displacement, increase
the risk of trafficking and exploitation. The problems
that arise as a consequence affect all countries along
the migration routes. While the absence of peace and
security favours the business model of traffickers - as
is clearly the case in Libya - countries at peace and
with a strong rule of law are by no means exempt from
the scourge.

That is why Switzerland is working on
strengthening measures to identify and protect persons
in the asylum procedure. The revised national action
plan to fight human trafficking 2017-2020 establishes
a number of actions in that regard. One such initiative
is the systematic training of front-line workers in
asylum reception centres. The action plan also puts a
special focus on unaccompanied minors in the context
of trafficking. The recent UNICEF-International
Organization for Migration report on children and youth
on the move across the Mediterranean Sea presents
facts and figures that confirm the need for prevention
and protection measures for that group, in particular
unaccompanied minors, who are not only particularly
vulnerable to trafficking, but are also disproportionally
represented among the people on the move.

We also welcome the references in the Secretary-
General's report to the value of regional organizations,
such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). The OSCE is contributing effectively,
through its action plan on combating trafficking in
human beings, to the development of an operational
response and a counter-trafficking policy covering
every dimension of the trafficking phenomenon,
particularly in conflict and post-conflict environments.

Let me also highlight the importance of fact-
finding and monitoring mechanisms in fighting the
impunity of those involved in human trafficking.
Such mechanisms allow us to build an important
knowledge base on that phenomenon and contribute
to strengthening accountability for that crime. Human
trafficking is a crime that goes beyond national borders.
In the light of that, the fight against that phenomenon
is the fundamental duty of all States. Switzerland will
persevere in its efforts to combat that scourge, both as a
cause and a consequence of armed conflict.

