Mr. Khare: My briefing this morning will focus
on the strategic review of the United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(UNSOA) and the assessment of the feasibility of
non-lethal support to Somali National Army troops
in Puntland and the Somali police, as requested in
resolution 2232 (2015).

UNSOAisworkinginasignificantlynon-permissive
environment against the backdrop of the scourge of
Al-Shaabab and a continuing humanitarian crisis.
Fatalities in the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) last year exceeded the combined fatalities
from malicious acts in all other United Nations
peacekeeping operations combined. Over the past 18
months, the United Nations has suffered attack on its
personnel or facilities on an average of once every 10
weeks. With a four-week rest-and-recuperation cycle,
statistically a staff member can expect an attack
before her or his third rest-and-recuperation break.
The logistical enabling environment remains weak,
affected by insecurity in the major supply routes, where
three-quarters of all improvised explosive device
attacks against AMISOM. occur.
It is in this context that the strategic review of
UNSOA was undertaken from July to September. The
review employed a comprehensive methodology with
extensive stakeholder participation. Consultations were
held with Member States, the African Union, the Federal
Government of Somalia, UNSOA clients and United
Nations system-wide entities. The review found that
UNSOA had contributed positively to the gains made by
AMISOM. and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM). However, it also found that
UNSOA resources had not kept pace with the dramatic
expansion of its tasks. UNSOA is now supporting
both very high intensity military operations, as well
as highly mobile political engagement in Somalia and
beyond. The number of clients it supports has grown
from one to five. The number of personnel it supports
has grown from 8,000 to over 33,000, all in an area of
operations that has grown from 100 square kilometres
to over 400,000 square kilometres.

I am proud of what UNSOA has been able to achieve
with its comparatively small and restricted resource
base. This, however, has come at the expense of the
overall effectiveness of service delivery, including in
critical areas related to maintenance services, field
defence supplies, tentage, mobility and the construction
programme. Moving forward, UNSOA needs to be
significantly strengthened. While the Secretariat will
be doing its part, critical support will be needed from
the Council, the General Assembly, Member States
and, of course, our partner the African Union.

UNSOA efforts will be refocused and reprioritized
around the strategic objectives set by the Council for
Somalia and within the areas of AMISOM. operations
with regard to the Somali National Army. This will
entail redefining the UNSOA client base as AMISOM,
UNSOM. and the Somali National Army when
conducting joint operations with AMISOM. Existing
medical support infrastructure will also be extended
on a limited basis to provide in-theatre medical
evacuation support to the Somali National Police in the
areas where AMISOM. operates. Efforts will also be
refocused on surge support to address the critical gaps
noted earlier, strengthening the United Nations Human
Rights Due Diligence Policy and compliance with the
sexual exploitation and abuse policy, coordination and
joint decision-making frameworks and environmental

stewardship. This will require targeted but significant
strengthening of the current capacities of UNSOA.

These efforts ofthe Secretariat will need the support
of the Council in strengthening the accountability
framework for UNSOA through a single, clear mandate
focused on the delivery of support to, but operationally
separate from its clients, namely, UNSOM, AMISOM
and the Somali National Army. It will require a stronger
reporting relationship with the Council, a leadership
function headed by an Assistant Secretary-General
and, of course, a new name.

Clear roles and responsibilities for the delivery
of sustainable logistical support have been agreed
between AMISOM. and UNSOA within the framework
of their joint responsibilities. We are encouraged by
the African Union's efforts to generate the enabling
units authorized as part of AMISOM. and, in parallel,
UNSOA will proceed urgently with supporting the
African Union in the establishment of mission-enabling
units in all sectors of AMISOM. operations to support
the opening of the main supply routes.

I wish to make a final point. I will ensure that
the transition of the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring
Group and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region to other service providers
will be smooth. Of course, until new service providers
are identified, UNSOA will continue to extend such
services on a temporary basis, in full consultation with
those two entities.

With the endorsement of the Council, I would
like to present proposals to the General Assembly
to strengthen UNSOA. They are likely to represent
a significant increase in investment to the tune of
approximately $60 million per annum and a one-time
cost of approximately $13 millions. That, I believe, will
translate into real and tangible gains in terms of the
capacity to enable the activities of AMISOM, UNSOM
and the Somali National Army.

The Council is aware that one of my first visits
after assuming charge as Under-Secretary-General
for Field Support was to Somalia in April. I shall send
my Deputy, Assistant Secretary-General Banbury, to
Somalia from 18 to 20 October in order to follow up
immediately on the guidance and advice that we will
receive from the Council. I will also be addressing
all UNSOA in this regard by video-teleconference on
19 October, while Mr. Banbury is there.

