Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank His Excellency Mr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi,
Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia, for presiding over
today's meeting of the Security Council. I also thank
the Secretary-General and all the speakers for their
valuable briefings.

At the outset, I wish to thank the Malaysian
presidency for its initiative to convene this open
debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of massive
destruction, which is of particular importance for the
Council's work and constitutes a key forum for the
ongoing exchange of ideas and viewpoints with regard
to the global review process of resolution 1540 (2004)
as we seek to address that threat, which faces all of us.

Uruguay, as a non-nuclear-weapon State, as a
member country of the first nuclear-weapon-free zone,
which was established by the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and
as a State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, is committed to strengthening
of the disarmament and non-proliferation regime.

Uruguay's accession to the normative multilateral
framework is greatly complemented by its foreign
policy, which promotes and favours the need to
continue to make progress in universal and transparent
negotiations with a view to achieving comprehensive
and complete disarmament under a strict international
regime. Faithful to our commitment to disarmament
and non-proliferation, Uruguay has signed and ratified
the majority of the existing international and regional
treaties on that subject and has fulfilled its reporting
obligations to the relevant Security Council committees
as they pertain to non-proliferation. In addition, we
provide information on an ad hoc basis to the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee.

Uruguay has promoted the establishment of nuclear-
weapon-free zones as an effective way to achieve
the goal of the full elimination of nuclear weapons.
The nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America
and the Caribbean is an example of the promotion
of international peace and security. In addition to
being a country that, throughout its history, has never
received material to fabricate nuclear weapons nor has
it acquired such arms to ensure its survival as a State,
we share the legitimate concern of the vast majority
of the international community that we should ensure
the existence of genuine measures to protect us when
threatened by the possible use, or the threat of use, of
these weapons, whether by States or by non-State actors.
That is why we encourage the international community
to undertake all feasible efforts to make it possible to
achieve the goal of nuclear non-proliferation. Uruguay
understands that, until such a time as nuclear weapons
are completely eliminated, the greatest political priority
should be assigned to negotiations that will lead to
the approval of a universal, unconditional and legally
binding instrument on negative security assurances,
so that we can faithfully meet our obligations and
ensure that there is no distinction between nuclear and
non-nuclear States.

It is also important to bring about the effective
implementation of multilateral treaties that have as
their goal to eliminate or prevent the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and the
importance for all States parties to those treaties to
fully implement them in order to promote international
stability. In that regard, we would encourage all
Member States to fully comply with their obligations
and to respect their commitments with regard to arms
control, disarmament and non-proliferation in all their
aspects with regard to all weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery systems.

Uruguay expresses its firm condemnation of
the launches and continuing provocations by North
Korea, which further escalate tensions on the Korean
peninsula and constitute a clear violation of Security
Council resolutions and a threat to international peace
and security. Likewise, we reiterate the need for,
and appropriateness of, continuing to work towards
a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

The proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their delivery systems constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. The best preventive
tool that we have today is resolution 1540 (2004). That
is why we believe that today's discussion will contribute
in great part to the process of the comprehensive review
of the resolution, which is being conducted under the
leadership of Spain by the Security Council Committee
established in accordance with resolution 1540 (2004).

Uruguay is extremely concerned about the growing
threat of terrorism and the risk that non-State actors
could acquire, develop or use nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their delivery systems or
traffick those weapons, which could have unpredictable
and devastating consequences for humankind. The
existence of those groups and their close relationship
with weapons of mass destruction, the rapid advances
in science and technology and the current bloody
conflicts serve to further alert us to the danger of their
use by non-State actors. The use of chemical weapons
in Middle Eastern countries shows just how dangerous
that threat is.

That is why we need to take urgent measures, in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, leading to effective responses
to threats to international peace and security caused
by non-State actors. Cooperation and the exchange
of best practices among States in the fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are
essential to counter the illicit trafficking by non-State
actors in nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and
their delivery systems and related materials, as well
as intensifying the coordination of efforts at national,
regional, subregional and international levels, as
appropriate, in order to strengthen the response to this
serious global threat.

Transparency in the work of the 1540 Committee
is very important. The high visibility of the open
consultations during the Committee's work in June
is proof of that, and that is why we urge the ongoing
promotion of measures and activities that involve
the participation of all Member States in pursuit of
strengthening and improving the implementation of
that resolution. Likewise, the need to bolster assistance
and collaboration among States, between the 1540
Committee and States and between 1540 Committee
and the relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations to help States implement resolution 1540
(2004) is essential.

Resolution 1887 (2009) is another pillar of the
non-proliferation regime. In paragraph 23 it refers to
the need for the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). In the same way, States should take all the
appropriate measures, in accordance with their national
legislation and national authorities and consistent with
international law, to strengthen export controls, to
control access to intangible transfers of technology and
to information that could be used to develop weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems, to prevent
the financing of proliferation and the transport of such
materials and to protect sensitive materials.

Uruguay will be part of all initiatives that will lead
to the successful comprehensive review of resolution
1540 (2004) and the strengthening of the functions of
the 1540 Committee.

