Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome your presence at today's meeting,
Mr. President. We also commend the Secretary-General
and our briefers for their discussion of the best ways
to consolidate reconciliation efforts in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.

Reconciliation is a very complex and
multidimensional concept whose implementation in
response to the specifics of individual conflict situations
has the potential to contribute to re-establishing the
possibility of peaceful coexistence and cooperation
and transcends the concept of a mere ceasefire.
Reconciliation must be understood as a process and
a part of a much more ambitious and comprehensive
strategy, aimed at identifying and tackling the political,
social, legal and economic root causes of conflicts in
order to prevent them from recurring. We therefore
share the view that there is no single, invariable model
that is applicable to all cases of conflict. However, we
believe that they always share certain characteristics.
They are voluntary. They recognize that the process
must be gradual and multifaceted, and that the
restoration of trust and the inclusion of every level of
society are crucial to the transformation of political,
social and historical relations that must be achieved.
In our View, religious, political, social, cultural and
media leaders, among others, now have a central role to
play, both in creating an environment conducive to the
launch of reconciliation politics and in implementing
them, while in particular promoting the participation of
women and young people.

Experience has shown us a range of actions that are
useful to those ends. For example, the formation ofpeace,
truth and reconciliation commissions clearly illustrated
the importance of gaining in-depth understanding
of the facts with self-reflective perspective in order
to interpret what happened and paving the way to
acceptance and forgiveness. Likewise, efforts around
events and symbolic gestures are especially valuable,
at the same time as establishing comprehensive policies
to deal with the memory of what happened, including
actions to locate those who disappeared in the course of
the conflict, in accordance with resolution 2474 (2019).

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes for former combatants are also an important
element of the reconciliation process, which also
eliminate a potential threat to peace.

In cases linked to atrocity crimes, such as genocide
and crimes against humanity, the need for justice and
the fight against impunity as well as various forms of
recognition and compensation of victims function as
conditional factors of credibility towards reconciliation.

When this does not occur, the international
community, including the Security Council, must
assume its responsibility, setting up special political
missions, ad-hoc tribunals and referring situations to
the International Criminal Court with a view to ensuring
that the perpetrators of serious human rights violations
and of violations of international humanitarian law
answer for their crimes.

In that context, we would like to echo the
representative of Germany in highlighting the value
of transitional consensus, such as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, as well as the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
importance of preventive diplomacy in addressing the
root causes of conflict, especially to prevent human
rights violations. Such activities avoid the need to
establish reconciliation processes in future. To that end,
more active participation by regional and subregional
organizations and neighbouring States is necessary to
bring parties together before violence breaks out.

