Mr. Grauls (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for permitting me to address the
Security Council once again in my capacity as Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) country-specific
configuration for the Central African Republic. I fully
endorse the statement made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Vogt, and
I welcome here the presence of the Prime Minister of
the Central African Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Touadera. I believe that his presence here attests to
the importance that his Government attaches to
cooperation with the United Nations and with the
international community as a whole. I should like to
take this opportunity to convey to both of them my
appreciation for their vision and their commitment and
for the spirit of partnership in which they carry out
their work with the Peacebuilding Commission.

I should like, through this briefing, to outline the
situation in terms of peacebuilding and the resulting
prospects for the future, on the basis in particular of a
visit to the field that I undertook in October, when I
headed a delegation from the country-specific
configuration for the Central African Republic.

In that context, I should like to touch on three
issues that involve both opportunities and risks: the
security situation and its subregional dimension; the
political climate; and the emerging new strategic vision
of the Government.

First, with respect to the security situation, as
Ms. Vogt pointed out, the Government has made
considerable progress in terms of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of armed
groups in the north-west part of the country, and
brought the Convention des patriotes pour la justice et
la paix (CPJP) to the negotiating table so as to enable it
to become a party to the Libreville Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. Full attention is now being devoted
to the reintegration of ex-combatants. However,
financing such reintegration remains a major and
pressing challenge. It was the promise of support for
reintegration that enabled the Government to disarm
and demobilize rebel combatants in the north-west of
the country and to sign a ceasefire agreement with the
CPJP, and it is the implementation of that pledge that
will enable the reintegration process to be successful.

It is now urgent to secure the funding necessary
to complete the DDR process and avert a resumption of
hostilities. The Peacebuilding Fund and the World
Bank, inter alia, are currently considering ways of
contributing to this financing. However, this appeal is
addressed also to other potential donors.

Security in the Central African Republic is
closely linked to that in the subregion, and vice versa.
The current subregional context could undo the fragile
progress that has been achieved. The presence of
foreign armed groups, in particular the Lord's
Resistance Army, led by Joseph Kony, and the Front
populaire pour le redressement, led by Baba Ladde,
continue to destabilize Central Africa considerably. In
addition, new mercenaries from Libya are often joining
foreign armed groups. Those militias not only pose an
immediate threat to the security of the people but also
hinder the completion of the DDR process.
Furthermore, those groups represent a threat to peace
and security throughout the region.

The summits convened by subregional
organizations provide the heads of State of
neighbouring countries with an important opportunity
to address the problem of subregional insecurity and its
impact on Central Africa. The maintenance of the
subregional force - the Mission for the Consolidation
of Peace in the Central African Republic - beyond its
current mandate would appear to be one of the
appropriate measures.

My second point concerns the political climate
and good governance. As was recalled by Ms. Vogt, the
holding of the 2011 elections led to a major political
reshuffling that resulted in the principal opposition
parties leaving the National Assembly and gave the
presidential party a broad parliamentary majority. In
late November, the Government's holding of an
inclusive workshop on electoral reform made clear its
awareness of the importance of policies that are based
on seeking a broad-based consensus.

Beyond electoral reform, the Peacebuilding
Commission encourages the Government to extend this
inclusive approach to all of the primary areas of public
policy. The opposition should also be constructive in
terms of its approach to dialogue with the Government,
despite its having boycotted the elections, which
proved to be counterproductive.

Good governance and the fight against corruption
are important priorities that the Government has
highlighted in its general policy statement to the
National Assembly. In the area of good governance,
there needs to be an improvement in public finance
management in order to restore relations with the
International Monetary Fund.

The PBC encourages the initiative of the Prime
Minister to hold a national workshop on fighting
corruption in order to raise the awareness of all
components of the nation with respect to this major
problem. The National Assembly has major oversight
responsibilities in this area.

The final point I would like to raise concerns the
transition from the previous national poverty reduction
strategy to the new one. Peacebuilding is one of the
key pillars of this new strategy, which will involve
efforts on the part of the Government as well as of its
international partners in the years ahead. It is important
that this strategy also win a broad national consensus.

As Chair of the country-specific configuration on
the Central African Republic, I would like to reiterate
here to the Government of that country that we are
ready and willing to continue to support it in the period
ahead in terms of mobilizing funds for the areas of the
strategy that would contribute to peacebuilding. In that
context, the Government will need to identify its
priorities and present realistic numbers.

