Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I welcome the
briefings today from the Deputy Secretary-General and
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Given the interconnected nature of all the issues that
the United Nations deals with, Whether in Ukraine or
elsewhere - peace, security, development, human
rights, humanitarian affairs - it is imperative that the
Council have a full picture. I am very glad that we have
been able to do so today. I also welcome the presence
in the Council of the Foreign Ministers of Ukraine and
Lithuania.
The situation in Ukraine is deeply worrying for
three major reasons. First, the Minsk agreements
remain unfulfilled, and peace remains elusive.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation is worsening,
and will only continue to do so during winter. Thirdly,
Crimea remains illegally annexed, and its people's
human rights remain oppressed. Let me take up each
of those in turn.

First, as we have heard today, progress on the
diplomatic track has slowed, and ceasefire violations are
on the increase. Last month saw spikes in the fighting
in eastern Ukraine, with fatalities fast approaching
pre-September levels. At a conservative estimate, over
9,000 people have now been killed, and more than
20,000 wounded, since the fighting began.

Many recent casualties are a direct result of the
abhorrent use of landmines and booby traps. Others
have been caused by heavy weapons, the same heavy
weapons that were supposed to have been withdrawn
under the Minsk agreements. The OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission makes clear where the blame lies.
The majority of violations have been committed by the
separatists.

It is imperative that the ceasefire be respected by
all parties. Not only is the ceasefire vital to the success
of the Minsk agreements, it will also allow collective
action to undertake meaningful demining in eastern
Ukraine. Landmines and other explosive remnants
of war continue to inflict casualties on an almost
daily basis. The priority must be to map the areas of
contamination and agree a coordinated approach for
their removal. That cannot be achieved while hostilities
are ongoing.

There is one Council member here today whose
influence can bring an end to the fighting and whose
pressure can deliver a political solution to the crisis. We
all look to Russia to make every effort in that regard,
both by using its influence on the separatists and by
withdrawing its troops and equipment that still remain
in Ukraine.

Russia can also have a meaningful impact on my
second point: the worsening humanitarian situation.
The separatists continue to deny access to both the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission and international
humanitarian agencies. That cannot continue. Sadly, at
the moment, Russia's influence only seems to increase
tensions. So-called humanitarian convoys enter
Ukrainian territory without the consent of the Ukrainian
authorities, in clear violation of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. There have been 42 such convoys
since August 2014, and they must cease.
With over 1.4 million people internally displaced
and an estimated 2 million people living in areas near
the fighting, the humanitarian challenge in Ukraine is
enormous. The recent opening of three humanitarian
logistics centres by Ukraine is a welcome move to
ease civilian suffering, but we regret the continued
deaths of civilians from landmines owing to the lack
of sanitation facilities at checkpoints. That needs to
be addressed. Sadly, the situation will only get worse
over winter. All aid agencies must be allowed to aid
preparations for cold weather across Ukraine. If access
continues to be restricted, aid agencies will be unable to
transport, store or deliver critical supplies to thousands
of affected people. A failure to do so will only lead to
more suffering and more deaths.

Turning to my final point, it has now been 21
months since the illegal annexation of Crimea. In that
time, the human rights situation has deteriorated. We
hear regular reports, including from Mr. Simonovic'
today, of repression and restrictions of the fundamental
freedoms of assembly, association, expression and
belief. The United Nations Human Rights Mission in
Ukraine noted in its report this month that most human
rights abuses in Crimea have been directed at Crimean
Tartars and people supporting Crimea's rightful place
in the Ukrainian State.

With temperatures falling and a road blockade
denying access to food and provisions, the humanitarian
situation on the peninsula is getting worse. The
electricity crisis is exacerbating the problem, and we
have raised the urgent need to restore the damaged
electricity power lines with the Ukrainian Government.

Let me conclude by thanking the briefers again for
their contributions. I hope that the Council, working
together and alongside the relevant agencies and
regional associations, can help ensure that 2016 is a
more peaceful year for all people in Ukraine. I look
forward to working with all Council members, both old
and new, in making that a reality.

