Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
would like, first of all, to thank Ambassador Andrey
Denisov for his excellent briefing and for his efforts to
strengthen the mission of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) in order to enable it to discharge its
responsibilities fully. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Ruperez and to thank him for his presentation.

We hope that after completing its thirteenth work
programme - which we support - the CTC will carry
out the final phase of its revitalization, as envisaged in
resolution 1535 (2004). We also hope that it will begin
to intensify its efforts to make the Executive
Directorate fully operational. The twelfth work
programme of the CTC marked the start of the
implementation of the revitalization process. We
therefore welcome the approval, first in plenary
meeting of the CTC and subsequently by the Security
Council, of the organizational plan for the Executive
Directorate that was submitted by Ambassador
Ruperez. We encourage the CTC to further strengthen
its cooperation with the Executive Directorate in order
to coordinate efforts to implement the organizational
plan and to make the Directorate fully operational as
early as possible.

Moreover, we encourage the CTC to strengthen
its communication strategy with Member States. On 19
July, my delegation energetically encouraged the
Counter-Terrorism Committee to develop new ways to
cooperate with the Committee established to combat Al
Qaeda and the Taliban. It is for that reason that we
welcome the plan being contemplated to carry out joint
meetings between the Chairmen of the two
Committees.

We note with satisfaction that during the last
quarter the CTC effectively dedicated itself to
preparing consensual visits to selected States, as
envisaged by resolution 1535 (2004). Those visits are
likely to strengthen follow-up in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and to promote the
establishment of direct dialogue with the authorities of
the States concerned. On 19 July my delegation
supported and encouraged such visits and underscored
the importance of proper preparation and a clear and
precise road map for the objectives to be achieved.
Today, we welcome the fact that the CTC has adopted
general guidelines and procedures for the preparation,
carrying out and assessment of those visits. Visits are
an instrument that are likely to better enable the
Committee to carry out its tasks pursuant to the
relevant resolutions.

We also note with satisfaction the work done by
CTC experts in considering the reports submitted by
Member States. We note the increase in the number of
reports submitted, but would also like to point out that
78 States have yet to submit their reports in the time
prescribed. We therefore encourage States to submit
their reports. We also urge the Committee to adopt a
proactive approach employing dialogue and
cooperation and to provide States that desire it the
assistance they need.

In addition, my delegation welcomes the Security
Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 1566
(2004) on 8 October. Above and beyond the Council's
renewal of its commitment to combat terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, that resolution put forth
practical measures to enhance the international
community's broad and coordinated response to
terrorism as a growing threat to international peace and
security. In that regard, my delegation is pleased that
steps are being contemplated against terrorist
individuals and organizations other than those already
covered by the relevant resolutions against Al Qaeda
and the Taliban and groups and individuals affiliated
with them.

My delegation would like to reiterate its call for a
definition of the phenomenon of terrorism. We also
reiterate the need to distinguish between terrorist acts,
which are condemnable and unjustifiable in all their
forms and manifestations, and the legitimate struggle
of peoples for liberation, self-determination, freedom
and independence including through armed struggle, in
accordance with international law. My delegation
therefore believes that the criminal acts set out in
paragraph 3 of resolution 1566 (2004) should not be
interpreted as a definition of terrorism. It is not up to
the Security Council to legislate in that regard. That
prerogative falls under the competence of the General
Assembly, which already has before it two draft
conventions on terrorism, which we very much hope
will soon be finalized.

Regional legal instruments complement
international arrangements to strengthen international
cooperation against terrorism. Such instruments
include the 1999 Organization of African Unity Algiers
Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism, which entered into force nearly two years
ago.

The African Union's first High-level
Intergovernmental Meeting on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism in Africa, which was held in
Algiers in September 2002, adopted a Plan of Action
that involved several measures, including in the areas
of police, border controls, legislative and judicial
measures, information exchange and the suppression of
the financing of terrorism. That Plan that established a
framework for cooperation to combat terrorism in
Africa.

A second meeting of that type was held on 13 and
14 October 2004 to consider the implementation of the
Plan of Action. The statement adopted at the meeting
reaffirmed the need to define terrorism and to
distinguish it from the legitimate struggle of peoples
for liberation, self-determination, freedom and
independence, which international law acknowledge as
basic elements in an international consensus on the
issue of terrorism. It also emphasized the importance of
an international conference to prepare a code of
conduct against terrorism at the national level.

Furthermore, we welcome the fact that the
African Centre for Study and Research on Terrorism,
headquartered in 0Algiers and created within the
framework of the Plan of Action, was officially
inaugurated on 13 October 2004 by President
Abdelaziz Bouteflika. The Centre's objective is to
centralize information, studies and analysis on
terrorism and terrorist groups and to develop training
programmes through organizing training courses,
meetings and round tables.

Finally, we are pleased that Ambassador Javier
Ruperez, in his capacity as Executive Director of the
CTC Executive Directorate, was able to take part in the
work of that second high-level meeting of the African
Union, to bear witness to the efforts of the African
continent in combating terrorism and to end the
support of the United Nations.

