Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. De
Mistura, for his briefing on the situation in Iraq and for
his presentation of the report on the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
I would also like to express particular gratitude to all
the United Nations staff for carrying out their mission
in difficult conditions in Iraq today. Moscow has
carefully studied the regular report on UNAMI and
shares the views and conclusions of that document. We
feel it is important to draw attention to the following
points.

Resolution 1770 (2007) assigned broad powers to
the United Nations in the sphere of helping to make
progress in the political process in Iraq. With an
emphasis on that important decision, the Mission has
been increasing its activities.

It is extremely important that the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General establish
constructive contacts with the main political forces in

Iraq. The opening of the United Nations regional office
in Arbil should also help to promote further
enhancement of the Organization's role. The
Organization continues today, under critical conditions,
to give assistance to Iraqis in such areas as the
development of a national constitution, preparation for
elections, humanitarian assistance and the introduction
of human rights standards.

However, it is clear that the full implementation
and realization of the unique potential of the United
Nations will be possible only with a radical
improvement of the situation in Iraq in terms of
security. The report's mention of a decline in the level
of violence throughout the country is reassuring.
Indeed, the situation has stabilized, to a certain extent.
The political forces of Iraq have themselves played a
decisive role in that regard, displaying a high degree of
responsibility. The positive trends we have noted
should be encouraged in every way possible. Only on a
platform of a reduction of violence and a shift to
political methods for resolving vital problems can the
key task of the Iraqi settlement, namely national
reconciliation, be achieved.

Iraq's regional neighbours are of fundamental
importance in improving the situation. We note the
positive dynamics in that regard. The mechanism of
holding permanent meetings between Iraq and
neighbouring States should be actively developed. We
also note with satisfaction the information contained in
the report on the establishment of constructive
relations between the Iraqi Government, Syria and Iran
and the increasingly effective efforts to monitor the
Syrian-Iraqi border. The Government of Jordan is
taking important steps.

All of that shows the possibilities of a broad
dialogue between neighbouring countries, with a view
to stabilizing the situation in Iraq and in the region as a
whole. Constructive regional cooperation, together
with a mechanism for international support with the
participation of Iraq's neighbours, the United Nations,
Egypt, Bahrain, the Group of Eight, the European
Union and the five permanent members of the Security
Council, must give additional impetus to the political
settlement in Iraq. Complex challenges require
collective responses.

However, declaring victory is premature. There is
no guarantee that the reduction in tensions noted in the
report will continue. The wave of violence that has

swept the country recently confirms our fears. We
stress that solving the problems linked with the civil
conflict in Iraq will be possible only through real
national dialogue aimed at overcoming mutual
rejection and distrust.

The political process in Iraq, as rightly indicated
in the report, is marking time. We note the steps taken
by the Iraqi Government to improve the situation in the
country, but in order for those measures to be effective,
they must receive the approval of the Iraqi political
forces and, of course, actually help to resolve the
problem of national reconciliation. In that sphere, the
role of the United Nations in establishing a broad
dialogue and consultations is irreplaceable.

A great deal of work remains to be done in the
area of forming viable military structures in the Iraqi
army. We noted the steps listed in the briefing by the
United States on behalf of the Multinational Force and
the steps taken by the coalition in that area. The report
of the Secretary-General talks about the creation of
"Awakening Councils". In fact, Iraq does not need new
non-governmental armed groups, but rather a strong
and independent national army and police. It is they,
and not various kinds of militias, who should
ultimately support security and order in the country,
after the withdrawal of the Multinational Force
contingent from Iraq.

We are particularly concerned by the
humanitarian situation in Iraq. The crisis in that area
has not been overcome. The difficulties in ensuring
vitally important services to the population are still
huge. Several million refugees and internally displaced
persons still cannot return to their home regions.

There is notably less information on the human
rights situation in the report before us than in the
previous report, and there is nothing said about
whether the Mission is following, as it did previously,
the fate of those persons detained by the Multinational
Force and by Iraqi bodies or about the situation in
prisons and places of detention. Of course, we
carefully studied the report on human rights, which, as
Mr. De Mistura announced today, will soon be
published in Baghdad. However, we still believe that in
the next report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the Mission, humanitarian and human
rights issues must be given far more attention.
We share the concern expressed in the report
relating to the arbitrary conduct of private security

companies. Those structures are outside international
humanitarian law. Moreover, they cause grave damage
to the relations between civilizations. We again repeat
that the activities of those structures must be brought
within a strict framework in the next deployment in the
country.

We are carefully following the efforts of UNAMI
to resolve the problems in Kirkuk, and we hope that
they will yield positive results. To prevent the
worsening of those problems, the Mission should
continue its efforts to establish constructive dialogue
between all political forces involved.

We note that the main area of United Nations
activities in Iraq, as indicated in the report, remains
solving the task of ensuring national reconciliation and
supporting sovereignty and territorial integrity
throughout the country. The achievement of those goals
must be built upon the future withdrawal from Iraq of
all foreign military contingents. The restoration of
stability in Iraq is, above all, a matter for the Iraqis
themselves. Members of the international community,
and Russia among them, can and must help them in
this. We are ready to participate further in actively
preparing and implementing any initiatives aimed at
helping to establish broad internal Iraqi dialogue,
achieving national reconciliation and strengthening the
real role of the international community in resolving
the situation in the country. The United Nations has a
fundamental role to play in that regard.

