The President: I thank the representative of
Mauritius for the kind words he addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of Norway.

Like previous speakers, I would like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Frechette for her briefing
and for the comprehensive report. This debate clearly
shows that the United Nations is on the right track in
Afghanistan. I warmly commend the work of the
Special Representative and his staff. I can assure
Mr. Brahimi and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) of Norway's
continued support, both in the Council and in the
Afghan Support Group, which we are chairing.

We only have to look back a few months to recall
the remarkable progress that has been achieved. We
have seen the fall of the Taliban, which, with its
repressive fundamentalism and its support for
terrorism, led Afghanistan into international isolation.
It was a regime which had no regard for the suffering
of millions of Afghans under its misrule.

In December, the Bonn Agreement created a
representative interim leadership, which is
demonstrating its responsibility in returning
Afghanistan to peace and stability. The Security
Council responded in January by lifting the sanctions
on the country, while tightening the measures against
the Taliban and Al Qaeda terrorists. Only three months
into the term of the Interim Authority, led by Hamid
Karzai, the future for the Afghan people looks more
hopeful than it has for a very long time.

Last weekend, at the start of the Afghan new
year, schools were reopened. Now girls too are allowed
to learn, and women allowed to teach, for the first time
in years. Kabul is peaceful, its people displaying the
dignity that the Taliban sought to deny them. In other
cities and areas around the country, too, life is
returning to normal.

I warmly commend the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) for the role it is playing.
Norway is proud to provide troops to ISAF under the
able command of the United Kingdom. We look
forward to continuing under a new leadership. Norway
will work with Council members to ensure the timely
extension of ISAF's mandate beyond June.

A humanitarian disaster, which seemed to be
under way last autumn, has been averted. Relief aid is
now reaching most of the needy. Our thanks go to all
the women and men involved - often at great personal
risk - in this effort. As chair of the Afghan Support
Group, Norway will continue to work with other
donors, the United Nations mission and the Interim
Authority to improve the coordination of aid and to
increase access to remote areas.

Let there be no doubt: many challenges still lie
ahead. Terrorists and the Taliban still pose a threat to
the peace and the political process. The recent combat
operations conducted by coalition forces against Al
Qaeda supporters testify to this.

Norway is proud to provide personnel to the
counter-terrorism campaign in Afghanistan. We will
continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with the United
States and other coalition partners in fighting global
terrorism. We will work to ensure that Afghanistan
never again becomes a base for terrorists.

To succeed, the Interim Authority must extend its
influence beyond Kabul, to all parts of Afghanistan.
Public services must be improved. The Loya Jirga must
be supported. This will require increased international
assistance. More funds are needed for the Interim
Authority to pay salaries and to function as an
administration. Norway has paid $6 million to the
United Nations Development Programme trust fund.
We call on donors to help find the funds that
Mr. Brahimi has asked for.

Measures are needed also to ensure that the
security situation continues to improve. Norway is
contributing to the international efforts under way to
support the establishment of national Afghan police
and security forces. I welcome the lead taken by
Germany, the United States, the United Kingdom and
others in this regard.

Recovery and reconstruction must be undertaken
with a view to underpinning long-term prospects for
peace and political progress. Norway looks forward to
working with the Afghan authorities and donors,
including through the Implementation Group, to make
concrete and constructive use of the assistance pledged
at the Tokyo Conference.

As agreed at the Afghan Support Group meeting
in Geneva earlier this month, basic humanitarian
assistance and financing remain an immediate priority.
Much of the $40 million that Norway will provide this
year will be for relief aid.

The United Nations and its new, integrated
mission have a key role in the Bonn implementation
process in assisting the Afghan authorities and in
sustaining the progress achieved, not least with regard
to women's rights and all the rights of the child.

Norway supports the Secretary-General's
proposal for a lean, integrated structure for UNAMA
and a strong coordinating role for the Special
Representative. The Afghanistan Support Group will
work with UNAMA to improve coordination, and with
multilateral and bilateral donors, non-governmental
organizations and the Afghan authorities. This must go
hand in hand with meaningful assistance at the local
community level. By using Afghan staff, UNAMA will
promote national capacity and ownership of the
process.

Continued, long-term commitment by the United
Nations and its Member States is needed to ensure that
Afghanistan remains firmly on the path to peace and
reconciliation and does not again become a haven for
terrorists. Constructive support, in particular by
neighbouring States, will be crucial. The Council will
do its part, next by adopting a resolution endorsing the
new United Nations Mission.

We look forward to seeing UNAMA operational.
Ultimately it is up to the Afghan leaders and people
themselves to create conditions for lasting peace and
development in their country. But the international
community can and must help.

I resume my function as President of the Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Spain. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

