Mr. Antonio (African Union) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to warmly congratulate you,
Mr. President, and also to convey the congratulations
of the African Union (AU) Commission following the
assumption by your country of the presidency of the
Security Council. We believe that you will build on
your experience and dedication in heading the Council's
work this month. I wish you every success.

I would also like to welcome the participation
this morning of the Secretary-General as well as of
other eminent personalities who have come to New
York to participate in this important debate. I should
like in particular to welcome the participation of His
Excellency Mr. Aminu Wali, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria; and His Excellency Mr. Excellency
Mr. Manuel Domingos Augusto, Secretary of State for
External Relations of the Republic of Angola, who is
still with us here today, and who, along with Chad,
daily is paving the way within the United Nations for
Africa to become a non-permanent member of the
Security Council.

China's choice of this topic is a good illustration of
its commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter at a time when the United Nations and the world
as a whole are preparing to celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the founding of our Organization.

Seventy years after the creation of the United
Nations, its Charter remains fully relevant, and our
Organization continues to be as fundamental as it has
always been in ensuring the trinity of peace, human
rights and development. Looking back at the past, it is
clear that the ambitious system of collective security
set up by the United Nations continues, in spite of the
limitations encountered in its implementation, to be
a sine qua non for tackling the global challenges that
weigh heavily on international peace and security.

The question today is how to ensure that we fill
the gap between the principles set forth and the results
we achieve each time that action is taken. Indeed,
given the proliferation of cross-border threats, in
particular international terrorism, the time has come
to mobilize and consolidate the efforts of all actors in
the international community as well as to strengthen
strategic partnerships, complying with the principle of
the Security Council bearing primary responsibility
for upholding international peace and security. It is
that spirit of cooperation that characterizes all United
Nations activities, including those in the area of
peacekeeping and international security, objectives that
guided the creation of our Organization.
Traditionally, in its relations with the United
Nations, the African Union has fully complied with
the spirit of cooperation and endorsed the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Its
efforts to promote peace and security on the continent
are complementary to United Nations activities.

The African Union has, inter alia, deployed a
number of peacekeeping operations, including in
Burundi, Darfur, Mali, the Central African Republic
and Somalia. The stabilization efforts undertaken by
those missions and the sacrifices made by their staff
have substantially paved the way and facilitated the
work of the United Nations missions that then take over.

This division of responsibility is taking shape as a
system where the African Union has the first boots on
the ground, stabilizing the situation in areas of conflict
and thereby creating a situation where the United
Nations can deploy peacekeeping operations at a later
stage. This partnership is a boon for the United Nations
and for the African Union, but it would be well served
by a more innovative interpretation of the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations. That would allow
for the African Union and its regional mechanisms to
fully play their roles as an integral part of the global
system of collective security.

To do so, it is important for the two organizations
to act with greater policy coherence so as to further
strengthen the partnership regarding preliminary
consultations for decision-making, a common
understanding of the issues raised and support for
African peacekeeping efforts. An appropriate solution
should also be found regarding the legitimate request
of the African Union for the financing of peacekeeping
operations undertaken with United Nations consent.

Along those lines, the current review of United
Nations peacekeeping operations by the High-level
Panel, which was recently hosted in Addis Ababa by
the Chairperson of the AU Commission in the context
of productive consultations with the African Union,
was an opportunity to promote our common goal
of establishing a ground-breaking, forward-looking
partnership pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter.

I cannot conclude without recalling the importance
of correcting the historic injustice done to Africa,
which remains the only continent that is not represented
in the category of permanent members of the Security
Council, while also being underrepresented in the
non-permanent category. Frankly, Africa's lack of
adequate representation remains at the heart of the
Security Council's deficiencies of representativeness
and legitimacy. I would like to take this opportunity
to call on Member States to correct that injstice by
supporting the common African position as outlined in
the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.

