Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.
We would like to welcome Mr. Jan Eliasson to New
York and thank him for the briefing here today. We also
thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for the presentation of
the Secretary-General's report.

The situation in Darfur has preoccupied the
attention of the international community for a while
now and I appreciate the efforts by the Secretary-
General of making it a priority. The international
community also continues to work in concert by trying
to find a durable and lasting solution. Nonetheless, the
reality is that the situation in Darfur is having a
devastating impact on the humanitarian situation on the
ground.

We concur with the observations of the Secretary-
General that the situation in Darfur is at a crossroads in
that, whereas there is increasing violence in this
region, there is also an opportunity for peace through
political negotiation and through the deployment of a
peacekeeping force that can help make a difference. As
we have emphasized on several occasions, the solution
in Darfur lies in a political settlement. It is for this
reason that we welcome the commitment and the
efforts by United Nations Special Envoy Jan Eliasson
and African Union Special Envoy Salim Salim to find a
political and peaceful solution to the problem in
Darfur.

South Africa believes that the Abuja Peace
Agreement provides the framework for the peaceful
resolution of the conflict in Darfur and we share the
commitment for the speediest conclusion of the
political negotiations and the need to ensure that all the
armed groups in Darfur respect international opinion
and participate in those peace talks.

It is, however, distressing that some of the
movements in Darfur decided to stay away from the
recent peace conference held in Sirte, Libya. We urge
the international community to do everything it can to
ensure that everybody joins that process because these
talks are a critical element in the solution of the Darfur
conflict. The Security Council should be able to take
firm action against those who wilfully absent
themselves from these negotiations and instead choose
to engage in violent actions against the innocent people
of Darfur.

Another major issue of concern is the presence of
the militia and rebel groups in and around some camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs), which has
resulted in violence inside these camps. All necessary
steps should be taken to ensure the security of the
civilian population and the IDPs as well as women and
children in Darfur. We must create conditions for
humanitarian assistance to reach the sections of the
population in need.

We appreciate the progress that has been made so
far with regard to the implementation of the United
Nations-African Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), especially the initial operating capability
for the headquarters which is now established. We urge
the United Nations and the African Union to further
accelerate this process so as to ensure that the transfer
of authority from the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS) can proceed.

At the same time, we are concerned at the
continued delays with regard to some of the key areas
that are critical for the implementation of UNAMID, in
particular, aviation, ground transportation, as well as
the force composition of the Mission. Concerning these
outstanding critical capabilities it is clear that we, in
Africa, are not in a position to provide them and we
appeal to those who can to provide the required
capabilities.

We are also concerned about the slow pace of the
approval of the budget for UNAMID. We agree with
Mr. Guehenno's observation on the need to rapidly
deploy a robust peacekeeping operation. In this regard,
my delegation calls on Member States to consider and
approve the Secretary- General's proposed budget for
UNAMID. We need to act expeditiously to meet the
timelines set out by the Council.

Clearly the success of UNAMID depends on the
cooperation of all the parties involved. In this regard
we want to stress the need for an ongoing dialogue
between the United Nations, the African Union and the
Government of the Sudan and, in this regard, we
commend the recent meeting of the parties in Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia.

We note the preliminary results of an
investigation initiated by the AMIS Force Commander
immediately after the attacks on the AMIS military
group site in Haskanita. South Africa, which deplores
this act, looks forward to the final report of the African
Union-United Nations operation. It is important that
when the perpetrators have been identified they be
brought to justice.

Lastly, we continue to hold out hope that the
tensions which have arisen in the relationship between
the north and south will soon be overcome so that both
parties will continue to fully implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). We are
convinced that full implementation of the CPA will
contribute positively to the lasting resolution of the
Darfur conflict.

