Mr. Pascoe: Mr. President, I thank you for this
opportunity to brief the Council on developments in
Iraq and the work of the United Nations in the country.
Our efforts have increased in important ways during
the year since the adoption of resolution 1770 (2007) in
August 2007. Members of the Council have before
them the fourth quarterly report of the Secretary-
General pursuant to paragraph 6 of that resolution,
focusing on the activities in the latest period of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).

From the moment he visited Iraq early in his term
of office, the Secretary-General has made clear his
strong commitment to seeing the United Nations do
more to help the Government and the people of that
country. That has not been an easy task given the
circumstances in Iraq, but today, under the more the
robust mandate of resolution 1770 (2007) and the
strong leadership of his Special Representative on the
ground, the United Nations is steadily expanding its
presence and activities in Iraq, while remaining
mindful of the very complex operating environment in
the country.

During the past year, we have witnessed steady
changes in Iraq that should be noted. As the Secretary-
General's report underscores, political and military
efforts have contributed to improved security in most
parts of the country, most visibly during the past three
months. Violent incidents and casualties have declined
and we have witnessed the improved performance of
Iraq's security forces during a series of operations.
However, civilian casualties as a result of violence
remain unacceptably high. A string of suicide
bombings just last week killed 60 people and injured
hundreds more in Baghdad and Kirkuk, a brutal
reminder of the lengths to which some are willing to go
to provoke hatred and division among the Iraqi people.

As the Secretary-General's report also makes
clear, it is necessary to cement the gains on the security
front through strengthened and sustained political
dialogue. While a window for improved political
dialogue may exist, the situation does remain tenuous
and progress achieved thus far could be lost. There has,
however, been some progress. The leading Sunni bloc,
08-45136

Tawafuq, recently returned to the Government, and
Prime Minister Al-Maliki filled the vacant cabinet
posts that were empty since the boycotts of last spring
and summer. The proper implementation of the
Amnesty Law, which went into effect in February of
this year, has the potential to contribute to developing
trust between communities in the country. While the
political atmosphere in Baghdad, Kirkuk and elsewhere
deteriorated somewhat during the recent debate on the
election law, we are hopeful that the Iraqi parties are
coming to recognize the need to continue and to
expand the extent of their political dialogue.

Since the Council handed down a new mandate
for UNAMI one year ago, the Mission has worked with
great energy to ensure its implementation. UNAMI
continues to focus on advancing political dialogue,
national reconciliation and the resolution of disputed
internal boundaries, as well as on preparations for the
provincial elections in order to ensure they are seen as
credible and broadly accepted by the Iraqi people.

Iraq's Independent High Electoral Commission,
with assistance from UNAMI, has reached a number of
operational milestones. Those include organizing the
field structure needed to conduct the voter registration
update, which is successfully under way in all of Iraq's
governorates. The Electoral Commission, with
UNAMI's support, recruited and trained nearly 8,000
staff to administer voter registration services to 564
centres nationwide. Almost all centres have been open
throughout the voter registration period, which is a
notable feat considering the immense operational and
security challenges inside Iraq. UNAMI has also
advised the Electoral Commission on how to ensure
transparency and strong oversight in the voter
registration update process. The international electoral
team, in its visits to voter registration centres and field
election offices throughout the country, continues to be
impressed by the knowledge and professionalism of
election administration staff. The Electoral
Commission has thus far accredited close to 20,000
political party agents and observers to monitor election
events.

Without new electoral legislation, however, those
critical governorate elections cannot go forward. As we
meet here this morning, discussions in the Iraqi
Parliament in Baghdad around the adoption of a new
law remain unresolved. The United Nations has been
doing all it can to urge the reaching of practical
compromises. In that regard, I would include the fact
08-45136

that we have been involved in all of the discussions
that have been ongoing in recent days on the issue,
offering many variations to the parties to try to help
them to reach a compromise. A failure to come to
agreement on a law at this time would be a major
setback, not only for the prospects for elections this
year, but for the larger process of national
reconciliation in Iraq.

In connection with discord over the passage of
the election law, the situation in Kirkuk grew more
tense and turned violent last week. The bloodshed in
Kirkuk illustrated just how fragile the situation has
become and how the lack of dialogue and compromise
could easily lead to renewed violence. The passage of
the draft election law that was subsequently vetoed and
the Kirkuk Provincial Council decision to set in motion
mechanisms for a referendum on the status of Kirkuk
were provocations by both sides that were inevitably
going to raise tensions.

UNAMI continues its work on the issue of
Kirkuk and disputed internal boundaries, and hopes to
establish the firm recognition among Iraqi parties that
sustainable peace can be based only upon collective
solutions acceptable to all concerned. The Mission
plans to present its next set of analyses on disputed
territories to the Presidency Council, the Prime
Minister and the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan
regional Government during the fall. While UNAMI is
working as an honest broker to establish a mutually
acceptable way to handle those complex issues, we
have repeatedly stressed that the ultimate responsibility
to make the difficult decisions lies first and foremost
with the Government of Iraq and the other
representatives of the Iraqi people.

In addition to addressing disputed internal
boundaries and the adoption of an inclusive electoral
law, there is a need for progress on the fundamental
issues that define the nature of the Iraqi State. Those
include defining the nature of the federal framework in
Iraq, establishing a clear revenue-sharing mechanism
and equitably managing Iraq's considerable resources.
The United Nations continues to assist the
Constitutional Review Committee in the expeditious
conclusion of its work, and important related
legislation continues to be discussed. Tackling those
core issues is as vital as it is difficult and will require
wisdom, patience and compromise by all sides.
3

Iraq's neighbours and other States in the region
have a vested interest in Iraq's stability and can and
should play a constructive role in that regard. During
the past year, numerous positive steps were taken to
strengthen regional cooperation in support of Iraq.
Following the Stockholm conference to review annual
progress in the implementation of the International
Compact with Iraq and, in the wake of the security
operations conducted with the leadership of Prime
Minister Al-Maliki, several member States in the
region announced the restoration of full diplomatic
representation in Baghdad. Additionally, two meetings
of the expanded Conference of Iraq's Neighbours took
place at the ministerial level: in Turkey in November
2007 and in Kuwait in April 2008. The Secretary-
General and the Iraqi Prime Minister also hosted a
high-level meeting on Iraq here in New York last
September. The second round of working group
meetings on border security, refugees and energy were
also held and UNAMI is currently assisting Iraq's
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in preparation for the next
cycle of working group meetings, leading up to a
ministerial conference in Baghdad later this year. The
Mission is helping to build the capacity of the
dedicated unit within the Ministry, which has been
playing a pivotal role in preparing those events.

We strongly welcome the developments on the
regional front and hope that other regional States will
seize on opportunities for turning the regional dialogue
process into a real partnership based on mutual
interests and concrete cooperation in diplomatic,
political, economic and cultural areas. Both Iraq and
regional actors must do more, and the United Nations
is ready to assist in that effort.

Supporting Iraq's reconstruction and development
remains a top priority for the United Nations. While
the economy continues to grow due in large part to
high oil prices, that has not yet translated into
improvements in the lives of ordinary citizens.
Unemployment rates remain stubbornly high and the
same governorates rate consistently low on key
socio-economic indicators such as unemployment,
malnutrition and illiteracy. It is estimated that 60 per
cent of Iraqis do not have access to one or more
essential social services and that 15 per cent lack food
security. However, security improvements present a
new opportunity for Iraq's oil wealth to reach its
population and improve their lives.
In addition to United Nations assistance for the
purpose of meeting those needs, we are working with
the Government of Iraq on economic reform for private
sector development, aimed particularly at increasing
employment opportunities and at diversifying the
nation's economic output, which is now heavily reliant
upon oil. A new $30-million project will be dedicated
to assist in the development of a viable and functioning
private sector in Iraq.

Economic initiatives were also central to the
agenda of the first annual review of the International
Compact with Iraq, which was held in Stockholm,
Sweden, on 29 May 2008. One hundred States and
organizations were in attendance. The Government of
Iraq presented its initiatives for full integration with
the regional and global economies, including the
establishment of an investment commission, private
sector partnerships and transregional initiatives to
promote investment, trade and greater cooperation with
neighbouring States. The Conference welcomed the
Government of Iraq's proposal for a partnership for
development, which recognizes that Iraq is a wealthy
country that requires technical assistance more than
aid. As a result, in close cooperation with the
Government of Iraq and donors, we are transitioning
from high-capital projects to co-financing, capacity-
building and technical assistance.

The Iraq Trust Fund - to which the European
Commission and Japan, among other donors, have been
particularly generous contributors - has already
disbursed $1 billion. The $300 million that remain are
actively being programmed. The Trust Fund goals are
now fully aligned with the Compact. With the consent
of the Government of Iraq and its donors, it is
envisioned that the Iraq Trust Fund will complete
activities at the same time as the Compact, in 2011.
United Nations assistance will continue supporting the
Government of Iraq as it leads its own recovery.

Increased attention has been placed on the
humanitarian needs of Iraqis and on alleviating the
suffering of Iraqi refugees, internally displaced persons
and other vulnerable groups. Over 2.8 million people
are currently displaced inside Iraq, and they, together
with refugees from neighbouring countries, are
returning to their places of origin at a steady rate of up
to 10,000 people per month.
The percentage of United Nations projects
dedicated to humanitarian activities has increased,
supported by funding received through the 2008 Iraq
consolidated appeal, which currently stands at 47 per
cent funded, or $128 million. A regional appeal is
being prepared for 2009 that will aim to incorporate
into one framework the funding needs not only inside
Iraq, but also of Iraqi refugees in neighbouring
countries. In consultation with the donors, $20 million
of the $55 million that the Trust Fund has gained
through interest have been dedicated to addressing
humanitarian needs, including through the
development of an emergency response fund, which
will provide a rapid response capacity to handle the
effects of the major military operations that have
transpired during the reporting period.

In the military operations undertaken in Basra
and Sadr City, United Nations agencies provided
emergency water, medicines and food parcels to
affected communities and maintained constant dialogue
with military commanders, briefing them on the
humanitarian situation and its possible deterioration.
However, humanitarian access during military
operations is often constrained and humanitarian actors
at times have felt it unsafe to deliver urgent relief. All
parties to conflict should do their utmost to normalize
and facilitate humanitarian access during these critical
times.

During the reporting period, the UNAMI Human
Rights Office also focused its monitoring and advocacy
activities on the plight of Iraqi civilians who reside in
the areas where intense fighting has taken place in
recent months. Although much has been accomplished
in promoting the protection of human rights and the
rule of law in Iraq, a great deal more remains to be
done. Journalists, educators, medical doctors, judges
and lawyers remained prime targets for armed militia
and criminal gangs. Gender-based violence, murders,
suicides and so-called honour crimes also continued to
be documented. UNAMI continues to seek better
access to detention centres and improved mechanisms
for the efficient legal processing of detainees. Beyond
its monitoring and advocacy actions, UNAMI
continues to run an active programme of human rights
capacity-building and training for Government officials
and civil society groups. The Mission also actively
supports the work of the Ministry of Human Rights and
devotes significant attention to legislative activity
relating to human rights and the rule of law.
Under the leadership of Special Representative
De Mistura, UNAMI, along with the United Nations

country team, is working hard to build an enhanced
presence throughout the country, despite the obvious
challenges and continuous security threats to
operations in Iraq. The Baghdad and Erbil offices are
expanding, a presence has been established in Basra
and Kirkuk, and planning is under way to post national
and international staff in Mosul, Najaf and Ramadi.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the World Health Organization have
moved their most senior staff from Amman to
Baghdad, and the overall ceiling for United Nations
staff members in Iraq has been raised further to
accommodate those trends. UNAMI's Iraqi
Government liaison officers are currently operating in
the offices of nine governors throughout Iraq. Their
presence has been instrumental in expanding the
breadth and depth of United Nations contact beyond
the nation's capital.

Security remains essential for the United Nations
to function in Iraq, and support and protection from
Member States is vital. I would like to express
appreciation to the Multinational Force in Iraq
(MNF-I), the Department of Safety and Security and
others for the support they have already provided. In
view of the possible changes in the current
arrangement for the presence of the MNF-I after
31 December 2008, it is essential that the security of
the United Nations presence continue to be ensured.

The so-called distinct entity established in 2004
under the unified command of the multinational forces
with a dedicated mission to provide security for the
United Nations presence in Iraq recently received
contributions that will ensure its operation well into
2009. I would therefore like to thank the Governments
of Belgium, the Czech Republic, Finland, Italy and
Germany for their recent generous contributions to the
Trust Fund to Support the Distinct Entity Created to
Provide Security for the United Nations Presence in
Iraq. We encourage Member States to consider further
contributions to the Trust Fund and to provide
additional military advisers to the Mission in Iraq, as
they remain a critical component of expanding our
presence inside the country. We are further grateful to
Georgia, Fiji, the Republic of Korea and South Africa
for providing security and operational support.

Construction of a new integrated compound in
Baghdad is essential to the presence of the United
Nations in Iraq. I would therefore like to thank the
Government of Iraq for its provision of a site for the
new integrated United Nations compound in Baghdad
and urge it to finalize the arrangement for the
co-funding of that important project.

I would also acknowledge the leadership that
Special Representative De Mistura has displayed in
that very difficult operating environment. He and his
team of national and international staff have done
extraordinary work for Iraq and its people.

As I said at the outset, Iraqis have witnessed an
improvement in security. However, as I said before, the
situation remains fragile and recent gains could easily
be lost. It is imperative that we not become complacent
due to recent achievements. Efforts must now focus on
achieving the political gains necessary to build trust
and confidence across community lines and to improve
the quality of life for all Iraqis, including the delivery
of basic services and the generation of employment.
The United Nations continues to believe that trust is
best established by tackling the issues at the heart of
each community's competing vision for the future of
Iraq. That includes the federal framework of the
country, the handling of Kirkuk and other disputed
territories, the distribution of wealth from
hydrocarbons and a viable revenue-sharing agreement.
The potential is there, and it is ultimately up to the
Iraqi people to make sound choices that will allow
them to build a sustainable and lasting peace. I can
assure the Council that we in the United Nations are
making a strong contribution and will continue to try to
help Iraq in that process.

