The President (spoke in Chinese): Pursuant to
the decision taken at the 5426th meeting, I recognize
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Konan Banny,
Prime Minister of C6te d'Ivoire.

The Security Council will now continue its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council commends Prime
Minister Konan Banny for his initiatives, taken in
cooperation with President Laurent Gbagbo,
which have injected a new momentum into the
peace process as defined by resolution 1633
(2005) and the road map established by the
International Working Group (IWG), and which
must lead to the organization of free, open, fair
and transparent elections by 31 October 2006. It
reiterates to him its full support.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the IWG and endorses its sixth final
communique, dated 20 April 2006.

"The Security Council welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Gerard Stoudmann as High
Representative for the elections. It encourages
him to take all necessary measures, in accordance
with his mandate, to expedite the preparation of
the electoral process. It calls upon all Ivorian
parties to fully cooperate with him.

"The Security Council, while taking note of
the progress achieved, expresses its grave
concern at the serious delay in the
implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme and of the identification operations. It
recalls the commitments made by the main
Ivorian political leaders in this regard at their
meeting in Abidjan on 8 April 2006
(Yamoussoukro II), under the auspices of the
Chair of the African Union. It urges them to fulfil
these commitments without delay.

"The Security Council shares the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General in paragraph
74 of his report dated 11 April 2006
(S/2006/222), over the consequences of any
additional delays in the implementation of the
key deadlines of the road map.

"The Security Council invites therefore the
Prime Minister and the Government of National
Reconciliation he leads to take immediately all
the measures necessary to the simultaneous
implementation of the DDR and identification
operations. It also invites the IWG, in accordance
with paragraph 10 of resolution 1633 (2005), to
report to it any hindrance or difficulty which the
Prime Minister may face in implementing his
tasks.

"The Security Council will continue to
evaluate and monitor closely the implementation
of the road map, in particular the DDR and
identification operations. It continues to underline
that targeted measures are to be imposed against
persons to be designated by the Committee
established by paragraph 14 of resolution 1572
(2004) who among other things block the
implementation of the peace process, including
by attacking or obstructing the action of UNOCI,
of the French forces, of the High Representative
for the elections or of the International Working
Group, or who incite publicly hatred and
Violence, as provided in resolutions 1572 (2004)
and 1643 (2005)."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/20.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.
