The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Indonesia, Japan, New Zealand, the
Philippines, Portugal and the Republic of Korea in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Wensley
(Australia), Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium), Mr. Moura
(Brazil), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Widodo
(Indonesia), Mr. Motomura (Japan), Mr. Hughes (New Zealand), Mr. Manalo (Philippines), Mr. Brito
(Portugal) and Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative and Transitional Administrator for East
Timor.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Vieira de Mello to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, Member of the Transitional Cabinet of
East Timor responsible for Foreign Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ramos-Horta to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/7l9, which contains the progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor.

The Security Council will hear a briefing by
Mr. Vieira de Mello at this meeting. I understand that
he is also prepared to answer questions or to provide
clarifications, if need be. At the end of the briefing, I
will give the floor to Council members who wish to
make comments or to ask questions. I would like to
invite members to raise their hand if they wish to take
the floor.

I now give the floor to Mr. Vieira de Mello.


