Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): As the
Council has had occasion to state on numerous
occasions, there is no solution other than a negotiated,
mutually acceptable political solution to the issue of
the Western Sahara, whose resolution remains
necessary - as all are convinced - not only for the
Sahara but for the entire Maghreb region. For that
reason, France welcomes the fact that the Security
Council today reiterated its unanimous support for the
negotiating process launched in Manhasset in 2007 and
for resolution 1813 (2008), a resolution that was also
adopted unanimously and which serves as the road map
for the process.

My delegation hopes that on that basis the parties
concerned will return to the negotiating table as soon
as possible and resolutely enter into a substantive
discussion 4 as the Council calls upon them to do 4
under United Nations auspices, showing realism, a
spirit of compromise and political will to finally
achieve a just, lasting and mutually acceptable
solution.

While the negotiations must resume, France
wishes also to recall the importance of the autonomy
proposal put forward by Morocco in 2007, which, in
our view, provides a basis for negotiation that is
credible, transparent and constructive and that respects
09-31958
the principle of self-determination and is thus worthy
of close attention by all parties.

I wish to reiterate our support for the efforts of
the Secretary-General and of Mr. Christopher Ross, his
new Personal Envoy, to whom we wish every success.
We support Mr. Ross's proposal to hold informal
meetings to better prepare the next session of
discussions. My delegation also wishes to express its
support for measures to be taken in the humanitarian
and political arenas, with the agreement of the parties,
to promote mutual trust and confidence.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the fact
that the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) has been
renewed by consensus. We take this opportunity to
recall how important it is for the Secretariat and the
Council to be in a position, in line with the initiative
launched jointly with the United Kingdom, to ensure
better political and military follow-up for all
peacekeeping operations, including MINURSO. To that
end, as we always strive to do for various peacekeeping
operations, out of a concern for effectiveness, we
underscore the importance of the Secretariat keeping
the operation's planning documents up to date.

