Mr. Fulci (Italy): Italy will vote in favour of the
draft resolution that is before the Council this morning.
We shall vote in favour on the basis of one conviction -
that while sanctions are, and remain, one of the most
effective tools provided by the Charter of the United
Nations to enforce compliance with international law, they
should not lead to the extreme consequence of inflicting
untold misery and starvation on an entire civilian
population.

Indeed, it would be paradoxical if by our actions,
we, the peoples of the United Nations, we who take great
pride in mounting massive operations to bring
humanitarian relief wherever and whenever it is needed,

 

were ourselves instead to contribute to provoking such
suffering. Frankly, an Iraqi child who looks at us from our
television screens, with his big eyes made even larger by
famine and disease, is no different from a child in Somalia
or any other country whom we rush to aid.

Furthermore, the experience of the past shows that
sanctions, if applied indiscriminately, tend to rally people
around the Government, rather than to mobilize them
against it. This, of course, does not mean that sanctions
should not be adopted or should not be applied. But to be
effective, they should always be applied with caution and
parsimony, and, above all, be precisely targeted in order to
avoid serious negative side-effects. According to the draft
resolution, Iraq will now be allowed to sell about 1 billion
dollars' worth of its oil every 90 days. Seventy per cent of
this amount will go to meet the urgent food and medical
needs of the Iraqi people. The remaining 30 per cent will
be used to partially compensate the victims of the Iraqi
aggression.

In this way, we believe, at least three important
objectives will be achieved. First, the Iraqi authorities will
be provided with the necessary financial means, under strict
international control, to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi
people. Secondly, a cash flow will be created in the fund,
to be used for the compensation of the many victims -
Kuwaitis, Egyptians, Pakistanis, Indians, Sri Lankans,
Palestinians and many others - who were deprived of their
livelihood and subjected to great hardship. In other words,
the Committee on Compensation in Geneva, chaired by
Italy, will therefore be able to start to function properly.
Thirdly, the many commercial losses to the neighbouring
countries will begin to be redressed, starting with the
restoration of the Iraq-Turkey pipeline.

After Iraq's formal recognition of the sovereignty and
international borders of Kuwait, today's draft resolution is
yet another step toward opening the way toward stabilizing
the situation in that region, which has already suffered too
much too long. It is our sincere hope that Iraq will
complete its fulfilment of all the pertinent resolutions so
that a situation of normalcy may be restored in the area.

Finally, I wish to take this opportunity to warmly
thank the Argentine delegation for its relentless search for
a compromise and to thank all others - and they are
many - who joined in a common effort to produce a
balanced text which does not infringe - I would like to
underline this - on the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Iraq. And our thanks, of course, go also to you,
Mr. President, for the determination, the skill and the
stamina that you once again demonstrated in leading us to
achieve today's important result.

