Mr. Mufioz (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow
me to say how gratified I am to have a Spanish
speaker, and yourself in particular, Mr. President,
presiding over this meeting of the Council on an issue
of the greatest importance for the international
community.

This is the second of the oral assessments that I
present every 120 days to the Council pursuant to
resolution 1526 (2004). As you may recall, I concluded
my last briefing by noting that terrorism continues to
be a global threat that can be addressed only through
the concerted efforts of the international community. I
also emphasized that this would be a long struggle.
Sadly, recent events have again shown us that the fight
against terrorism is far from over. The horrific terrorist
attacks against innocent children, women and parents
in Beslan, Russia and the bombing of the Australian
embassy in Jakarta a few days ago are tragic reminders
that we need to do a lot more to defeat terrorism.

Today, I want to reiterate that terrorism
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security that affect every State.
Therefore, we need to consolidate and further enhance
the achievements of the United Nations in fighting this
scourge.

The Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee
is acutely aware of these challenges. As I shall explain
in a moment, the Committee is currently considering
the first report of its Monitoring Team, which contains
recommendations on how to address the constant
evolution of the Al Qaeda network. I shall also explain
our plans for continuing and improving our
cooperation with Member States in order to further
strengthen the sanctions regime. Before I do so I will,
however, briefly inform you of the activities of the
Committee and its Monitoring Team since I gave my
last briefing on 25 May 2004.

The legal basis for the Committee's work
continues to be Security Council resolution 1526
(2004), which was adopted on 30 January 2004. That
resolution not only provides the conceptual framework
for the Committee and the Monitoring Team but also
addresses the mandatory and other responsibilities of
Member States with regard to the sanctions regime
imposed against Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

Since 25 May, the Committee has held 11
informal meetings. The Committee has continued its
practice of discussing and studying issues in informal
settings, as that allows members to exchange their
views more freely and to meet as frequently as
necessary. Such an environment has proven to be more
useful to new representatives on the Committee.

In several meetings held in June, the Committee
discussed an informal document presented by the
Chairman on non-mandatory measures contained in
resolution 1526 (2004). In that connection, it was
recognized that resolution 1526 (2004) introduced a
number of measures that, although not mandatory, are
important for the implementation of the sanctions
regime against Al Qaeda and the Taliban, as they
provide ideas as to how States might further enhance
their counter-terrorism efforts. Such efforts could seek
to cut the flow of funds and other financial assets to
and from individuals and entities on the List. They
could also lead to the establishment of internal
procedures on the transborder movement of currency,
based on applicable thresholds. Other non-mandatory
measures seek to further improve the Committee's List
and to strengthen cooperation in the area of capacity-
building for the implementation of sanctions measures.
When considering the non-mandatory measures
contained in resolution 1526 (2004), the Committee
realized that some of those measures might become
mandatory in the future if deemed appropriate and
necessary.

The Committee spent a considerable amount of
time and effort revising the guidelines for the conduct
of its work. That was mainly because the existing
guidelines do not reflect the most important changes
made to the sanctions regime against Al Qaeda by
resolutions 1455 (2003) and 1526 (2004). The
Committee has therefore focused on adapting its
current guidelines to make them better tools with
which to rationalize its work and provide guidance to
Member States in instances when relevant Security
Council provisions do not provide sufficient
information or guidance. The Committee has made
progress in its efforts to adopt new guidelines and will
continue its discussions to reach consensus in the near
future.

Since 25 May, the names of 8 new individuals
and 6 new entities have been placed on the
Committee's List. In order to implement the
requirements of paragraph 19 of resolution 1526
(2004), and in line with the practice of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), a list of contact points
has been established. That list enables the Committee's
secretariat to inform the relevant officials of Member
States of any changes to the List as soon as they are
made. That contact list is already fully operational and
contains contact points in all permanent missions and
in 183 States.

The Committee has continued to deal
expeditiously with exceptions, pursuant to resolution
1452 (2002). In conformity with the list of notifying
States maintained by the Committee, 11 States have so
far approached the Committee.

We have established an active working
relationship with the Chairman of the CTC and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Director, and we agree
that cooperation between the two Committees needs to
be strengthened further. To that end, a meeting will be
held this week with the participation of the CTC
Chairman, myself and the CTC experts and their
Executive Director, as well as with the Monitoring
Team of the Al Qaeda-Taliban sanctions Committee
and its coordinator.

During the past four months the Monitoring Team
has focused on establishing a close and effective
working relationship with the Committee and Member
States. The Team has established a number of contacts
both with permanent missions in New York and with
relevant national authorities. It has also provided the
Committee with support in promoting the effective
implementation of relevant resolutions and assessing
the impact of the measures detailed in those
resolutions, and by making recommendations as to how
those measures might be made more effective. It has
also produced a report for the Committee on those
States that have not fulfilled their obligations under
resolution 1455 (2003) by the agreed deadline. In
addition, the Team has provided support to the
Chairman of the Committee, in particular during his
travel to selected countries. It has also established a
close working relationship with the CTC, including in
particular with CTC experts.
The Team has approached the work on the
Committee's List actively and has focused on how
further improvements might be made to the List. It has
sent letters to 80 States seeking additional information
on those entries where identifying information is
missing or is not satisfactory. It has also encouraged
Member States to add names to the List and has
received a very positive response.

The Team has undertaken several trips. Between
6 and 27 July it visited Libya, Afghanistan, Pakistan,
Egypt and the United Kingdom. The purpose of those
visits was to assess the evolution of the threat posed by
Al Qaeda, to seek suggestions on how to improve the
List, to discuss ideas for making sanctions more
effective and to encourage States to add names to the
Committee's List. In August, members of the Team
visited Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore,
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and the capital
of the United States, Washington. Members of the
Team have also made presentations on their work and
that of the Committee to regional meetings in Asia and
Africa. On each of its trips the Team was well received
and noted great interest in engaging further with the
Committee as a necessary step in strengthening
international cooperation in the global effort to counter
terrorism.

The Committee highly appreciates the
information provided by the Monitoring Team on the
outcome of its Visits to selected States shortly after
their return. Those briefings enhance the Committee's
understanding of the concerns and experiences of
visited States.

On 31 July, the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team submitted its first written report to
the sanctions Committee. In paragraph 8 of resolution
1526 (2004), the Security Council requested the
Monitoring Team to submit three written reports to the
Committee during its eighteen-month mandate, with
the first report due before the end of July. I publicly
commend the Monitoring Team for having met its
deadline and for having produced a concise, well-
conceived and high-quality document. The report
contains fresh ideas and will give a new impetus to the
work of the sanctions Committee.

It should be recalled that the Monitoring Team
was established to assist the Al Qaeda and Taliban
Committee in better fulfilling its mandate. It consists
of independent experts and its findings and
recommendations are thus independent. The
Committee has already begun studying the report and
will consider any measure that may be taken to further
enhance its work. It is the Committee's responsibility
to consider the Team's report carefully and to reach its
own conclusions regarding appropriate follow-up
action that might be taken either by the Committee
itself or at the level of the Security Council. The
Committee is undertaking a thorough consideration of
the recommendations contained in the report.

The Committee first discussed the report at its
informal meeting on 23 August, when it decided to
release the report to the public. I then forwarded the
report to the President of the Security Council via a
letter dated 23 August and it was issued as an official
document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/2004/679. On 30 August, I held a joint press
conference with the Coordinator of the Monitoring
Team, Mr. Richard Barrett - who is with us today -
at which we introduced the report to the media.

As the report is the Monitoring Team's first, it
sets the stage for the Team's subsequent work. It lays
out the background for the Team's future findings,
summarizes the activities undertaken to date and
describes how it intends to proceed with its work in
future. The report also provides an indication of the
potential recommendations the Team is minded to
make in its subsequent reports. Of particular interest is
the fact that the Team has foreshadowed a number of
measures that might be taken to improve the
functionality and credibility of the Consolidated List,
as well as to strengthen the effectiveness of the
existing financial sanctions, arms embargo and travel
ban.

I do not intend to go into the details of the report
here. It is very well written and speaks for itself.
However, one theme that the Monitoring Team
emphasizes in it is that the international community
cannot afford to rest on its laurels at this crucial
juncture in the fight against Al Qaeda and the Taliban.
It also stressed the need to encourage closer
operational cooperation between States to make the
international environment still more inhospitable to Al
Qaeda-related terrorism, to the collection and
distribution of funds and to access to the weapons used
in terrorist attacks. It is unfortunate that this key
message has been misinterpreted in certain media
reports as a failure of the sanctions regime.

The Team notes that the nature of the threat from
Al Qaeda and the Taliban is constantly evolving, just
as Al Qaeda itself has evolved from an organization
with a structure and hierarchy into a global network of
groups unbound by organizational structure but held
together by a set of overlapping ideological goals.
Therefore, the international community must respond
creatively and effectively to the changing threat posed
by Al Qaeda and the Taliban. The Security Council
should be vigilant in ensuring that its strategy to
counter the Al Qaeda threat is as good as it can be. We
must try to stay ahead of the curve.

Continued cooperation with member States
remains perhaps the most important aspect of the
Committee's work. Three issues merit specific
attention: the need to further improve the quality of the
Committee's List; the opportunity, provided for in
resolution 1526 (2004), for States to meet with the
Committee; and the visits I undertake with members of
the Committee to selected States.

As I just mentioned, one of the central themes of
the report of the Monitoring Team is the need to
improve and develop the Committee's List further. The
Committee is considering adopting several of the
recommendations included in the report. In this regard,
I would like to encourage in the strongest possible
terms all member States to cooperate with the
Committee in submitting new names to the
Committee's List. The List currently holds the names
of 429 individuals and entities belonging to or
associated with Al Qaeda and/or the Taliban.

As we all know, that is, sadly, only a small
fraction of the actual number of individuals and entities
which are in fact associated with Al Qaeda or the
Taliban. Security Council resolution 1526 (2004)
reiterated the importance of proposing such names to
the Committee, unless to do so would compromise
investigations or enforcement actions. I understand that
there can be many reasons for not submitting names to
the Committee, including concerns regarding due
process, the delisting of certain names and the potential
stigmatization of listed persons. I strongly believe,
however, that Member States and the Committee can
resolve such concerns together. The Committee will
ask the Monitoring Team to explore the reasons for
non-submission of names. It should, of course, be
noted that the names of Al Qaeda and Taliban members
are mostly unknown and such individuals are difficult
to identify unless they are caught preparing or
committing terrorist acts or while providing assistance
to those belonging to or associated with the Al Qaeda
network.

The Committee is aware that it has work to do
with regard to refining its List. The Committee will ask
the Monitoring Team to submit to it a list of practical
and achievable technical corrections and I will
encourage Member States to inform the Committee
should they have technical corrections. Soon the
Committee will also consider the status of deceased
individuals and how best to deal with such situations
regarding the Committee's List to ensure that their
assets do not fall into the hands of terrorists. In its
work, the Committee will continue to give due
consideration to the fact that sanctions implementation,
including in the context of delisting procedures, must
take place in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.

The need for further cooperation between the
Committee and Member States is emphasized in
resolution 1526 (2004), which provides States with an
opportunity, at the Committee's request, to send
representatives to meet with the Committee for more
in-depth discussion of relevant issues. I fear that this
rather cryptic language may have caused some
uncertainty regarding who should take the initiative:
the State, which has been provided with an opportunity,
or the Committee, which makes the request?
Unfortunately, the result has been that no such
meetings have been held. I should like to take this
opportunity to invite all interested States that may wish
to meet in such a manner with the Committee to do so.
I should also stress that the purpose of such meetings
will be to learn more about member States experiences
and concerns and to explore ways to improve the
sanctions regime. I should also note that several
member States participated in Committee meetings last
year, under the previous resolution, and that was a very
productive exercise which we will seek to repeat.

As I shall detail shortly, I plan to undertake
further visits to Member States as requested by the
Council in resolution 1526 (2004). I find that these
visits are an invaluable tool in improving cooperation
between the Committee and Member States. My
previous visits have helped the Committee focus on
issues of concern to States and have highlighted new
trends and methods used by Al Qaeda.

With the support of the Monitoring Team and in
close cooperation with the CTC, the Committee intends
to consolidate and promote the achievements of the
United Nations in the fight against terrorism. In that
regard, the Committee aims to work diligently to fulfil
the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council.
Therefore, it will continue to explore how it can
motivate States to fulfil their obligations to implement
the measures against Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

The Committee and its members understand that
international terrorism poses a long-term challenge to
the whole world and to each country individually. And
international terrorists are swiftly adapting their
strategies, tactics and methods, as we have witnessed
in the last few months. For that reason, the sanctions
tool must be not only a powerful and well-targeted one,
but it must also be implementable. The sanctions
regime should, therefore, be carefully monitored on a
regular basis and adjusted accordingly, as necessary.
The Committee, with the assistance of the Team, is
currently exploring how to improve the implementation
of the existing sanctions measures, or even, eventually,
adopting new ones.

One thing is absolutely certain in this endeavour
being undertaken by the international community and
individual States: there are no quick fixes, short-cuts or
easy remedies. Rather, the task requires systematic,
persistent and exacting work, accompanied by constant
analysis of what has been carried out and responding to
the following questions: "Are we moving in the right
direction? Do we have sufficient clarity on how to
proceed? Have we made mistakes? Have we learned
from our mistakes?" If we do not ask ourselves these
questions, I fear that the terrorists associated with Al
Qaeda and the Taliban will, and will take pertinent
steps.

That said, I would like to highlight some concrete
tasks before the Committee.

First, there is a need to further improve the
quality of the List. The List - although imperfect -
already plays a very important deterrent role, but its
completeness and accuracy are essential for the success
of the sanctions already established. As I said earlier,
the Committee relies on the assistance of Member
States to improve the List.

Secondly, there is a need to focus more closely,
through the activities of the Monitoring Team, on the
results of States' sanctions enforcement activities, with
a view to detecting problems faced by States in
implementing them. The case studies to be conducted
by the Monitoring Team should prove invaluable in
that respect. The Committee and its Monitoring Team
stress that States should not feel that their international
prestige or good reputation will be undermined by
acknowledging problems in their implementation
efforts or by having been exposed to terrorist activities
on their territory. The fact is that no country in the
world can consider itself immune to terrorism.

Thirdly, the Committee's work in the area of
delisting and exceptions pursuant to resolution 1452
(2002) needs to be boosted. It is likely that States
would be more forthcoming in submitting the names of
individuals and entities for addition to the List if they
were sure that there was a reliable mechanism to
correct possible mistakes or to provide for necessary
basic expenses for the persons included on the List.

Fourthly, travel by the Chairman and by members
of the Security Council, the Committee and the
Monitoring Team must continue to receive support.
While much useful work can be done in New York, in
order to be effective the fight against terrorism requires
constant evaluation of how sanctions measures are
being applied on the ground. Based on my own
experience, which includes visits to more than a dozen
countries, I am convinced that without continuous
monitoring on the ground, our efforts will be fruitless.
Visits to the countries help us learn. In the near future I
am planning to visit several important countries in
Asia, and I will be travelling to Central Asia and
Europe in November. The Monitoring Team will be
travelling to Africa, Europe and Asia in order to
promote their work and seek the cooperation of
Member States for the studies they will undertake.

Fifthly, it is necessary to listen more attentively
to you, the Member States, and to provide the
opportunity to share your views and concerns, so that
you can receive the needed assistance. In that
connection, the written assessment of the reports
submitted to the Committee by over 130 States
pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003) will be completed
in the next l20-day period.

Sixthly, there is a need to increase cooperation
and coordination: with the CTC and its Executive
Directorate, in line with the meetings already held and
planned for the very near future; with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004); and
with all international agencies or organizations that
have accumulated experience and specialized expertise
in the fight against terrorism. Some States have already
come to realize how important it is to coordinate their
efforts at the national level to combat terrorism. It is
doubly important to do so at the international level.
What is needed is a coordinated approach involving all
participants in the fight against terrorism, while fully
respecting their distinctive mandates.

It is clear that the Committee will have a busy
time ahead in its efforts to adapt the sanctions to better
target Al Qaeda and the Taliban. In this effort there is a
need to think of new ways to defeat terrorism and its
perpetrators. I know that I will have the full support of
the Committee in this task, and I urge all other Member
States to also assist us in this vital undertaking. As I
have already explained, this assistance can be given
both by submitting new names for inclusion in the List
and by meeting with the Committee to share
experiences and ideas on what issues we need to
consider and how sanctions can be developed and
improved.

I look forward to the dialogue I will have with
Member States in my upcoming travels and also to
hearing from the Monitoring Team on the experiences
during their visits. It is my firm belief that when I give
my next 120-day report to the Council I will be able to
draw on the lessons learned from my travels, from the
Monitoring Team's next report and from the meetings
that I hope will take place between the Committee and
interested Member States in the interim.

The continued fight against Al Qaeda and the
Taliban is of the utmost importance. I trust we never
hesitate, never pause, never remain satisfied with what
we have accomplished and that we never falter. The
Committee's work will continue to be guided by this
principle in order to contribute to a more peaceful,
secure and cooperative world community.

