The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity. I have the honour to speak also
on behalf of the European Union and those countries
which have aligned themselves with this statement.

As the last peacekeeping troops leave Sierra
Leone, the European Union commends the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) for its
central contribution to the peace and stability of Sierra
Leone. The efforts of the Special Representatives,
other United Nations officials and the troop-
contributing countries, together with the cooperation of
the people of Sierra Leone, have ensured the success of
the Mission.

UNAMSIL has demonstrated a sure touch in its
efforts to secure, develop and enhance security. We
welcome the drawdown of the Mission, as it
demonstrates to the people of Sierra Leone that the
conflict lies behind them.

The legacy of the past six years is a peace that
can and must continue to be built upon. The Mission
has shown innovative ways of cooperating with local
actors and with the international community. The use
of defined benchmarks for managing the drawdown has
proved successful. And the willingness to work with
other United Nations regional operations, such as the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and the
United Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire, as well as
the United Nations Office for West Africa, has been
highly beneficial.

The European Union is committed to working
with the Government of Sierra Leone to demonstrate to
the people that the benefits of peace are tangible and to
working with them to improve their lives. The
European Union is dedicated to ensuring that economic
and social development is enhanced and continues to
invest in infrastructure and institutional programmes in
order to achieve that. Improved access to rural areas
and the rehabilitation of the education and health
infrastructure in those areas are key ways to
demonstrate to all Sierra Leoneans that the country is
improving. Those aspects will therefore be the focus of
the European Union development assistance.

We look forward to the support of UNMIL in
providing security for the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. The regional aspect of the conflict was
important, and cooperation from the Mano River Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
will be key in building peaceful development.

The European Union notes the success of the
recent Consultative Group donors meeting in London,
was pleased to participate and hopes that it will enable
the successful implementation of the Government of
Sierra Leone's poverty reduction strategy plan.

The European Union expects that the United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone will continue
to support the work of the Government as it faces up to
its many challenges. Reform of institutions,
improvements in infrastructure and the challenge of
tackling corruption will need continued support. The
focus on human rights is to be commended, as, in
particular, the problems faced by young people and
women are also addressed.

The European Union looks forward to credible
elections in 2007 and to a tolerant and responsible
attitude to campaigning from all parties and their
supporters. The work of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Sierra Leone in support of the electoral
process will be important. We hope that the withdrawal
of UNAMSIL marks the end of the conflict phase in
Sierra Leone, and we look forward to cooperating in
the building of a prosperous and durable peace,
particularly on the day when the Peacebuilding
Commission has been agreed by the Security Council
and the General Assembly.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Sierra Leone.

