Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): Mali is pleased
that this important question of sanctions is being considered
at an official meeting of the Security Council today under
your presidency, Mr. Minister. My delegation is also
grateful to the delegation of Canada, in particular to
Ambassador Robert Fowler, for having taken the initiative
for such a meeting, which provides us with a useful
opportunity to have an open and constructive dialogue on
the general question of sanctions imposed by the Security
Council. Similarly, I wish to express my thanks for the
contributions made by Germany, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Switzerland and other
countries, following the General Assembly, to the drafting
of reports and studies dealing specifically with the various
aspects of sanctions imposed by the United Nations.

As we know, sanctions have increased over the past
decade. In point of fact, during that period the Security
Council has set up more sanctions regimes than throughout
its recent history. At present, nine sanctions regimes are in
force. Although sanctions are a means provided for in the
United Nations Charter, enabling the Security Council to
ensure its decisions are applied, they are far from
universally supported. Nor have they enabled the Security
Council to ensure respect for its resolutions.

The vast and considerable experience acquired over
the past 10 years could help the Security Council in its
future decisions. In this context, I wish to touch on several
issues which in the view of my delegation deserve priority
consideration in the Council.

First, my delegation wishes to highlight the
relevance of using sanctions as a means of establishing
peace and of maintaining international peace and security.
In point of fact, the imposition of sanctions should be
carried out in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter on collective security, after all attempts at a
peaceful settlement provided for in the Charter have been
exhausted. In other words, sanctions should never be
imposed in the pursuit of individual national interests. The
imposition of sanctions should meet a single objective,
namely, serving the international community on whose
behalf the Security Council has received a mandate to
respond when international peace and security are
threatened.
Secondly, we believe that the international
community must learn from a decade of sanctions
imposed by the United Nations. In fact, the experience of
the Security Council in this area has revealed a number of
shortcomings, as well as serious related consequences, in
particular in the humanitarian sphere. We feel that the
Council must further consider the negative effects of
short-, medium- and long-term sanctions.

As the Secretary-General pointed out in paragraph
25 of his report on the causes of conflicts and promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,
sanctions can cause suffering for unintended victims, in
particular the must vulnerable strata of society, namely
children, women and the elderly. Similarly,
comprehensive economic sanctions often have a
considerable negative impact on the development capacity
and activities of targeted countries.

Thirdly, we feel that greater use should be made of
targeted sanctions and that particular attention should be
given to their unintended effects. In this respect my
delegation welcomes the decision taken by the Council to
set up an informal working group and entrust it with
drafting general recommendations on provisions to be
taken to strengthen the effectiveness of Security Council
sanctions.

Fourthly, Mali believes that it is extremely important
to determine the duration of sanctions regimes. When
considering this question, we should bear in mind the
goal being pursued and the need to avoid needless
suffering for the civilian population. Sanctions often have
considerable negative effects on the development capacity
and development activities of targeted countries, as well
as on those of neighbouring countries and others. We
must pursue efforts to reduce as far as possible the

 

secondary effects of sanctions, in particular as they relate
to the humanitarian situation.

In this regard, humanitarian assistance should be
provided speedily and impartially. Measures should be
envisaged to reduce, as far as possible, the suffering of the
most vulnerable groups, while bearing in mind the urgent
situations that may emerge, such as massive refugee flows.

In order to deal with the harmful humanitarian and
economic consequences of sanctions, we should seek the
assistance of concerned international institutions and
regional and intergovernmental organizations with a view
to assessing vulnerabilities and humanitarian needs in
targeted countries at the time when sanctions are imposed
and, afterwards, at regular intervals.

Fifthly, my delegation believes that the sanctions
committees should, at every stage in the application of
sanctions regimes, monitor the humanitarian effects of
sanctions on vulnerable groups, including children, and
provide, where required, exemption mechanisms to facilitate
the provision of aid and humanitarian assistance. In this
regard, the task of humanitarian organizations and
competent United Nations bodies must be facilitated in
accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the recommendations made in the note of the President
of the Security Council (S/1999/92) of 29 January 1999.

In conclusion, I should like to say that, given the
experience that has been gained in this field, Mali
welcomes the ideas contained in the millennium report of
the Secretary-General (A/54/2000) relating to targeted
sanctions and aimed at minimizing the impact of sanctions
on the civilian population.

