Mr. Mladenov: I am honoured to present to the
Council today two reports of the Secretary-General.
The first report is pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution
2110 (2013) (8/2014/190) on the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the
most recent developments in Iraq. The second report
is pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 2107 (2013)
(8/2014/191).

During my last briefing (see S/PV.7068), I stressed
that Iraq's future cannot be considered in isolation from
the broader challenges that the region is facing. As
divisions continue to plague Iraqi politics, the ongoing
conflict in Syria has added a regional dimension to
sectarian tensions and is affording terrorist networks
the occasion to forge links across the border and expand

their support base. The situation is further compounded
by unresolved constitutional issues that constantly
bring to the fore the existing tensions between Iraq's
communities. All that makes for a fragile and explosive
combination.

Today more than ever, Iraq's political, civic and
religious leaders have the responsibility and duty to
promote national unity so as to engage all Iraqis as
stakeholders in the construction of a democratic future
for their country. Participants in that endeavour will not
only have to brave the threats of rising violence from
terrorist activities, they will also have to acknowledge
the need for compromises on pressing matters related to
the national budget and revenue sharing.

The need for unity is currently most visible in
Anbar governorate, from which the most serious threat
to the security of the country emanates. That threat
is beginning to affect other parts of the country. The
country's security is strained by well-armed and well-
trained terrorist groups with access to substantial
financial resources. Their goal is clear: to establish a
permanent foothold beyond the control of the authorities
and to consolidate a base for the expansion of their
operations. They exploit divisions and weaknesses in
Iraqi society and want to ultimately make the country
ungovernable.

Over the past few weeks, the capital of Anbar
governorate, the city of Ramadi, has returned to
Government control. Although isolated pockets of
fighting remain, the local authorities and the security
forces face the difficult task of clearing out buildings
and securing roads that have been booby-trapped with
sophisticated explosives by the terrorists. Those traps
have considerably slowed down the process of return for
those families who want to go back to their properties.

The situation in the city of Fallujah, which remains
under the control of the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant and other armed groups remains a source of
concern. The city is surrounded by Iraqi security
forces. Civilian casualties and sporadic shelling of
neighbourhoods and civilian have been reported.
Indeed, on at least one occasion, shelling hit the general
hospital. Many people have fled. However, large
numbers of residents remain trapped inside the city,
with nowhere to go and limited, if any, access to food
and basic services.

Since the beginning of the crisis, I have called on
the Government of Iraq to exercise restraint in taking
military or paramilitary action and to take all necessary
measures to ensure the protection of civilian life and
property. I welcome the assurances provided by the
Prime Minister of Iraq that Iraqi security forces will
not enter the city and that the Government is seeking
a political solution that would allow the legitimate
authorities to return to Fallujah. The United Nations is
also closely following all attempts to broker a peaceful
solution.

Since the beginning of the crisis, I have also
engaged in intensive meetings with leaders from across
the spectrum of Iraqi politics. In all meetings, I have
stressed that, while the United Nations will support
Iraq's fight against terrorism, the challenges facing the
people of Iraq cannot be resolved without dialogue and
concessions.

While a security response is necessary to tackle
the threat of armed groups and terrorists, a range
of strategies is needed to successfully address the
conditions that enable terrorist activity. The protection
and advancement of human rights, equality before the
law and the inclusion of those who feel marginalized
will become central in any political resolution in the
future. Those messages were boosted by the timely
visit of the Secretary-General in January, during which
he stressed the need for unity and a holistic approach to
the problem of violence in Iraq.

The Government of Iraq has furthermore attempted
to resolve the crisis on the basis of a 14-point plan to
restore stability and security in Anbar. The plan has
put in motion a process that aims to build confidence
among federal, provincial and local actors and
establish strategic cooperation on the ground. It offers
a time-bound cessation of hostilities and an amnesty
period for insurgents who are not affiliated with the
terrorist groups. Another key feature is the boosting
of provincial police resources through the recruitment
of approximately 10,000 local tribal members. The
Government has also decided to allocate new funding
in order to compensate families and communities who
have been most affected by the fighting and to support
development projects in Anbar.

Less than a month after the plan's adoption, 5,000
tribal members from Anbar and an additional 7,000
local Anbar residents have already been recruited,
while 1,940 displaced families have received funding.
However, the cessation of hostilities was short-lived,
underscoring the nature of the threat facing Iraq and
its neighbours.

The signs are not promising for an early resolution
of the crisis. The United Nations continues to closely
follow all attempts to find a peaceful solution. All our
interlocutors in Baghdad and Erbil expressed their
support for the United Nations as an impartial and
trusted partner.

In such a volatile situation, the United Nations
primary concern has been to provide lifesaving
assistance to those displaced by the fighting. Three
months of fighting has led to the displacement of over
66,000 families, which represents just over 400,000
people. Many remain trapped in areas of active conflict.
The intensity and nature of the fighting is significantly
constraining regular access by the United Nations and
other humanitarian actors to those affected.

Despite the difficult circumstances, the United
Nations is delivering assistance where it can and recently
accessed areas that were previously unreachable. I
would like to acknowledge the efforts of Government
of Iraq, provincial authorities, Iraqi security forces and
our local partners and national staff who have made
that possible. Unfortunately, with many stocks drawn
from our reserves in Iraq, our own and our partners'
resources are diminishing rapidly.

Let me be absolutely clear: without securing
additional funding, the United Nations will very soon
be unable to continue its humanitarian assistance
to those fleeing the fighting in Anbar. I am aware
that a number of Governments have indicated their
willingness to consider co-funding on the condition that
the Government of Iraq contribute to the $103] million
strategic response plan, which we put forward and
launched earlier in March. Given the compelling
humanitarian needs, the capacity of the United Nations
and its partners and the impartiality of the assistance
provided through the United Nations, I call on the
Government of Iraq and the international community
to urgently support the strategic response plan.

The Anbar crisis poses the most serious challenge
to the Government of Iraq's efforts to maintain the very
stability and security needed for building a democratic
State. Since the onset of the crisis in late December
2013, the Council of Representatives, for example,
has witnessed boycotts by three of its largest blocs.
That has resulted in the Council's inability to secure
a quorum for the majority of its meetings. It has also
brought the entire legislative process to a halt during
this critical time.
The approval of the federal budget law has
emerged as a significant challenge. It has been affected
by unresolved negotiations between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
on oil-export rights and the sharing of revenues derived
from oil products. The situation escalated when the
budget transfer to the Kurdistan Regional Government
was halted in February.

To resolve the budget dispute, both the federal and
regional Governments engaged with each other through
the exchange of official and technical visits, as further
delays in the budget law could very soon place serious
constraints on the federal Government's spending,
including in areas of delivering services. I have
extended my good offices to facilitate that dialogue in
order to reach a robust and transparent agreement on
the equitable distribution of budget allocations derived,
in part, from oil and gas exports.

I would like to welcome the vital and constructive
engagement by the United States in facilitating an
interim arrangement that would now allow for the
negotiations to continue, with the goal of adopting the
2014 budget with the agreement of all components of
Iraqi society.

Under that interim arrangement, I further welcome
the decision of the Kurdistan Regional Government to
begin exporting 100,000 barrels of oil per day through
Iraq's existing pipeline network to Turkey without
preconditions. To build on that first step, experts from
the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government should meet soon to assess future month-
to-month export targets based on technical capacities
and in a manner consistent with the Iraqi Constitution.

Both the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
Regional Government have taken steps that should
allow for progress to be made on all outstanding issues
related to the management of the hydrocarbon sector
and revenue sharing, as required by the Constitution. I
take this opportunity to once again urge all parties to
work in a spirit of compromise with the goal of quickly
resolving all issues related to the approval of the 2014
federal budget law. UNAMI stands ready to assist in
that process.

In just over a month, on 30 April, Iraqis are
scheduled to head to the polls to choose their national
representatives. It will be Iraq's third national election
under the 2005 Constitution, and it is likely to be its
most contested race to date. On the same day, voters in
the Kurdistan region will also choose their governorate
council representatives.
I am pleased to report that technical preparations
are on track, including the distribution of approximately
75 per cent of the new electronic voter registration
cards. In addition, security arrangements are being
put in place for the elections. Those preparations cover
areas of the Anbar governorate that are accessible to the
Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) and
its officials.

UNAMI continues to provide technical advice
to the Commission. In addition, we have embedded a
staff member within the Commission who will work
to ensure that voters reach voting centres as safely as
possible. UNAMI is also working with the IHEC to
ensure that the displaced residents of Anbar can take
part in the elections.

However, there are concerning reports of the
security situation in some parts of Diyala and Baghdad
governorates, where, according to some sources, armed
groups or militias may have targeted and intimidated
the local population. I call upon the Government of Iraq
to ensure that security returns to those provinces and
that such allegations are investigated. All communities
should be able to freely participate in the forthcoming
elections. Indeed, they should be encouraged to do
so. As such, we are confident that, from a technical
perspective, the two elections can take place on
time. The IHEC is also conducting a large-scale out-
of-country voting operation, which will include 19
countries and will allow Iraqis living abroad to register
and vote in the general elections.

Over the past few days, some controversy has
emerged over the decision ofthe Electoral Judicial Panel
to disqualify certain candidates from participating in
the election. Most recently, the IHEC commissioners
submitted their resignations, allegedly over political
pressure being exerted on their work. I reiterate my
full support for the independence and integrity of
the Independent High Electoral Commission. The
Commission's independence is guaranteed by the
Constitution, and I call on all political entities to protect
its integrity.

The Commission has demonstrated a high level
of professionalism. It has the technical capacity to
organize the forthcoming elections, and there is no
reason to delay them. I would like to commend its
efforts to establish the necessary procedures to ensure
the effective participation and representation of women
in the electoral process, and urge it to continue its
work. All concerns should be handled within the
Constitution and the legal process. The people of Iraq
must not be prevented from voting and choosing their
representatives on 30 April. Any delay for political or
other reasons will set a dangerous precedent for the
country.

A transparent and credible election is one of the
pillars of democracy. I want to take this opportunity
to encourage the people of Iraq to vote and to make an
informed choice on the basis of strong political platforms
that promote a harmonious and cohesive society that
represents all religious and ethnic affiliations. I appeal
to the political parties to focus their platforms on the
future, not the past. The people of Iraq deserve the
opportunity to make a free choice for the future to
which they aspire.

On this occasion, I would also like to call on
the political leaders of the Kurdistan region to work
together and to finalize the formation of the Kurdistan
Regional Government after the successful elections in
September 2013.

Iraq continues to implement the death penalty. In
2013, 177 Iraqis were executed, followed by another
50 this year. I wish to reiterate the Secretary-General's
call for Iraq to consider a moratorium on all executions,
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly
resolutions and international conventions. Such
international instruments have defined the standards
governing the use and implementation of the death
penalty. Those standards also require that no person
who was under the age of 18 at the time the crime was
committed should be executed. Iraq currently has two
men on death row who were under 18 when the crimes
for which they have been convicted were perpetrated.

I would now like to address the issue of the residents
of the temporary transit location at Camp Hurriya. To
date, 356 residents have been relocated outside Iraq,
with the largest number being accepted in Albania and
Germany.

I welcome the appointment of the Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on the relocation of the
residents, Ms. Jane Holl Lute, as a positive step for
engagement with the international community on
finding relocation countries. I commend the recent
steps taken by the United States, including a recent
decision to resettle a number of those residents in the
United States, as well as to provide $1 million in seed
funding to the United Nations multi-donor funded
project - the trust fund, as it is known - to support
their resettlement and integration in third countries. I
also call on the Government of Iraq to ensure that all
security and humanitarian arrangements are provided
for the Camp Hurriya residents in accordance with the
signed memorandum of understanding.

On a separate note, I would like to mention that the
Mission continues to face some operational challenges
due to the absence of a status-of-mission agreement
10 years after the Mission's establishment. I want to
reiterate our call to the Government of Iraq to swiftly
support the finalization, signing and entry into force of
the status-of-mission agreement without further delay.

The United Nations plays an important role in Iraq
in promoting political dialogue and human rights, as
well as in engaging in the development agenda. I would
like to thank the United Nations country team and our
partners in the Iraqi Government for finalizing a new
United Nations Development Assistance Framework for
Iraq for the period 2015 to 2019. While it will continue
to provide the basis for development assistance, it
should also support efforts to enhance social cohesion
in the country.

The people of Iraq are tired of war and
confrontation. They want to reconstruct their country
and use their wealth to the benefit of all. They need
to build thousands of schools to prepare their children
for the future, and to invest in a modern health-care
system. They need an independent judiciary and a
modern public administration. They need a vibrant
civil society and a dynamic private sector. They aspire
to uproot corruption and sectarianism. No one in Iraq
would disagree that those are the long-term challenges
that everyone in the country faces in seeking Iraq's
social, political and economic development. Everyone
welcomes the role of the United Nations in supporting
Iraq's critical transition.

The people ofIraq look to UNAMI to be an impartial
partner and expect the United Nations country team to
bring forward international experience and expertise to
assist their difficult transition to democracy. They also
look to the Security Council to continue to guide us in
an united manner.

I now wish to briefly turn to and present the second
report ofthe Secretary-General on the issues ofmissing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing
Kuwaiti property, including its national archives,
pursuant to resolution 2107 (2013).

I visited Kuwait for the first time in my capacity as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
17 and 18 March. I had the honour to meet His Highness
the Emir, the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister and the Emir's adviser,
as well as the National Committee for Missing Persons
and Prisoners of War Affairs. I was very gratified to
see the Kuwaiti leadership's strong wish for stability
in Iraq. The Emir and others made it clear that they
desired nothing less for Iraq than peace, stability and
prosperity.

It is therefore comforting that my political deputy,
Ambassador Gyorgy Busztin, carries out his duties as
the overseer of that mandate against the very conducive
backdrop of strong Iraq-Kuwait ties. During the
reporting period, UNAMI served as an observer to
Iraq's two interministerial bodies on missing Kuwaiti
nationals and property. We note the sincerity and
resolve of the Iraqis. However, it is with much regret
that, despite the sincerity, time and effort that Iraq
continues to invest in that humanitarian endeavour, I
can report no new results with regard to the issue of
missing persons.

Kuwait's National Committee for Missing Persons
and Prisoners of War Affairs is seriously concerned
that, with each passing day, the search for those missing
becomes harder. Those in possession of information
may become more removed and inaccessible. Despite
the lack of progress during the past decade, the
Committee members demonstrate an admirable sense
of purpose and resolve. I have the highest respect for
the Committee and for the families of the missing. The
Committee joins UNAMI in approaching the issue,
including missing Iraqis on its soil, as a humanitarian
task.

Loss and pain clearly transcend nationalities.
Any family with a missing member, be they Iraqi or
Kuwaiti, would relate to the grief and pain of the other.
As I wonder about what has sustained those families
who have no knowledge or information of their loved
ones, I realize that it is their unyielding hope that keeps
them going, even though no remains have been found
since 2004.

I believe that there are a number of ways in
which UNAMI can assist on that issue, including
through adopting a new local approach to searching
for information, maintaining the spotlight on that
very important and sensitive humanitarian issue and
assessing how it could best assist in the search for useful
information from a wider Circle of potential sources.

Needless to say, I am also pleased that 100,000
books, academic theses and other objects belonging to
Kuwait have been found and collected in recent months.
UNAMI has suggested for the two property committees
to convene in the near future and for Iraq to use the
occasion to return Kuwaiti belongings. I believe that
those meetings between the two property committees
should happen on a more regular basis in order not only
to build understanding and empathy between the two
sides but also to devise practical means of achieving a
breakthrough on the national archives.

On the question of the national archives, I would
also like to express my disappointment that not a single
lead has emerged so far. UNAMI is working very
closely with the Government of Iraq to assess existing
archival arrangements.

As Iraq completes its payment of compensation
to Kuwait, in 2015, I would very much welcome the
opportunity to be able to announce progress on the
issue of the missing Kuwaiti nationals and property. I
am convinced that is Iraq's wish as much as Kuwait's.
On behalf ofUNAMI, I would like to assure the Council
that we will do everything in our ability to make
that happen. I am more than ever convinced that the
outstanding humanitarian issue of the missing Kuwaiti
nationals, as well as of missing property, including the
national archives, must be brought to closure without
further delay so that the two countries can definitively
turn the page.

With the support of Member States, UNAMI will
continue to assist the people and the Government
of Iraq in implementing the Mission's mandate. I
thank the Government and people of Iraq for their
cooperation. I especially wish to thank our staff,
national and international, as well as the Secretariat,
for their dedication, without which our mission would
be impossible. I also wish to place on record my deep
gratitude to the Security Council for its continued
support.

