Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Since we discussed the
annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/2009/444) at length in the General Assembly last
Friday, 1 will confine my intervention to a few points.
But before doing so, I would like to thank Ambassador
Mufioz for his briefing and to underscore the fact that
the progress achieved in the Commission's work during
the past four years is very positive and promising. Our
thanks also go to the chairs of the country-specific
configurations. It is clearly seen from the report that
that relatively new instrument, with a growing track
record, plays an essential role in helping the countries
in need to attain a durable peace.

Yet the increased complexity of the post-conflict
reconstruction processes, the evolving priorities of
peacebuilding and the need to adapt to changing
conditions on the ground call for a continuous review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture on the
basis of the lessons learned.

With that in mind, we are pleased to see that the
Commission has already engaged in a process of
consultations on how to better improve its work,
increase its impact and mobilize sustained international
attention. We are also pleased that the new terms of
reference for the Peacebuilding Fund are in place.

We believe that these ongoing processes will be
further advanced with the envisaged review in 2010 of
the Commission's founding resolutions. In this regard,
I would like to emphasize five key issues for further
consideration within the review process.
First, bearing in mind the importance of national
ownership of the peacebuilding process, priority should
be given to the issue of building national capacities.
Our aim should be to transfer expertise rather than to
create dependence on it.

Secondly, we should think more about the
strategic planning of a coherent and effective transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, as well as about
the identification of critical early peacebuilding tasks,
particularly within the first two years. As pointed out
in the thematic debate held under our presidency of the
Council last June (see S/PV.6152), peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are integral parts of a whole, and success
can come only if we treat them as such. Turkey will
actively pursue all efforts in that direction.

Thirdly, the gender perspective should be an
essential element in the work of the Commission. The
important role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and the need for their
empowerment in peacebuilding efforts should be
stressed more within the work of the Commission.

Fourthly, the efficient functioning of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture rests on its ability
of to deliver as one. Therefore, the harmonization of
policies and procedures among the different arms of
the United Nations emerges as a vital component for
the success of our efforts. In this regard, the capacity
of the Peacebuilding Support Office should be
strengthened with a view to promoting a more
integrated and strategic United Nations response in
post-conflict countries.

Last but not least, we believe that the financing
mechanism in support of peacebuilding efforts should
be more predictable, sustainable, transparent,
accountable and flexible. That is why Turkey stands
fully behind its commitments to the Peacebuilding
Fund and makes its contributions to it without any
caveat. The Fund indeed has the potential to fill a
unique niche in the post-conflict arena, and we hope
that the revised terms of reference will allow the Fund
to improve its efficiency and responsiveness.

The momentum the Commission has gathered in
terms of advancing the peacebuilding agenda within
the United Nations and its success in promoting a
convergence of views among Member States
constitutes its most important added value. We believe
that the upcoming mandate review in 2010, based on
lessons learned, will be useful in charting the course of
the Commission's future work. Turkey is ready to
actively contribute to this process by sharing with the
members of the Commission and the Secretariat the
experiences it has gained through its rather extensive
involvement in and support to the recovery efforts of
various post-conflict countries.

Finally, I fully agree with Ambassador Takasu
and others who have argued for a closer working
relationship between the Security Council and the
PBC. Regular meetings between the Presidents of the
two bodies and increased mutual feedback on each
other's work will certainly be useful in creating
synergy in our efforts and effectiveness of our common
endeavours.

