Mr. Sahovie (Yugoslavia): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on Bulgaria's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. Seeing you preside
over this meeting, Mr. Foreign Minister, provides
telling evidence of the attention with which Bulgaria,
Yugoslavia's neighbour, addresses a question of
paramount importance to our region. I also wish to
thank Mr. Annabi for his comprehensive and
interesting briefing.

After many difficult years of effort to put an end
to the conflicts in the Balkans, stability still continues
to elude some areas of South-East Europe. No doubt,
Kosovo and Metohija will be central in determining
whether the process of stabilization will take root and
proceed towards accelerated integration into Europe or
be stalled in a quagmire of prolonged instability. The
events that have taken place in the past several weeks
are a clear demonstration of the volatility of the
situation in the province.

Indeed, it is with concern that we must note that
the security situation in the province remains grave. We
find it necessary to draw the Council's attention to the
recent joint report by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and
particularly to its statement that despite gradual
improvements in security, the occasional recurrence of
extremely violent attacks reinforces the pervasiveness
of fear among minorities.

We recognize and support the efforts of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to deal with the problem and to
proceed more energetically to establish the rule of law.
In that context, Yugoslavia believes that it is very
important to maintain an approach that would ensure
that justice is dispensed fairly and unselectively, and
not as a function of day-to-day politics. A decisive
approach to violence against minorities, including
beginning the prosecution of crimes perpetrated against
members of minority groups, is of equal significance
for building a just society in Kosovo and Metohija,
which is our common goal.

Border control is another significant aspect of
general security. During the month of August, KFOR
detained several individuals who had attempted to
illegally cross the borders with Macedonia and
Albania. Those incidents, as well as some others,
demonstrate that far more robust efforts are needed to
secure the borders. This is of particular importance if
we want to prevent the export of violence from Kosovo
and Metohija and the destabilization of other countries
in the region.

It is necessary to state yet again that improved
security also constitutes the essential precondition for
the return of internally displaced persons. Only a few
days ago, the ombudsman for Kosovo and Metohija
said that the recent attack on Serbs in Gorazdevac
would adversely affect returns. We fully share that
view. Various figures have been cited for the number of
people who have returned but, in addition to numbers,
the core issue - to paraphrase Special Representative
Michael Steiner - is whether return is in fact a
genuine option at all.

Among other things, genuine return means
returns to all parts of Kosovo and Metohija, including
urban areas. At present, Kosovska Mitrovica, divided
as it is and often perceived only as a problem,
nevertheless remains the only multi-ethnic urban
settlement. Responsible efforts to alleviate tensions in
that city need to be based on patience and caution.
Furthermore, the arrangements for the administration
of the city must open up prospects for coexistence
among all of the city's communities. Of course, we
believe that the option to return and stay has to be
realistic and viable not only in Kosovska Mitrovica but
also throughout the province. In that regard, progress in
addressing the question of missing persons is
indispensable. Three years after the arrival of the
international presences, thousands of people remain
unaccounted for. We therefore call on UNMIK to
address this issue in a forceful and effective way.

The protection and restoration of cultural heritage
is also of great importance, all the more so as the scale
of the destruction of historically and culturally unique
monuments in the province is enormous and
unacceptable. This also remains an obstacle to post-
conflict healing. My Government expects UNMIK to
address this issue in full accordance with the 1954
Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict. For its part,
Yugoslavia is ready to shoulder its share of
responsibility.

New elections in Kosovo and Metohija are
scheduled for the end of next month. My Government
has repeatedly stressed the importance of Serbs in
Kosovo and Metohija participating in those elections,
and has called on them to do so. However, there is no
doubt that their turnout will be affected by the pace and
effectiveness with which their problems are addressed
and resolved. They also need to start believing that
there are tangible benefits to be derived from
participating in local Government.

It is quite obvious that stability and European
standards of tolerance and normalcy are still very far
from reality in Kosovo and Metohija. To attain them
the province must address itself to fulfilling at least the
minimum requirements set by the benchmarks
established by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, a process that has yet to begin. That
is primarily the responsibility of the provisional
institutions of self-government. At the same time,
UNMIK must continue to exercise its reserved powers.

Much still remains to be done in every field
before discussions begin on the final status of the
province. We place great value on the fact that this
View prevails in the Security Council. Therefore, any
speculation about deadlines for the international
presence could harm the efforts to address the question
of Kosovo and Metohija in its entirety. The only way to
move forward is to focus on the implementation of the
mandates of the international presences as provided for
by Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), as well as
on strict compliance with the Constitutional
Framework and the UNMIK/Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia Common Document.

