Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like to
thank Mr. Valentin Inzko for presenting his twentieth
report (S/2018/974, annex) as High Representative,
a sobering milestone. We highly value his dedicated
personal efforts and persistence in carrying out his
mandate for the greater good of the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union later this morning.

I will focus on the following issues: first, the rule
of law; secondly, the Office ofthe High Representative;
and thirdly, the issue of stability.

First, with regard to the rule of law, in the previous
debate on this item in the Council in May (see S/PV.8248), we expressed concerns about the rule of
law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have seen some
responsible steps taken since then, such as the passing
of amendments to the criminal procedure code, but
serious concerns remain. Erosion of the rule of law is
a threat to any democracy. When in combination with
divisive and revisionist rhetoric, such as that which we
continue to see in Bosnia and Herzegovina, it becomes
a toxic mix. We therefore call on the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to strengthen the rule of law
in their country, and to do so convincingly and at all
levels. Let me reiterate that the divisive and revisionist
rhetoric of political leaders is conducive neither to
reconciliation and cooperation, nor to the political
need to make compromises. We underline the points on
accountability in that context that were just made by
our American colleague. We also call on the authorities
to amend the election law, and State institutions must
continue to function properly.

Secondly, I turn to the High Representative and
his Office. With the rule of law under pressure and
rhetoric thriving, upholding the civilian aspects of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace becomes
even more crucial, and the engagement of the Office of
the High Representative becomes even more pertinent.
The circumstances for closure of the Office are not
yet there As was pointed out by Mr. Inzko, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made limited progress in completing
the 5+2 agenda. The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains
steadfast in its support for the High Representative and
his Office. Twenty-three years after it establishment,
the work is far from done - unfortunately, I would like
to add.

Thirdly and finally, I will address stability. It is
a precondition for strengthening the rule of law and
a precondition for upholding the civilian aspects of
the Framework Agreement. The European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea is key in
supporting the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
in maintaining a safe and secure environment for its
citizens and maintaining stability in the region. We
therefore welcome the unanimous adoption today
of resolution 2443 (2018), renewing the mandate of
Operation Althea.

In conclusion, in his first report to the Security
Council, the first High Representative, Carl Bildt, wrote
that lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina "requires
a genuine commitment to the building of a future
in common" (S/1996/J90, para. 104). That observation
still holds truth today. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
continues to support Bosnia and Herzegovina's Euro-
Atlantic integration in order to ensure the future
prosperity and security of its people and the region.
That future depends on the political leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and their will to reconcile, cooperate
and conclude highly needed political compromises. In
short, it depends on their will to truly lead. The time to
do so is now.

