Mr. Jagne (Gambia): We are yet again faced with an
urgent situation, but have limited options at our disposal to
deal with a conflict that is seemingly intractable. We have
seen it before: each time the situation in Angola is
discussed, no sooner are our hopes raised than they are
dashed again for one reason or another. Everything
humanly possible has been done by the international
community to help bring peace to Angola, but those efforts
have been consistently frustrated, culminating in a state of
neither peace nor war. Considering the rapidly deteriorating
political and security situation, that new sounds like an
understatement. In the process, as always, the innocent
civilians bear the brunt of the attendant difficulties and
atrocities: human rights abuses, exposure to landmines,
mass killings, poverty, illness and disease, people internally
displaced or haunted by the spectre of being refugees -
the list could go on and on.

The draft resolution before us is a last-ditch attempt to
salvage the peace process before the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) expires.
We hope that the parties concerned will understand once
and for all that there is no alternative to the Lusaka
Protocol. In this context, my delegation also welcomes the
appointment of a new Special Representative to continue
the good work that Maitre Beye had been doing, and we
call on all Angolans to give their unflinching support to
him in carrying out his mandate.

In the same vein, we note with satisfaction that the
Secretary-General has sent a Special Envoy to the region.
We are anxious to share his assessment of the situation
upon his return. Until then, my delegation agrees with the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of MONUA for a month, until 15 September 1998.

What happens next will depend to a large extent on
the Angolans themselves. If only they would draw
inspiration from the words of all those who paid a well-
deserved tribute to the late Maitre Beye and his team for
the ultimate sacrifice that they made, and try their utmost
to accomplish the cherished dream of bringing peace and
national reconciliation to Angola. It could not have been
better expressed by the Secretary-General than when he
said in his report:

"The best way to honour Mr. Beye, in memory,
therefore, would be for the Government and, in
particular, UNITA to work resolutely towards the
genuine peace and national reconciliation, which the
people of Angola deserve so much." [S/1998/723,
para. 40]

