Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): We thank you
very much, Mr. President, for convening this timely
meeting on Kosovo. We welcome particularly the
presence of the Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, and the
presence of the Vice-Chancellor and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Germany, Joschka Fischer and of
Foreign Minister Goran Svilanovic of Serbia and
Montenegro.

The events taking place in Kosovo are
unexpectedly threatening years of hard work by
dedicated peace-builders and the huge financial, human
and political investment in peace by the international
community.
When, a few weeks ago, the Council considered
the Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
(S/2004/71) and we heard the statement by the head of
the Mission, it was quite far away from our minds that
events like those occurring now could take place.
Despite difficulties and the awareness of the long way
to go before a democratic and multi-ethnic society
could be established in Kosovo, we were comforted by
assurances that real progress had been achieved and
that the benchmarks established by the international
community towards that end could be met in the
foreseeable future. The disturbing events occurring
now in Kosovo deserve our strongest condemnation
and are a wake-up call to the international community.

At the last meeting of the Council devoted to the
situation in Kosovo (see S/PV.4910), the Assistant
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro
called our attention to a number of facts: the decrease
in ethnically-motivated crimes, but with the authors of
such crimes enjoying impunity; the discouraging
number of returns of displaced persons; and the lack of
political will to create conditions for the effective
participation of the Kosovo Serbs in the political
process. The Assistant Minister considered that
UNMIK's main task should be to create sustainable
conditions for a multi-ethnic Kosovo, where all
communities could live freely and accede on an equal
footing to the Institutions. I mention these facts since
pointing them out will help us remember that
something was brewing and that there was a warning to
the Council.

In the view of my delegation, this is not a time
for despair, despite the gravity of the situation. The
international community's commitment to Kosovo
must continue. In our view, the strategy applied so
far - the "standards before status" policy - is a just
one, which, with determination and preservation, will
bear results.

The events occurring now show that the
attainment of the final objective is further away than
planned, but we are still confident that the people of
Kosovo, with the assistance of the international
community, will be able to meet the objectives set out
in resolution 1244 (1999).

Before concluding, a word of condolence and
sympathy to the families of the victims, as well as a
word of encouragement for all those who strive for a
better future for the population and for a democratic
and multi-ethnic Kosovo.
I end by expressing my delegation's full support
for the Special Representative, UNMIK and KFOR in
their efforts to stabilize the situation in Kosovo.

