Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank Deputy Special Envoy Matar for her briefing. The first meeting of the large body of Syria's Constitutional Committee and the 45-member small body in October last year marked a good start for the Syrian political process. Yesterday Special Envoy Pedersen arrived in Damascus to engage in talks with Syrian Government officials on issues relating to the Constitutional Committee. China applauds the good offices of the Special Envoy and the constructive participation of the Syrian parties. We support the Special Envoy in stepping up communication with the Syrian Government with a view to listening to its legitimate requests. The United Nations should continue to advance the Syrian political process in accordance with the Syrian- led and Syrian-owned principle and resolution 2254 (2015). It is important to maintain the independence of the Constitutional Committee's work, so as to create the conditions to bridge differences and build consensus among the Syrian parties. The protracted Syrian conflict means that the parties inevitably have some differences when it comes to the work of the Constitutional Committee, which will require time to be resolved. It is up to the Syrian people themselves to find a way out. The process should not be subjected to any external interference or arbitrary timelines. We hope that the parties will maintain political dialogue through the Constitutional Committee to deepen mutual understanding and trust. Syria should not be divided or fragmented. Members of the Constitutional Committee should demonstrate political will, commit to the spiritof compromise, stay actively engaged in talks and jointly safeguard Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. Since Syria's political, security and humanitarian situations are intertwined, I wish to reiterate China's position on Syria's counter-terrorism and humanitarian issues. Idlib has turned into a breeding ground for terrorism. The issue of foreign terrorist fighters within Syria is significant and has resulted in serious spillover effects. All countries must combat all forms of terrorism, with uniform standards, in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions and international law. Otherwise, Syria, as well as the regions of Western Asia and North Africa, will enjoy no peace. The international community should both move forward the political process and help improve Syria's economic and humanitarian situations. It is essential to secure the conditions of survival for the Syrian people, lift unilateral sanctions and support post-conflict reconstruction. Civilians are directly and negatively impacted by such unilateral sanctions. Reconstruction is an important step to provide better social services for the people. The provision of humanitarian supplies by relevant parties should not come with any political preconditions. China stands ready to play a constructive role in the early restoration of peace, stability and development in Syria.
