The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
should like to extend best wishes for the year 2001 to
all Members of the United Nations. I should also like
to express the Council's deep gratitude to the outgoing
members of the Council for their important
contributions to its work. The representatives of
Argentina, Canada, Malaysia, Namibia and the
Netherlands, all in an excellent manner, contributed
their talents to the business of the Council during their
term of membership.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Strengthening cooperation with troop-contributing
countries

Letter dated 8 January 2001 from the
Permanent Representative of Singapore to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General (S/2001/21)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bulgaria,
Canada, Egypt, Fiji, India, Japan, Jordan, Malaysia,
Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Senegal, South Africa,
Sweden and Zambia in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Listre
(Argentina), Mr. Stuart (Australia), Mr. Sotirov
(Bulgaria), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Bebars
(Egypt), Mr. Naidu (Fiji), Mr. Sharma (India),
Mr. Akasaka (Japan), Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan),
Mr. Abdul Khalid (Malaysia), Mr. Sharma
(Nepal), Mr. Hughes (New Zealand), Mr. Apata
(Nigeria), Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan), Mr. Stan'czyk
(Poland), Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic ofKorea),
Mr. Ducaru (Romania), Mr. Ka (Senegal),
Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa), Mr. Schori (Sweden)
and Mr. Musamchime (Zambia) took the seats

reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
letter dated 8 January 2001 from Singapore, document
S/2001/21.

I am pleased to welcome participants to this open
debate on the subject "Strengthening cooperation with
troop-contributing countries" (TCCS). Before I throw
the floor open, permit me to make a few introductory
comments.

This topic is timely. We are witnessing another
significant upsurge in peacekeeping operations. The
success of peacekeeping operations depends on a
healthy triangular relationship between the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the TCCs. Recent events
have shown that all is not well in this triangle. The
weakest of these links are those with the TCCs. One
key goal of this debate must be to lead to a healthy
triangle with respect to all three links.

However, we must remind ourselves that this is
not a new problem. After the disasters in Somalia and
Bosnia, the Council did some soul-searching and
produced two documents, S/PRST/ 1994/62 and
S/PRST/ 1996/13. Unfortunately, despite these lessons
learned, we have witnessed similar problems in Sierra
Leone recently. Clearly, we need to find out what went
wrong and how it can be set right. The report of the
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, or the
Brahimi report, has already activated some action on
the part of the Security Council and the Secretariat to
strengthen consultations with the TCCs. However,
more can and needs to be done. We have to go beyond
closer consultations to strengthening cooperation
between these three partners of peacekeeping.

That said, we do not expect to arrive at all of the
answers today. Rather, we hope that today's discussions
will be a useful start on the road towards resolving the
problems related to this important issue. The Singapore
delegation has circulated background papers, which
can be found in document S/200l/21. This document
provides some background and also raises some
questions that could be addressed. With the aim of
stimulating good discussion, let me briefly mention
some of the questions that we might wish to address in
today 's open debate.

First, what are the key problems in the relations
between the TCCs and the Council and the Secretariat?
Has the practice of meetings with the TCCs prior to the
adoption of Council resolutions helped? How can we
further improve the content and form of private
meetings with TCCs to make them more interactive
and productive?

Secondly, apart from meetings with TCCs, what
other mechanisms and channels can be used to
strengthen the link between the Security Council and
TCCs in peacekeeping? Does the current corporate
culture encourage sufficient interaction with TCCs?

Thirdly, how can the three crucial partners - the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the TCCs-
cooperate better to address the peacekeeping problems
of this age: commitment gaps in the contribution of
troops to all United Nations peacekeeping operations,
the failures and shortcomings of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the problems concerning
the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers?

To ensure that the concerns of troop-contributing
countries are fully addressed in this debate, the Council
has agreed that we will begin this morning's
deliberations by first listening to the TCCs, after the
Deputy Secretary-General, Louise Frechette, has
spoken. The entire morning session has been set aside
for the TCCs to present their views. Subsequently, at
3 p.m. sharp, when we reconvene, the members of the
Security Council will share their views. We hope that
they will also respond to some of the concerns and
suggestions stated by the TCCs. Following them, we
will hear the comments of those TCCs that were not
able to speak in the morning session.

Finally, we do not at this stage have any
preconceived notions of the outcome of this open
debate. We invite the delegations to present their views
and ideas and to share their experiences. It is hoped
that as a result of this exercise, some concrete
recommendations will emerge which can be followed
up on. The goal must be to enhance the relationship
between the TCCs, the Security Council and the
Secretariat, and bring about a new spirit of cooperation
among the three partners. If these recommendations are
accepted, we could then consider whether the Council
should formulate a resolution or presidential statement
to adopt them.

I now give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-
General.

