Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I should like at the outset, on behalf of
the Arab Group - whose chairmanship I have the
honour to hold this month - to thank you for
responding so quickly to our request to hold this urgent
meeting of the Security Council, at which we are
considering once again the dangerous situation
prevailing in the occupied Palestinian territories,
particularly in the territories that are under the control
of the Palestinian National Authority and which have
been reoccupied by Israel.

This meeting is important because it is being held
following the mission undertaken in the region by the
Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Colin
Powell. As we all know, the international community
as a whole had pinned its hopes on that mission, given
the threats facing the security of the Middle East region
as well as international peace and security. We must
therefore think calmly about the potential
consequences and repercussions of those threats at all
levels.

Our hopes of seeing the provisions of resolution
1403 (2002) implemented have been dashed, because
the Prime Minister of Israel is using a suicide policy as
the basis for rejecting all United Nations resolutions, in
particular those of the Security Council. He has even
gone to the extreme by neglecting all international calls
to resort to reason, to have foresight, to avoid political
one-upmanship and to stop jeopardizing the interests of
the Palestinian and Israeli peoples as well as the safety
and security of the international community as a whole.

The results of the actions of the Israeli army,
acting under direct orders from Prime Minister Sharon,
have serious repercussions from the standpoint of
international law, political norms and even human
morality. To besiege an entire people; to resort to any
and all means in order to starve them and deprive them
of safety and medicine; to continue with the wholesale
killing and massacring of innocent people in the camps,
particularly in Jenin - under international law, these
actions are considered war crimes against humanity,
including crimes of liquidation and of genocide.

Despite the fact that the media, humanitarian
agencies and non-governmental organizations,
including Israeli ones, have been prevented from
entering the camps to see what has been done by the
Israeli authorities, it has been proved without a doubt
that crimes of war have been committed against the
Palestinian people. This was confirmed by Human
Rights Watch, which said that collective punishment
has been meted out to unarmed Palestinian civilians,
including physical liquidation, detention and arbitrary
arrests, which are considered by Human Rights Watch
and by other humanitarian organizations to be war
crimes and absolutely forbidden by international law.

The Israeli authorities have refused to allow any
measures to be taken that could confirm what I have
spoken of as well as the terrible crimes committed
inside the camps. Israel has even prevented an
international delegation headed by Mary Robinson, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, from going to
the occupied territories in accordance with a resolution
adopted by the Commission on Human Rights, which is
currently in session in Geneva. This is clearly an
attempt on the part of Israel to stall so it can eliminate
all traces of the crimes against humanity it has
committed both inside and outside Palestinian camps.

The shocking and regrettable developments that
we have witnessed since the adoption of resolution
1397 (2002) have given rise to doubts about the
credibility of the Council, which has since adopted two
more resolutions - 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) -
aimed at forcing Israel to abide by international
legitimacy and the collective will of the international
community, as expressed through the Council.

The Security Council has time and again adopted
resolutions whose goal is to prevent the situation from
spiralling out of control and to avert its serious
repercussions. We ask once again for the will of the
international community to be affirmed. We do not
want to shirk our responsibility or to take any action
that is not in conformity with the provisions of
international law or that contravenes any various
humanitarian or ethical norms. We must say "enough is
enough" to those who have made peaceful coexistence
impossible and who have made violations of
international law their trademark in political dealings.
We must all assume this responsibility, without
applying double standards or preferential treatment.
International law is a comprehensive, integrated
concept. Members of this international body must act
in conformity with international commitments and
must implement United Nations resolutions. Respect
for and implementation of Security Council resolutions
should not be the object of ridicule and disrespect. If
they are, the Council will lose its legitimacy and
credibility, which stem from the Charter. Because of
Israel's refusal to abide by the international will,
resolution of the Palestinian problem must be
internationalized. That could be achieved through
greater commitment on the part of the international
parties, particularly the United States of America, the
Russian Federation and the European Union.

What is needed now is, first, to compel Israel to
withdraw immediately and unconditionally from the
Palestinian cities and villages it has reoccupied.
Second, all restrictions that the occupation authorities
have imposed against humanitarian organizations, such
as the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, must be removed.
Third, all humanitarian organizations must be allowed
to enter the territory, particularly the Jenin camp, in
order to ensure that unarmed civilians receive
international assistance. Fourth, the siege imposed
against many sacred sites, including the Church of the
Nativity, must be lifted. A humanitarian crime could be
committed in that Church, an act that would remain a
blemish on the world's conscience.

Fifth, the thought of expelling Palestinians from
their land must be rejected, because, according to the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,
that would be a war crime. Sixth, the siege imposed
against the Palestinian leadership must be lifted and the
undermining of its symbols and sovereignty must stop
immediately. Seventh, ambulances and humanitarian
workers must be allowed to move freely throughout the
occupied territories.

Eighth, information blackouts, delays and
misinformation must stop. The mass media and
humanitarian organizations must be allowed to know
what has occurred, to know what crimes have been
committed in the field against Palestinian civilians.
Ninth, there must be a positive response to the request
of Mrs. Mary Robinson and her delegation to carry out
a fact-finding mission in the occupied territory -
which she was requested to lead by a resolution of the
Commission on Human Rights.

Finally, the Secretary-General should be
requested to send an international force to monitor
events and the activities of the Israeli occupation
authorities in the reoccupied areas.

These actions, which have been requested by
numerous international parties and by many civil
society and international organizations, are the only
way to correct mistakes before the situation
deteriorates even more than we could ever have
expected.

In our view, sending an international force is the
most appropriate means of protecting the Palestinian
people from Israeli oppression and the only useful way
to restore stability to the region. We welcome the
initiative announced by the Secretary-General today to
the Council to send such an international force.
Resuming the political process is the only way to seek
a settlement and to enable the Palestinian people to
attain their inalienable right to establish their own
State, alongside the State of Israel, in accordance with
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002),
and in keeping with the position adopted by the Arab
summit in Beirut, a position which is supported by the
entire international community.

(spoke in French)

I will give the interpreters an opportunity to
switch languages and will now speak in French.

For three weeks now - or rather, I should say, 14
months - we have been faced with an unprecedented
phenomenon in the history of the United Nations: an
Israeli State, which owes its life to this Organization -
because, let us not forget that it was a United
Nations resolution that established its birth in 1948 -
now expands, taking over its neighbours by
confiscating their land and now committing war
crimes. We think we must be dreaming, because we see
it not only defying international law, but also defying
its own protectors. An American intellectual recently
said to me: "I have always supported Israel, but I can
no longer support the Israel of Sharon."

That is why I believe that the resolution that we
submitted to the Council several days ago, which we
postponed out of respect for Secretary of State Colin
Powell and the "quartet", is a wake-up call to the
Western conscience, of which we have never despaired.
I am one of those who believe that today the Council is
being offered an opportunity to calm the demons of this
new Israel that many no longer recognize, to enlighten
those who support Israel about Arab opinions that are
inflamed by injustice, and to admit that - if one
wishes a law to be applicable to all - the law must not
be written using two weights and two measures. I want
to believe that the America that we discovered in our
youth, with universal values, cannot be subjected to the
whims of an extremist Likud's unbridled
ultranationalism.

I express our hope of seeing all of Europe, from
the Atlantic to the Caspian - the Europe of the
French, the Europe of the British, the Europe of the
Norwegians, the Europe of the Irish and the Europe of
the Bulgarians - join its efforts with those of Russia
and China, with those of the non-aligned States of the
Council, to say: We want a just world, a civilized
world; we reject the behaviour of an outlaw Israel.

May the members of the Council consider the
suffering of the Palestinian people, who say they are
ready to sacrifice 75 per cent of their historical land
area in order to be able to live alongside Israel. It is up
to Israel to prove that a cousin is part of the family and
therefore cannot be a perpetual kidnapper.

The Arab world put all its political cards on the
table at the Beirut summit: an end to belligerence,
along with recognition, normalization and cooperation.
Why has Mr. Sharon not yet seized the opportunity to
say precisely what he is ready to do to pull the entire
region out of crisis? I am afraid he may be incorrigible,
but let those who deal with him and apparently let him
get away with everything take the credit for saving a
situation that the Eisenhower-Foster Dulles team was
perfectly able to handle in very similar circumstances
with David Ben-Gurion. The Bush-Powell team ought
to be able to do as much.

It has often been said that there is no military
solution to this conflict, but a political solution that
requires a political state of mind. It is futile to conflate
terrorism - which is heinous and condemnable
because it strikes innocents - with a national
liberation movement, for it must not be forgotten that
the Palestinian territories have been occupied for 35
years. The Palestinian aspiration to freedom,
independence and a State must be satisfied along with
the Israeli right to security - I repeat, along with the
Israeli right to security. That is what President Arafat's
colleagues have said every day on CNN and every
American television channel.

Once the political will makes itself felt, we shall,
I repeat, have to return to the idea presented by
President Ben Ali two years ago at the Cairo
Summit- which has since been taken up by several
statesmen and continues to be supported by our valiant
and courageous Secretary-General - to send in a
multilateral interposition force. It may be assumed that,
once it has been dispatched, all violence will come to
an end. Neither of the two parties, whom we hold to be
responsible, would dare break the armistice. Such a
force, which Mr. Annan recommends because he
rightly believes the timing to be right, will observe and,
if necessary - God forbid - intervene. Recent history
has demonstrated the success of such enterprises.

For the moment, we must maintain our vigilance
with this draft resolution and tell Tel Aviv: "Withdraw
your troops from the towns, villages and holy sites. Do
not touch Arafat. Implement the Security Council's
resolutions. Stop your atrocities. Be straight with the
law." Then peace will come.

