Mr. De Alba (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by congratulating the Republic of Korea
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month and in particular for its initiative to hold
an open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The number of participants today - this
morning, this afternoon and, certainly, tonight - is a
very clear indication of the importance and interest that
the international community attaches to this topic and
above all to the need for the Security Council to take it
into account in its daily work.

I also welcome the participation of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. We
believe that her frequent participation in the Council's
work contributes in no small part to enabling the
Council to comply with its protection responsibilities,
in particular for civilians, and to prevent violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
Finally, we welcome the participation of the Director of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and his
contribution to this important debate.

Speaking on behalf of Mexico, I would like to
limit my comments, first, to recognizing the fact that
significant progress has been made in terms of the
normative framework for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The adoption of comprehensive
mandates and strategies in peacekeeping missions
and the use of selective sanctions against individuals
and entities responsible for violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law are examples of
such efforts. Moreover, it is important to recognize
the commitment of troop- and police-contributing
countries to enhancing training for their own troops,
along with the Secretary-General's initiatives to
coordinate deployment more appropriately and to
strengthen tools such as human rights guides, mission
strategies and operational guides, which have helped
improve the situation in several regions.

Nevertheless, our participation in today's debate
is also aimed at highlighting the fact that we must
continue to deal with the challenges identified by the
Secretary-General in his most recent report on the topic
(S/2012/376), and I would like to highlight the following
challenges.

We believe that we must strengthen compliance
with international humanitarian law by parties to a
conflict, whether State or non-State actors, in order
to protect the civilian population. It is also necessary
to guarantee that missions on the ground have the
necessary human, material and financial resources to
fulfil their mandates and that they address the issue of
exit strategies, as mission drawdowns frequently leave
civilians unprotected. Missions should also have strong
leadership and promote cooperation and coordination
with other actors on the ground, both those from within
the United Nations system and other international
actors.

Access to humanitarian assistance by the civilian
population should be timely and guaranteed by means
of humanitarian corridors, agreements on the cessation
of hostilities and exchanges of information. It is
important to continue to focus particular attention on
the impact of armed conflict on women and children,
recognizing them as the most vulnerable members of
society and thus those most affected by conflict. It
is vital to strengthen accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law in the context of armed
conflict. Mexico would therefore like to highlight the
relevance and usefulness of the International Criminal
Court being seized of such crimes when a State cannot
or is not prepared to do so.

Finally, I would like to stress the urgency of
concluding negotiations on an arms trade treaty at the
final conference, which is to be held within a few weeks'
time. As highlighted by a number of representatives
today, the adoption of an effective and robust arms
trade treaty that effectively prohibits the transfer of
arms when there is a risk of their being diverted to
the illicit market or being used or possibly being used
to commit violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law cannot, in our view, be postponed.

The Security Council, as I said at the beginning
of my statement, has an indispensable role to play in
promoting and implementing measures to optimize the
protection of civilians. A significant part of that work
has been done, and the presidential statement adopted
today (S/PRST/2013/2) is part of that effort. The
presidential statement underscores the importance of
condemning all violations of international law against
civilians, including sexual and gender-based violence,
which is used for political reasons and as a tactic ofwar.

I myself hope that, in the future, these efforts of
the Security Council will be better coordinated with
the rest of the membership, which could participate in
these debates and exchanges before the Council adopts
measures so that States not members ofthe Council feel
as if they are truly participating.

In conclusion, given the wide array of tools available
to the Organization to ensure international peace and
security, we would also support the Council's recognition
of the importance of strengthening coordination with
regional and subregional organizations and among
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
Mexico would like to see the Council continue to use
all of the resources and instruments available to it in
order to achieve that goal. We believe that this work is
the key to ensuring the legitimacy and credibility of the
missions themselves and the United Nations system as
a whole, and to achieving real and lasting peace, which
is the final objective of deploying such missions on the
ground.

