Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Thank you, Mr.
President, for convening today's debate on the role of the
Security Council in the prevention of armed conflicts. Since
tomorrow is the last day of your presidency, let me also, on
behalf of my Mission, thank you, personally, and the staff
of your Mission, for the commendable work you have done
during the term of your presidency of the Council.

The United Nations was established in 1945 with the
primary aim of preventing armed conflicts between States.
Over the past 54 years, unprecedented growth has taken
place in the social, political and commercial interaction
between States. These many and complex processes of
globalization have in effect amounted to a period of rapid
change, which, while holding out the prospect of many
benefits, has often placed profound strains on States and
their constituent parts. To paraphrase the Secretary-General,
we have been moving towards an era in which there is a
near-universal acceptance that States exist to serve their
citizens rather than the reverse.

The stresses generated by these processes have often
been so great that many countries have been unable to deal
with the ensuing contradictions. More often than not,
existing tensions within States have been exacerbated by the
processes of globalization, and violence within States and
societies has become epidemic.

My Government believes that the recent proliferation
of intra-State conflicts demonstrates that there is a
fundamental connection between the inequalities generated
at the level of States and those generated within States. We
also believe that unless there is a simultaneous commitment
to address these fundamental inequalities within the system
of international relations through reform and
democratization, it will be difficult to attain their universal
implementation at a national level.

It is no secret that the United Nations Security
Council, established over half a century ago, is also
struggling to come to grips with this new reality.

Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, the aim of
which is to promote and institute appropriate methods for
the peaceful settlement of disputes, has made some valuable
contributions to the prevention of armed conflicts. Its
principles should continue to constitute a fundamental
starting point in our resolve to effectively empower the
Security Council to promote the maintenance of
international peace and security.
However, if we examine the major crises the
Security Council has addressed this year, we must
conclude that the United Nations still focuses the bulk of
its efforts and resources on stopping, rather than on
preventing, managing and resolving conflicts. We need to
shift this focus on conflict intervention more towards
conflict prevention, management and resolution. In this
context, it is worth noting that the United Nations has
only twice in its history authorized the relatively
inexpensive preventive deployment of United Nations
peacekeepers to the field: in the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, and in the Central African
Republic.

Only once efforts under Chapter VI are exhausted is
the Council meant to turn to other methods, such as
enforcement. Past experience has shown, however, that by
the time Chapter VII actions are contemplated, let alone
implemented, the costs are normally stupendous: in terms
of civilian casualties and abuses of human rights; in terms
of displaced persons; and in terms of stress and damage
to the infrastructure, economies and ecosystems of entire
regions, if not their outright destruction. On top of this,
one must then add the costs to an already financially
enfeebled United Nations system of bringing peace to
full-blown conflicts.

The South African Government would like to
reiterate, as we have previously done before this body, the
urgent need for all of us to renew our commitment to the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts. In
this context, there are three things which we believe the
Security Council needs to do - and do consistently - to
demonstrate its resolve in the prevention, management
and resolution of armed conflicts. The Council should
commit itself to: promoting and supporting the efforts of
regional early warning mechanisms; responding to the
recommendations of such warning mechanisms with
appropriate early action; and facilitating the establishment
of an environment in which the root causes of a conflict
may be addressed.

We have heard many times before that early warning
mechanisms are critical for conflict prevention, perhaps so
many times that the message appears to have become lost
in the medium. We must acknowledge also that there is
an ongoing debate within the United Nations on early
warning mechanisms, where questions are often raised by
Member States concerning issues of legitimacy and

 

sovereignty. Questions are often rightly asked about the
legitimacy and authenticity of information and analyses on
conflict situations. Questions are sometimes understandably
raised about whether the very act of gathering information
on conflicts threatens the sovereignty of States. The
Secretariat, on which the Security Council must rely for the
bulk of its information needs, must more often than not
tread a veritable minefield of controversy when it responds
to requests for information.

None of these constraints, however, should be allowed
to call into question the premise that early warning
mechanisms should play a valuable role in preventing
armed conflict.

So what needs to be done?

The Secretariat and the wider United Nations system
need to continue holding themselves to the highest
standards when collecting, collating and disseminating
information on conflict situations. Given the need to
address the sensitivities surrounding the question of
information gathering for early warning purposes, the
United Nations should continue to focus its primary efforts
on building early warning and conflict-prevention
partnerships with regional and subregional organizations.

For our part, States Members of the United Nations
need to consider, collectively or individually, appropriate
ways and means of contributing to the early warning
capacity of the United Nations system, whether generically
or for specific conflict situations. For the benefit of the
conspiracy theorists out there, this need not translate into
the creation of a global intelligence-gathering system.

That is not to say that non-governmental organizations
and the media do not have a role to play in the provision of
early warning information; they clearly do. Collectively,
non-govemmental organizations and the media typically
command far greater information-gathering resources than
all of our Governments combined. Certainly they command
far greater resources than the United Nations.

The key to the provision of useful, credible
information for the purposes of early warning for conflict
prevention lies in the timely dispatch by the Secretary-
General and the Security Council of United Nations
fact-finding missions to conflict situations. Where regional
or subregional organizations are involved in such initiatives,
the Security Council should express its early and
unambiguous support for such initiatives. Conversely, this
places an obligation on Member States to accept such
missions, and to extend to them the fullest degree of
cooperation.

The Secretary-General stated last year in his report
to the Security Council on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa (S/ 1998/318) that no amount of early warning
will prevent conflicts unless it is backed up by early
action. This, as we all know, is more often than not
dependent on the capacity of the Security Council, and of
the wider United Nations membership, to demonstrate the
appropriate political will. In this context, early diplomatic
intervention is typically the most useful and cost-effective
means of intervention. Where possible, such international
mediation should take place in cooperation with
established regional and/or subregional governmental
organizations.

South Africa and its regional and subregional
partners are investing heavily in early warning and
conflict prevention. In return, and where appropriate,
especially where capacity constraints exist, efforts by
regional and subregional organizations to resolve conflicts
should be supported and backed up both politically and
materially by the United Nations at an early stage. Where
regional and subregional organizations have made explicit
recommendations to the Security Council on measures to
address a specific conflict, such recommendations should
receive early consideration and should be acted upon with
appropriate speed.

At the same time, and in the words of my President
to the General Assembly in September, we believe that:

"the requirement on the United Nations to make
such interventions to prevent the outbreak of
hostilities imposes an obligation on the United
Nations that it should be seen by Governments and
peoples as a truly even-handed interlocutor and
peacemaker". (A/54/PV.4, p. 9)

To this subject I will return later.

In order to consolidate the gains made by successful
diplomatic interventions, it is imperative to address the
root causes of conflict. Armed conflicts, whether
inter-State or intra-State, are not spontaneous expressions
of violence. Typically their genesis can be traced to a
combination of contemporary and historical factors
including colonialism, poverty, underdevelopment and a
lack of access to - or the denial of - socio-cultural,
political and economic resources.

 

Nevertheless, holistic approaches need to be adopted
to conflict prevention and resolution strategies which
incorporate humanitarian actions to address emergency and
other short-term needs; sustained political dialogue and
institution-building to promote reconciliation, human rights
and democracy; and appropriate and sustainable
programmes and processes aimed at promoting
infrastructural and economic reconstruction and
development, and the elimination of poverty.

Of course, it is not the role of the Security Council to
do all of these things. It is, however, the role of the
Security Council to ensure that an appropriate environment
exists for the parties to a dispute to address these issues,
with the cooperation of their regions and the wider
international community.

A number of factors have traditionally constrained the
United Nations, and the Security Council specifically, in the
pursuit of its conflict-prevention mandate, perhaps the chief
amongst which is the lack of representativity and
transparency of the Security Council.

The Council's considerable array of powers are
conferred upon it by the Members of the United Nations,
via Article 24 of the Charter. In conferring those powers,
the Members expect that the Security Council's approach to
dealing with conflicts should at all times be informed by
the universally applicable norms espoused by the United
Nations Charter.

However, as we approach the end of the millennium,
we must acknowledge that by the majority of Members of
the United Nations the Security Council is perceived as
unrepresentative. To others it is merely an anachronism.
By some even, it is perceived as a hegemonic instrument.
These perceptions, which have grown over the past 54
years along with the growth in the number and diversity of
the membership, have at times contributed to a grim
atmosphere within the United Nations, in which the very
principles and ideals of the Charter appear to have been
brought into question.

A matter that has frequently dominated discourse at
the United Nations is this: Whilst it may be our highest
goal to promote and maintain peace, democracy and human
rights, the questions "Whose vision of peace? "Whose
vision of human rights?" and "Whose vision of
democracy?" remain bitterly contested. The intersection of
this reality with the pursuit of the noble ideals of the United
Nations means that this disclosure has most recently found
a renewed voice in the debate over humanitarian
interventions.

At a time when this Organization should be
celebrating the attainment of peace underpinned by
universal norms of democracy and human rights, we are
instead divided; many seem to fear that such ideals mean
instead the imposition of a global mono-culture on the
less powerful. One of the chief reasons for this state of
affairs can be traced to the lack of representativity and
transparency of the Security Council.
In order to be truly empowered by the membership
to act consistently in defence of the ideals expressed
within the Charter, the Security Council must be
perceived to be legitimate in both form and function. This
means that the composition of the Security Council, its
powers, and its methods of functioning and decision-
making must be representative of, and accessible to, the
universal membership of the United Nations. Only when
the Council is perceived to be fully legitimate will it be
able to pursue its mandate of preventing armed conflict
effectively and consistently.

In conclusion, in an era in which the majority of
conflicts are intra-State conflicts, and in which many
inter-State conflicts have intra-State origins, it is vitally
important that interventions to prevent, manage and
resolve conflict take place within the context of globally
recognised criteria and norms, and with global support.
This support will clearly not be forthcoming unless all the
Members of the United Nations believe that they and their
regions are adequately represented on the Security
Council, for only by our simultaneously reforming and
democratizing our system of international relations will
our search for peace and security succeed.

