Let me start by commending Special Adviser Karim Khan and his team for the very important work they are doing. His description of the mass graves reminded us of the dimension of the horrendous crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We appreciate the compassion he demonstrates by working with survivors and their family members. The description he gave reminded us of what the communities in Iraq have suffered - crimes against humanity, genocide and war crimes. Germany stands behind his efforts and will continue to support him financially, politically and by providing personnel. With regard to war crimes, let me recall our first Security Council presidency, in April 2019, when we invited to the Security Council Nadia Murad, a Nobel Peace Prize winner and survivor of sexual violence committed by ISIL (see S/PV.8514). She was among 1,000 Yazidi women we invited to Germany for a chance to heal their wounds and survive. In the Council, we were faced with the reality of what they had to encounter in Iraq. The perpetrators who committed these horrendous crimes have to be held to account. We owe it to the victims, the survivors and traumatized communities, such as the Yazidi. Only if we are successful in this work will we give these communities a chance to heal and find peace. By being successful, we also prevent similar crimes from being committed in other places. It is very important that the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) work with local authorities, including the Kurdish Regional Government, and affected communities. With non-governmental organizations, UNITAD promotes a spirit of partnership. It is also very important to engage in training the Iraqi judiciary so that the necessary legislation be adopted. The objective will be fair and independent criminal proceedings, consistent with applicable international law. For Germany, this includes the prohibition of the death penalty. Let me end by thanking the Ambassador of Iraq. I thank him very much for the very close cooperation between UNITAD and his Government. This is very important. We look forward to the finalization of the case briefs and seeing perpetrators sentenced.
