Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I too would like to
extend our thanks to the Presidents of the Courts,
Judges Pocar and Byron, and to the Prosecutors,
Ms. Del Ponte and Mr. Jallow, not only for their
briefings today, but for the tireless commitment with
which they work for justice in their respective areas.
My delegation would wish, through them, to pass on
our thanks to their teams for all of their efforts on these
issues.

I would like to start first by talking about the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. I would like to start on that by paying a
tribute to the Prosecutor, Ms. Del Ponte, as she makes
her last appearance before the Security Council. I want
to express the United Kingdom's deep gratitude to her.
Her tireless efforts have kept the ICTY at the forefront
of the battle against impunity. The Tribunal has
achieved a very great deal during her tenure, which has
culminated in justice for many victims of terrible
crimes. I think the numbers speak for themselves. Only
four indictees remain. As I will say later, however, that
is obviously too many.

Ms. Del Ponte has made an immense contribution
to international justice. We have worked very closely
with her in the European Union, and we have all
benefited from the dedication and issues of principle
that she has brought to her role. We wish her success in
her new role, and we recognize again the contributions
of all members of her staff, and particularly the senior
managers, such as the Deputy Prosecutor, whose
commitment and leadership have played a significant
role in the Tribunal's achievements.

Finally, I would like to welcome the recent
appointment of the new Prosecutor, Mr. Serge
Brammertz. We wish him every success as he leads the
Office of the Prosecutor through what will clearly be
an important time and what may possibly be the final
phases of its activity.

The Prosecutor concentrated on Radovan
Karadzic and, especially, on Ratko Mladic. Resolutions
1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004) expressly cite those two
fugitives by name. The third name on the list in those
resolutions, Ante Gotovina, is in The Hague today, and
his country, Croatia, stands on the verge of European
Union membership and will be a member of this
Council next year. That is a substantial achievement.

In contrast, the Prosecutor's account of how little
progress has been made in Serbia, over Mladic' in
particular, is extremely disappointing, to say the least.
It is disappointing to the Prosecutor and to those of us
who uphold the Tribunals. It is disappointing in terms
of Serbia upholding her European commitments. And,
above all, it is a lasting insult to the more than 7,000
victims of Srebrenica, the worst massacre in Europe
since the end of the Second World War.

I would like to use this occasion today to
underline that full cooperation with the Tribunal
remains an ongoing obligation of all States, as
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004) and Chapter
VII of the Charter make clear. The capture and transfer
of Karadzic and Mladic' are essential and should remain
the highest priority for all. Full cooperation and the
arrest of the remaining fugitives wherever they are -
and they do not have to be in Serbia - are also
essential. I would like to recall briefly that Gotovina
was eventually located in Spain, with the help of the
Spanish police.

The arrest of the remaining fugitives remains
central to the reconciliation required for long-term
stability in the Balkans. There can be no question of
any of the fugitives being allowed to wait out
international justice. We call on Serbia to take the
necessary steps to ensure their transfer to the Tribunal
without any more delay.

On the completion strategy, I think that it is clear
that the United Kingdom remains a strong supporter of
the ICTY. We believe that the orderly completion of its
important work is vital for the region and for
international criminal justice. We recognize and
commend the considerable efforts of all of the
Tribunal's organs to increase efficiency and the pace of
trials and their achievements in that regard. We urge
the Tribunal to continue such efforts and to reduce
delays as much as possible. We look forward to hearing
of further progress.

We note with appreciation the initial work done
by the Tribunals on their legacy and the residual issues
that will remain after completion. We look forward
now to the Council's working group starting to address
these issues substantively, and we express hope that
early progress can be made towards a coherent
framework for dealing with these matters in relation to
both Tribunals and to the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. We want to be absolutely clear that we agree
with the Tribunals that there is no suggestion that the
ICTY should automatically close after its time scales
have expired. It is important that the international
community support the efforts of the ICTY and those
of the Rwanda Tribunal to try the most high-profile
indictees in their courts. That is the implication of the
two resolutions 1 have mentioned today.

I would now like to turn to the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). We do
congratulate this Tribunal on its continued progress
towards completing its caseload. We welcome Judge
Byron's confirmation that, in broad terms, the
completion strategy remains on track. We would like to
urge the Tribunal to redouble its efforts to ensure that
that is the case.
As other speakers have said, it is deeply
concerning that there are still 14 indictees at large and
that these include Felicien Kabuga. Those individuals
must not be allowed to evade justice. Again, we call on
all States to fulfil their obligation to cooperate with the
ICTR, and we stand ready to do whatever we can to
assist the Tribunal. We are particularly concerned that
reports continue that Kabuga may be in Kenya. We
look to Kenya to cooperate fully and promptly with the
Prosecutor and welcome the recent assurances it has
given in this respect. We hope that everybody involved
will do all they can to ensure that Kabuga is swiftly
brought to justice in Arusha.

We are also deeply concerned about the reports of
the number of indictees that remain at large in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and that some may be active in the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR). We
urge the Government of the Democratic Republic, with
full support from the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
take all necessary measures to arrest and transfer any
indictees on its territory.

In conclusion, I would just like to renew our
thanks to both Tribunals and their staffs and to say that
we look forward to working with them in the months to
come.

