Major General Menon: I will be brief in
answering the questions that were raised during the
meeting. As far as technology is concerned, I would
like to assure the members of the Security Council that
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) has conducted a detailed study of what
additional technology needs to be brought in. We are
building that capability but it takes some time. I can
say that we have already brought in certain night-vision
devices - which we did not have earlier in the mission.
We are bringing in surveillance trailers, cameras and
so forth. It is important that we understand national
sensitivities when we bring in technology. Whatever
technology we bring in, we share it with both Syria and
Israel, and it is important that we keep up that dialogue
with them. But I would like to emphasize that both
nations very strongly support us in the endeavour of
bringing in technology.

The question of sense-and-warn radar was raised.
No troop-contributing country has offered UNDOF
that capability, and Headquarters is therefore now
looking into the possibility of acquiring the equipment
on the open market. We are currently working on
that. The issue of who will operate it and how it will
be maintained - the logistic model - will have to
be addressed. I would also like to say that we are in
very close coordination with both Israel and Syria with
regard to that particular equipment. They have been
very forthcoming. I have discussed it personally with
my Syrian interlocutor. He has been very forthcoming
and open to it, but he has also told me that we need
to share that information with his side, once that
particular equipment has been identified. I am hopeful
and confident that we will very soon be able to get that
particular equipment to UNDOF.

As far as technology is concerned, we definitely
require a greater amount. The Mission really started
with nothing, since we were a very traditional
peacekeeping mission, but things have changed. I think
that the way forward now is to build up technology for
the Mission.

With regard to the protection measures concerning
which the United States representative inquired, I
would just like to say that UNDOF used to operate in
soft-skin vehicles. That has changed significantly. Now
every person who comes to the Syrian side travels in
an armoured, protected vehicle. We are now looking
at getting armoured personnel carriers (APCs) to the
Mission, so that we can stop using the earlier soft-skin
vehicles. Any movement is carried out in very close
coordination with both parties, Israel and Syria, so
as to ensure that, when troops are moving, we keep
them safe.

We are in the reconstruction phase. We have
engineer platoons with us. When we went into Camp
Fouar, the first issue on which we concentrated was to
build up its force protection measures, which we have
now strengthened significantly. I would also like to say
that, despite the fact that we left those positions some
time ago and some of them were vandalized, the force
protection measures, such as bunkers, among others,
are in a very good state. In fact, when we moved into
Camp Fouar most of the bunkers did not require any
reworking. They were in very good condition.

UNDOF's method of operation has also changed
significantly. We will no longer operate in small teams
or remain in isolated pockets, as we had done for the
previous 40 years.

I have already touched upon the sense-and-warn
radar, and I am confident that, once that equipment
arrives, it will strengthen the force protection measures
of the camp significantly.

As far as availability and capabilities are
concerned, we are, as I said, a light infantry force that
is now turning and metamorphosing into an armoured-
protected capable force. It is being built up slowly. I
would like to commend the Fijian contingent, which
came in with APCs. They did not have that capability,
but they went out and acquired it. Such was the case with
the Nepal contingent, which brought in five APCs and
will possibly bring in a mechanized company, because
they turned to the open market to acquire that particular
capability. But I sincerely feel that we need nations
with capability to come in and assist United Nations
missions in a crisis situation, rather than leaving the
job to nations that do not have the capability and which
have to go out and build it up. However, in the event
that a nation that has the capability cannot come in,
it then becomes imperative that we help others trying
to bring in that capability in their efforts to build up
their capabilities so that they can protect the missions
in carrying out their mandates.

Headquarters is doing its utmost to build up the
capability of UNDOF. The issue of capability versus
willingness is one that needs to be addressed. Ideally,
we would have willing and capable forces, and we have
to resolve that particular issue. United Nations missions
definitely need to be flexible. We need to be agile
and adaptive, and we have to keep up with changing
conditions in the world. My personal opinion is that we
continue to remain lacking in that regard.

Concerning the subject of the tripartite coordination
mechanism, which was raised by representative of Italy,
I wouldjust like to say that both parties, Israel and Syria,
very strongly support us. I enjoy extremely open lines
of communication with both parties whenever a crisis
situation arises. Nevertheless, although the tripartite
coordination mechanism of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon is good, I would say that both parties
have to agree on that particular issue.

Lastly, I would like to thank the Security Council for
assisting UNDOF in its return to the area of separation
limitation on the Bravo side, which took advantage
of a great existing opportunity. With the support of
the Security Council, we managed to move back into
certain vacated locations earlier than expected. Once
again, both parties, Israel and Syria, have strongly
supported UNDOF's return to the Golan.

I will leave the Security Council with the following
reflection. Who monitors the Golan? In my opinion, it
should be UNDOF or the United Nations. Although some
people call it a challenge, I will designate it as more of
an opportunity, because both Israel and Syria strongly
support us in our return to the Golan. Furthermore, I
would like to take this opportunity to say that it was
through the unanimous support of the Security Council
that we were able to return to Camp Fouar during phase
1. I believe that we should subsequently move forward.

In the meantime, I would like to assure all members
of the Security Council that UNDOF is up to the
challenge and will do its best to maintain peace and
stability in that area.

