Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I too
would like to thank Special Representative Doss for his
comments and Belgian Foreign Minister De Gucht for
his contribution today. I would also like to welcome
the distinguished representatives of the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Rwanda.

The United States is deeply concerned about the
recent fighting in Eastern Congo, which has caused
considerable human suffering and which has seriously
threatened to further destabilize the region.

I would like to make only a couple of comments
in the Chamber today and to reserve the rest of my
comments and questions for consultations. I think it is
important to make two points.

First, we welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1843 (2008) with its authorization for
additional forces to deploy to the United Nations
Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo
(MONUC). We appreciate the work that MONUC is
doing under the most difficult of circumstances to
restore stability to the East and to protect the estimated
quarter of a million civilians who have been displaced
since intensive fighting began in late August. We urge
Member States and the United Nations to take concrete
measures to ensure the rapid deployment of these
additional forces to MONUC.

I would like to note that through the Africa
Contingency Operations Training and Assistance
programme (ACOTA), the United States is supporting
all African units deployed in MONUC with equipment
and training, and the United States is prepared to
support other African elements deploying to enhance
the current force structure. It is imperative that all
Member States support the efforts of MONUC and
Special Representative Doss to restore stability in the
East.

Secondly, we would like to reiterate what the
Secretary-General has observed: there is no military
solution to the conflict in the East. In this context, we
welcome the recent talks between the Governments of
the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda. We
also strongly welcome the appointment of President
Obasanjo as the Secretary-General's Special Envoy. We
support him fully and we urge that all parties cooperate
fully with him within the framework of previous
existing agreements.

