President Kabila (spoke in French): May I
begin, Mr. President, by stating my warm
congratulations to you and my wishes for a fruitful
mandate for the Republic of South Africa's presidency
of the Security Council during the month of April. May
I also say how much my country appreciates your
initiative in organizing this special Council meeting
devoted to relations between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union
(AU), on the subject of peacekeeping and international
security.
I take this opportunity to pay tribute to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and all his team, those at
Headquarters and those on mission throughout the
world, for their laudable and tireless efforts to promote
and defend the objectives and principles of the United
Nations Charter.

My country is currently in a phase of
peacebuilding, renewal and reconstruction. I myself am
Chairman-in-Office of the Economic Community of
Central African States, and I warmly welcome the
invitation to take part in this meeting. My being here
today is meaningful in two ways. It is a sign of the
value that my country attributes to international peace
and security. It also expresses our recognition of the
valuable support the United Nations has ceaselessly
given to my country and other countries in our
subregion in the resolution of recurring conflicts that
jeopardize our stability and undermine our possibilities
of achieving development.

My most ardent desire is that with regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
solutions we come to at the end of this day of
discussion make a substantial contribution to rendering
more extensive, sound and efficient the cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular the African Union. Indeed, I believe that if
these solutions, despite their imperfections, manage
separately to contain the damage caused by human
folly, together and working in concert they would
obtain even better results towards a safer, more human
world.

The Security Council should therefore do more
than just encourage; it should support regional efforts
to maintain peace and security. It should integrate them
into its global vision and should consider them in light
of what they really are: regional components of its
universal mission.

Peace is so precious that the quest for it, however
frustrating it may be at times, cannot afford to put up
with discouragement or, even less, neglect. It cannot be
left to chance; it must rather be built, managed and
maintained. To achieve that, the factors that often
jeopardize peace must be identified, and we must learn
from the experience of societies and peoples who have
succeeded in taming it and who over the years have
been able to enjoy the rewards that peace brings.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
have experienced years of war with our share of

misery, misfortune and grief. Today, that regrettable
interruption is fortunately finished. Certainly,
pacification of the country is by no means complete.
And even though our institutions have once again
become legitimate, thanks to the fruition of political
will following the constitutional referendum and
general elections, they still need to be strengthened.

We have boundless determination to consolidate
democracy; enhance the rule of law; complete the
process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; finalize the establishment of a
professional, national and republican army and police
force; operationalize an accountable judicial system
that guarantees social peace; and create within the
Great Lakes region, and more widely in Central Africa,
a political environment stripped of all factors hindering
peaceful coexistence among countries and peoples. It is
in this context that the recent progress made, both
internally and externally, including the signing of
several agreements marking out the path towards peace
in the east of our country, must be placed.

The persistence of conflict in the world in general
and in Africa in particular has given rise to serious and
complex problems. Among them are the large flows of
refugees and internally displaced persons, the spread of
infectious disease, the proliferation of increasingly
harmful weapons and drugs, and the destruction of the
environment and of biodiversity.

Fortunately, these issues, which form the daily lot
of African societies, are at the heart of United Nations
concerns. They therefore deserve joint attention and
support of the United Nations and the African Union
by virtue of the principles of the United Nations
Charter and of the Constitutive Act of the African
Union and of the powers of the two organizations,
which in this case are complementary.

The United Nations is, in fact, the only
organization that can lay down rules and standards that
are imposed on all humankind and that can oblige the
whole world to respect them, including by weapons.
That is essential, given that the indirect and direct
actors and protagonists in conflicts are sometimes not
on the continents where the events are taking place. On
the other hand, regional and subregional organizations
are knowledgeable with regard to the sociological
situation on the ground and are therefore the only ones
that can even propose the most operational solutions to
specific conflicts.
Recognizing this complementarity, we need to
include among the special areas for cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU the struggle
against the illegal exploitation of natural resources in
Africa; strengthening cooperation in conflict
prevention and resolution, including the management
of crises and peacebuilding and peacekeeping in post-
conflict periods on the continent; supporting the
14 December 2006 decision by the AU Peace and
Security Council regarding the Coordination and
Consultation Mechanism between the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council; and implementing the agreement on
the organization of joint meetings between the AU
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council at
least once a year. Moreover, by virtue of the
cooperation thus strengthened, the Secretary-General
should be invited to appeal to the relevant United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes to intensify
their efforts to support cooperation with the African
Union.

More broadly speaking, the United Nations
system, whose primary responsibility is to promote and
maintain international peace and security, should
increase its assistance to the AU with a view to
reinforcing the institutional and operational capacity of
its Peace and Security Council, inter alia, in early
warning, through the regular, continuous and
coordinated exchange of information, training of
military and civilian personnel, and jointly carrying out
certain mediation missions.

United Nations support should therefore extend to
AU peacekeeping missions in its various member
States, particularly in the sphere of communication and
logistics; to strengthening peacebuilding capacities
before and after the cessation of hostilities; and to
supporting humanitarian actions undertaken by the
Peace and Security Council, in conformity with the
Charter and the protocol establishing the Peace and
Security Council. The United Nations should support
the establishment of the standby force and the African
Military Commission, as well as greater
professionalization and better operating of the brigades
existing within subregional organizations such as the
Economic Community for Central African States and
the Southern African Development Community; and
strengthening the institutional capacities of the
regional centre for training and peacekeeping for AU
member States.

To ensure the implementation and follow-up on
the prevention and resolution of conflicts, it is
important to strengthen the good offices missions and
mediation capacities of the Secretary-General.
Moreover, the Peacebuilding Support Office should be
strengthened, the Peacebuilding Fund should expand
its activities and, if necessary, a special fund for
peacekeeping should be established. Such a fund would
have the mission and the merit of ensuring that
regional organizations have lasting and predictable
funding for the peacekeeping operations that they
undertake.

On another front, the widely recognized inability
of preventive diplomacy to put an end to the new forms
of armed violence in Africa cannot be ignored. If we
are to preserve peace and prevent or manage conflicts,
there is certainly a need for dialogue, diplomacy and
negotiation. But also, and in particular, there is a need
for order, respect for national and international law,
strong and effective institutions and, above all, justice.
And, regardless of how noble and useful those
institutions may be, it must be not only transitional
justice, but also, and in particular, justice that promotes
and unapologetically enforces the law.

Indeed, prosecuting those responsible for serious
crimes, without neglecting the aspect of compensation
for the victims of such crimes, is essential if we wish
to create the conditions for true reconciliation, to
prevent recidivism and to re-establish respect for the
sanctity of life and the inviolability of human dignity.

The world is becoming more globalized every
day, together with the challenges facing us. Yet,
regional specificities remain as important as ever, and
the effectiveness of solutions depends on them. The
right balance between the global and the regional is
therefore the answer. With regard to Africa, it is up to
us who are meeting here today to find that happy
medium.

