Mr. Sharma (India): It is a matter of very great
concern to us that the attacks of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) on the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia continue, with the Security Council reduced
to helplessness. As we said in the Council when it met on
24 March, we expected it to exert its authority to bring
about an early return of the peace that was broken by the

 

bombing. The draft resolution prepared by the Russian
Federation has aims to which we completely subscribe. It
calls for an immediate end to this senseless violence and it
seeks to re-establish the authority of the Security Council,
which has been one of the early victims of NATO's
bombing campaign. We therefore joined as a co-sponsor.

We deeply regret that the Council has not adopted this
draft. The effect will be to prevent a return of the peace
that the international community so dearly wants and which
permanent members, three of whom cast vetoes in pursuit
of national interests, have a special responsibility to uphold.

It is clear that NATO will not listen to the Security
Council. It would appear that it believes itself to be above
the law. We find this deeply uncomfortable. In New Delhi
earlier today, the External Affairs Minister said that India
cannot accept any country's taking on the garb of a world
policeman. NATO argues that the Serb police in Kosovo
act violently and without any respect for law.
Unfortunately, NATO seems to have taken on the persona
and the methods of operation of those whose activities it
wants to curb.

It is natural to be revolted by violence and to want to
put an end to human suffering. However, between nations
as within them, populations can be protected, the law
upheld and those who break it punished only through legal
means. The cure otherwise is as bad as the disease. It is
also very rarely effective and often makes things worse.
Those who take the law into their hands have never
improved civic peace within nations; neither will they help
in international relations.

Those who continue to attack the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia profess to do so on behalf of the
international community and on pressing humanitarian
grounds. They say that they are acting in the name of
humanity. Very few members of the international
community have spoken in this debate, but even among
those who have, NATO would have noted that China,
Russia and India have all opposed the violence which it
has unleashed. The international community can hardly be
said to have endorsed their actions when already
representatives of half of humanity have said that they do
not agree with what they have done.

