Ms. Nason (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's debate.

Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union.

The challenges to our peace and security have
never been greater or more complex. Our responses
need to match those challenges. The people we serve
expect us to take the lead in dealing with the violent
conflicts, humanitarian crises, migration flows and
climate-related emergencies they face on a day-to-day
basis. We simply must be up to the task. Sustaining
peace is a core responsibility. It is part of what we are.

I represent a country for which peacekeeping is a
part of our DNA. Having participated continuously in
peace-support operations since 1958, Ireland addresses
the members of the Security Council as a dedicated
and committed contributor of troops to important
United Nations missions. Today, we have deployments
to six United Nations missions across the Middle East,
Africa and Europe, with substantial contributions to
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force. Our
experience has taught us that mandates and missions do
not lend themselves to a one-size-fits-all approach. The
challenges are complex and evolving; our responses
must also be.

We believe that the landmark adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development offers us a unique
opportunity. We need to seize it in order to realize
the ambition of the United Nations to improve core
mandates and responses.

The long-term vision for sustaining peace rests on
developing a capacity to build inclusive and resilient
States. We need effective institutions capable of
engaging with their people. We have a responsibility
to deliver long-term leadership, ownership and
accountability. We need to keep faith with the task.
We commend Secretary-General Guterres for putting
conflict prevention at the core of his mandate. We
simply cannot succeed unless we address the root
causes.

Ireland shares the view that believing in the United
Nationsmeansinvestinginit,notablyinitspeacekeeping,
mediation, peacebuilding and humanitarian functions.
The European Union's Global Strategy on Foreign
and Security Policy and its Common Security and
Defence Policy can and will enhance United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, particularly
through capacity-building missions in fragile settings.
Ireland will be an active contributor.

We know there is no easy fix. Every conflict has
unique characteristics. As a peacekeeping contributor,
Ireland believes that mandates should be designed to
reflect the multiplicity of factors that drive conflict
and fragility. Our operations must be responsive to the
changing situations on the ground. It is crucial that our
peacekeepers in the field engage meaningfully and in
an inclusive manner with local communities. Mandates
should also factor in the political, humanitarian and
developmental contexts.

We are learning that humanitarian and development
assistance programming, in their turn, must be tailored
to situations of conflict, especially where crises are
protracted. We must all work to support common
outcomes from our interventions.

We know that people are less likely to turn
to violence when their rights are being respected.
Taking a human rights perspective across the nexus of
development, humanitarian and peacebuilding efforts
will therefore increase our chances of success and be
instrumental in addressing drivers of conflict.

Mandates must recognize and respond to the links
among conflict, peace and gender equality. We also
know that cannot succeed unless we address the specific
needs of women and children. Time and again, we have
seen that the full participation and representation of
women in decision-making serves to improve prospects
for success in our peacebuilding and peacekeeping.

Sustainable development in conflict-affected
countries and regions means that we must also accept
risk. We must prepare for long-term time frames and be
committed to sustained engagement. The drawdown of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the transition
of the United Nations presence in that country represent
a test case for the United Nations system in applying
the sustaining peace approach. Ireland has long
supported the people of Liberia, and we are committed
to working with Government, United Nations and civil
partners there.

In conclusion, even as a newcomer here today,
I know that debates in the Chamber increasingly
recognize that our complex world demands a United
Nations that equips itself to face that complexity. In the
past, the walls dividing the three pillars of the United
Nations cast shadows on our efforts to build sustainable
peace. Let us resolve today that we have an overarching
responsibility to the people whom we represent to be
more effective and coherent - or, in other words, to
overcome those barriers to sustain peace. We have no
greater challenge.

