Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Rwanda for organizing this important public
debate under its presidency. This initiative clearly
illustrates its commitment as a major troop contributor
to United Nations and African Union missions, as well
as its commitment to increased cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in
the maintenance of peace. My thanks also go to the
Secretary-General, the Permanent Observer of the
African Union and the Deputy Secretary General of
the European External Action Service for their very
informative briefings.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is essential to maintaining
international peace and security. As the examples
of Mali and the Central African Republic illustrate,
regional organizations acting under a United Nations
mandate have greater legitimacy and are able to access
support from the United Nations if necessary. In return,
the United Nations can benefit from the expertise and
operational capacity of regional organizations.

It is on the African continent that cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is the most visible and most necessary. In the Sudan,
including Darfur and South Sudan, the United
Nations and the African Union are working hand in
hand. In that regard, it is important that the Security
Council continues to strongly support the work of
mediation undertaken by the African Union High-level
Implementation Task Force. We hope that this support
will be in evidence during the upcoming dialogue with
President Mbeki.

In another example of partnership in South Sudan,
an agreement was reached to incorporate within the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan the force
proposed by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to support the monitoring and verification
mechanism under the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities.

To avoid the worst in Central African Republic,
the African Union and the Community of Central
African States have combined their efforts to establish
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA), with the support
of the Security Council. MISCA has saved many lives
and is preparing the ground for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). For its part,
Luxembourg has made a financial contribution to the
African Union to strengthen MISCA for the transition
to MINUSCA. We also participate in the European
Force in that country, whose efforts to consolidate
security in Bangui should facilitate that transition.

As a member, Luxembourg welcomes the strong
partnership between the United Nations and the
European Union, a partnership that benefits primarily
Africa. European Union-United Nations cooperation
covers the immediate crisis response, humanitarian
efforts, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development.
As Mr. Popowski has indicated, synergies between the
United Nations and the European Union on the ground
where they work side by side are significant. That is the
case in the Central African Republic, but also in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and Mali,
especially in the area of security sector reform.

Europe supports the development of African
capacities to manage crises through training and the
provision of equipment. By 2016, more than 17,000
African military personnel will have been trained with
European support, some ofthose in Mali and Somalia by
Luxembourg instructors. The support of the European
Union and its member States can also be seen in their
substantial contributions to the operating budgets of the
United Nations and the African missions, especially
through its African Peace Facility.

The presence of several operations in the same
theatre of operations strengthens the need for
coordination at political, operational and financial
levels. Such coordination involves constant exchanges
of information and experiences at all levels of the
chain of command in order to make interventions
more effective and efficient. In that spirit, we favour
deepening the triangular cooperation among the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union.

I wish to conclude by underscoring the fact that
the contribution of regional organizations is equally
important for protecting children in armed conflict,
be it through cooperating with the Office of Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui and UNICEF or through
crafting guidelines on children in armed conflict,
taking into account protection of children in planning
operations, training personnel or deploying child-
protection specialists on the ground. Resolution 2167
(2014), prepared by Rwanda and which we sponsored,
highlights that issue, and rightly so.
In the area of the protection of children in armed
conflicts, as in many other areas, the United Nations
and other regional organizations can make a difference
by working together and in a complementary manner.
As a founding Member of the United Nations, of
the European Union and of a number of regional
organizations on the European continent, Luxembourg
will spare no effort to contribute.

