Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I am grateful to you,
Mr. President, and to the Portuguese delegation for
convening this timely meeting of the Security Council
on Timer-Leste. I would also like to thank Mr. Da

Costa, the Timorese Minister for Foreign Affairs, for
his pertinent contributions to today's discussion. I also
thank Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, for her lucid
introduction of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/641). We appreciate her efforts and dedicated
service as Head of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

I will limit my remarks to three important issues,
namely, the political and security situation in Timor-
Leste, its economic and development agenda, and its
judicial and correctional systems.

Nigeria welcomes the climate of calm and
stability that continues to characterize the political and
security landscape of Timor-Leste. The prevailing
conditions manifest the commitment of the Timorese
leadership and stakeholders to sustainable peace.
Indeed, the Government's initiatives on the road to
peace and national unity have helped not only to foster
dialogue and reconciliation, but also to facilitate the
focused implementation of the national development
plan.

The presidential and parliamentary elections
scheduled for early 2012 will be a major milestone in
the peace consolidation and democratic transition
processes in Timor-Leste. Under the circumstances, the
importance of peaceful and credible elections cannot
be overemphasized. The continuing constructive
interaction between the various political parties and
major stakeholders, which has guaranteed the
prevailing peace, should therefore guide the conduct of
the elections.

With the transfer by the United Nations of
command and control of all police operations to the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) on 27 March,
Timor-Leste has entered a new critical phase that will
determine the durability of the remarkable progress
made in the security sector since 2006. The low crime
rate is an indicator that the transfer is viable. Ahead of
the eventual withdrawal of UNMIT, its police should
continue to support the institutional strengthening,
capacity-building and professionalization of the PNTL,
as outlined in the PNTL-UNMIT Police Joint
Development Plan, signed on 23 February.

The development of a competent and credible
national military is also critical to the country's
ongoing success. In that regard, we welcome the steps
being taken to further strengthen the institutional and

human-resource capacities of the Timor-Leste defence
force, with the support of UNMIT and other United
Nations and bilateral partners. A clear delineation of
authority between the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de
Timor-Leste and the PNTL, under effective civilian
control, would certainly help to prevent the incidence
of friction between the two forces.

On socio-economic development, given the
improved security, greater confidence in the country's
leaders and the robust economic growth, Timor-Leste's
social and economic revival is rapidly gaining traction.
We laud the Government's effective and transparent
use of increased budgetary resources and the
promulgation of the Timor-Leste Strategic
Development Plan for 2011-2030. The Plan sets out an
economic growth and poverty reduction strategy. In our
view, if well implemented, the Plan will engender
growth and accelerate the pace of development in the
country. Still, there is an overarching need for the
Government to sustain its investment in rural
development and youth employment and to
communicate its goals and programmes to the
population more clearly.

On the judicial sector, Nigeria commends the
Government's recent measures to strengthen the
capacity and effectiveness of the justice and
correctional sectors, including its adoption of the
Justice Sector Strategic Plan for Timor-Leste. Such
measures have undoubtedly enhanced access to justice,
reduced the number of pending criminal prosecution
cases and improved the prison infrastructure. To
underpin the notable progress already made, the
Government should emphasize combating impunity
and strengthen accountability mechanisms.
Furthermore, adequate steps should be taken to
generate public confidence in the judicial system and
to ensure respect for the independence of the judiciary.

In closing, I would like to thank the UNMIT
peacekeepers, as well as the Timorese partners on the
ground, for their continued dedication to peace and
security in Timor-Leste. While the Timorese have made
giant strides towards peace and stability, the presence
and commitment of strong international partners will
remain vital for sustained progress in the country.

