Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month, which is your first month as a member of the Council. I would like also to congratulate your delegation and to express our readiness to work with you and the other members of the Council with a view to ensuring the discharge of the tasks entrusted by the Charter of the United Nations to the members of the Security Council. Allow me also, through you, to convey my thanks to other colleagues and to the Secretariat for facilitating the work of my delegation here in the Council. I want also to thank the United States delegation and Ambassador Kelly Craft for her successful presidency in December. I would like to sincerely thank Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of the Secretary- General for West Africa and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, for his insightful briefing on the activities of his Office and his assiduous efforts to achieve peace and stability in West Africa and the Sahel, in cooperation with international and regional partners. Since I am taking the floor for the first time on the African issue, I wish to emphasize that, given the importance of Africa to our identity and policies, security in the Sahel and West Africa and _ the security of Tunisia and the Arab Maghreb region are inextricably linked. In my statement I will touch on three points. First, concerning the role played by the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), my country’s delegation appreciates the Office’s pivotal role and its comprehensive approach to addressing the growing challenges ravaging the region. We also commend its approach to communication, national dialogue and mediation efforts as well as to prioritizing prevention. All of this contributes to ensuring an environment conducive to the elections that are slated for several countries of the region in 2020. That approach has proved effective and important in preventing conflicts and crises and has enabled UNOWAS to play a pivotal role in enhancing national and regional capacity and strengthening democracy and good governance while empowering women and achieving greater gender equality through laws that strengthen women’s presence and participation in decision-making. My country supports the strategic review that was completed on strengthening the mandate of UNOWAS, and it is our hope that the consultations under way will conclude in the approval by Security Council members of expanding and enhancing the tasks that are conducted by the Office. Secondly, regarding the security and humanitarian situations, Tunisia has been following with great concern developments in West Africa and the Sahel. We have reviewed with great interest the content of the report of the Secretary-General on this issue (S/2019/1005), especially concerning the increase in the number of terrorist and criminal attacks and the worsening of organized transnational crime. The increased capacity of criminal and terrorist groups to move about and even exercise control over territory and inhabitants in certain regions and to take advantage of the public authority vacuum and the lack of basic services is for us a cause of great concern. The conflicts and clashes witnessed in this region between herders and farmers because of natural resources, in addition to the increase in religious and ethnic conflict, constitute a serious threat to security and stability and create a breeding ground for terrorist groups and extremists. Terrorist attacks have led to major population displacement and resulted in many internally displaced persons moving from one region to another because of the lack of security and the worsening humanitarian situation. That has led to the closure of health-care facilities and schools because of the total absence of national and local authority. Thirdly, pertaining to the endeavours to achieve security and peace in the region, we support the efforts of the countries that participate in the Multinational Joint Task Force and the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force in addressing existing challenges. We believe that it is necessary to support the countries of the region in strengthening their capabilities to deal with emerging threats, meaning that we must stress a comprehensive and multidimensional approach that takes into consideration security and political aspects, including good governance, the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals and the African Union vision of silencing the guns on the African continent. We wish here to underscore the importance of ensuring support for political and security approaches in conjunction with development approaches so as to tackle the root causes of conflict and instability in West Africa and the Sahel. It is our view that the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel is a key means of assisting the countries of the region to actually achieve this, given the mechanisms that it includes to intensify and coordinate international and regional support for the countries of the region. In that regard, we commend the regional and international initiatives undertaken in 2019, including the Economic Community of West African States Summit and the Biarritz meeting of the Group of Seven (G-7) held in August, which focused on the situation in the region, as well as the July 2019 meeting among G-7 Ministers for Cooperation and the European Union Commissioner for International Cooperation and Development, along with their counterparts from the five Sahel countries, dealing with the root causes of the lack of development and the worsening of poverty and marginalization in the Sahel region. We look forward to the Summit that will be held in Paris shortly. All those initiatives attest to an increasing awareness at the regional and international levels of the need for a cross-border approach to reinvigorating the broad international partnership to provide the urgently needed support for the people of the region. In conclusion, we renew our full support for UNOWAS and its Head, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas.
