At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Niger on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of September. I would also like to commend Indonesia, our fellow member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, for its successful presidency in August. I thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, and Ambassador Guenter Sautter, Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, for their insightful briefings. I would also like to welcome Ambassador Taher M. T. Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya, to this meeting. Viet Nam continues to closely follow the developments in Libya. We remain concerned about the ongoing conflict, which has resulted in over 300 civilian casualties in the second quarter of 2020. This worrisome figure represents a 173 per cent increase as compared to the first quarter, according to the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). The presence of terrorist groups and the continued spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have further exacerbated the situation in the country and in neighbouring countries. We are also concerned about the worsening economic conditions in Libya owing to the ongoing conflict and the current pandemic. On the political front, we take positive note of the recent statements by relevant Libyan parties calling for a ceasefire and paving the way for elections in the coming months. However, it is greatly regrettable that direct talks between the parties have not been resumed. In that context, Viet Nam wishes to highlight the following points. First, the momentum for a ceasefire gained recently on the political front must be maintained in order to put an end to the hostilities and return to peace talks on the three tracks, in line with resolution 2510 (2020) and the Berlin Conference on Libya. We urge the parties to soon finalize the draft ceasefire agreement proposed by UNSMIL and proceed with its implementation. We also note the parties' call for the establishment of a demilitarized zone in Sirte. In this regard, the collaboration among UNSMIL, regional organizations, neighbouring countries and other relevant Member States will continue to play a key role. We would like to welcome the continued efforts of the members of the International Follow-up Committee on Libya in support of the resumption of the peace talks. We also welcome the African Union's intention to hold the intra-Libyan reconciliation conference later this year. It is necessary to underline that all efforts should aim at supporting an inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned peace process as the only viable solution to the current conflict in Libya. Secondly, Viet Nam once again urges all relevant parties in Libya to fully respect international humanitarian law and refrain from targeting civilians and civilian objects. The parties must ensure the safety of health-care workers and allow unhindered humanitarian access to effectively fight the COVID-19 pandemic. Further attention and measures must be taken to protect vulnerable groups, particularly women, children, migrants and refugees, from the negative impact of both the conflict and the COVID-19 pandemic. We also welcome the efforts of UNSMIL and the United Nations Mine Action Service in helping to address humanitarian challenges in Libya. Thirdly, we reiterate the importance of upholding relevant Security Council resolutions on Libya, particularly those related to the arms embargo. We share the concerns of the Secretary-General about the reported flow of arms into Libya in recent months. We urge all parties, inside and outside of Libya, to strengthen their commitment and actions in adhering to the embargo and towards putting an end to foreign interference in the country. Fourthly, we would like to commend the continued efforts of Ms. Williams and reaffirm our full support for the work of UNSMIL. In this regard, we support the 12-month extension of UNSMIL's mandate. Viet Nam will work closely with other Council members to that end. We would also like to reiterate the importance of the long-overdue appointment of the new Special Representative of the Secretary- General for Libya. In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to reaffirm its strong support for the pursuit of peace, stability and development of Libya.
