Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): Let me, at the very outset,
state that Kenya will fully support the draft resolution
before us. We believe that the draft resolution is an
important one, for it will establish the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA), the follow-on
Mission which will sustain an international presence in
that country after the expiry of the current mandate of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) today.

For many years now, the United Nations has played
a lead role in the search for peace in Angola, beginning
with the first Mission, UNAVEM. I, in 1989. That
Mission successfully completed its tasks and helped usher
in UNAVEM. II and UNAVEM. III. Kenya is proud to
have contributed to the success of these missions by
providing personnel, financial contributions and political
support.

Since its establishment, UNAVEM. III - the largest
peacekeeping operation ever - has made important
contributions to the peace process in Angola. UNAVEM
III has been actively involved in verifying the status of
the ceasefire, providing good offices, defusing tensions,
enhancing confidence-building, escorting civilian convoys
and performing engineering and other essential tasks. Last
April, as a result of concerted efforts by many actors,
including UNAVEM. III, the Angolan parties agreed to
instal the long-awaited Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation.

Nevertheless, when the mandate of UNAVEM. III
expires today, it will leave certain political and military
aspects of the peace process uncompleted. The political
aspects include the normalization of State administration
throughout the territory, the regularization of the UN ITA
radio station into a non-partisan broadcasting facility and
the transformation of UNITA into a political party. The
military aspects include the demobilization of ex-UNITA
combatants and their reintegration into society, the
dismantling of illegal checkpoints and the disarmament of
the civilian population.

My delegation, attaches great importance to the
implementation of these tasks in the shortest time
possible. We believe that these tasks remain critical to the
success of the overall peace process. Their
implementation must depend on the political will and
commitment of the Angolan leaders.

The general security situation in Angola remains
worrisome. In recent weeks, the Government has

 
reinforced its troops in the northern provinces of Lunda
Norte and Lunda Sul, apparently to control the flow of
armed elements infiltrating from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. While the Government has the sovereign
right to move its troops within its borders, we are
concerned that this military activity might affect the fragile
balance that maintains the ceasefire. We are also concerned
that such military activity will negatively affect the work of
international organizations working there, as happened last
month when personnel of UNAVEM. III and of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) were denied freedom of movement in the
affected areas.

My delegation has also noted the attacks of banditry
that persist in other parts of the country, especially
Benguela and Huila provinces, including the one in which
a corporal from the Brazilian battalion of UNAVEM. III
was killed on 19 May 1997. We call on the Government
and UNITA to cooperate in resolving these security
situations. We once again reiterate our earlier appeal for the
convening of a meeting between President Dos Santos and
Mr. Jonas Savimbi to resolve these and other issues. We
continue to believe that the holding of such a meeting -
indeed, such meetings - in the future is vital in this
formative stage of the peace process.

In conclusion, we wish to thank the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, and
the staff of UNAVEM. III for their dedicated service to the
cause of peace in Angola. We hope that MONUA will be
equally successful. We also wish to pay tribute to the troika
of observer States and all others that have remained
committed to the peace process. We encourage them to
continue to render their support until the end.

