Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor to speak this
time in my national capacity.

First of all, I thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for
her briefing, and I thank Ms. Bihamba for her valuable
briefing at the beginning of this meeting.

My statement is a brief one. I will address three
key points.

The first concerns the political issue. The political
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
entered a decisive phase, governed by the upcoming
legislative and presidential elections. We hope that
those elections will be held in a free and impartial
way on the agreed date of 23 December, and that
all sectors of the Congolese people will be able to
participate and vote in accordance with Congolese
laws and the Congolese Constitution. The process of
rebuilding confidence should be considered among
all the Congolese political parties as stipulated in the
political agreement of 31 December 2016. We recall
here the joint communique of the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council issued
on 19 July, which calls on all political parties to work
together in that direction.

Second is the security situation. The ongoing
violence and armed conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly in the South Kivu and North
Kivu regions, which had seen military escalation
and attacks over the past few months, requires an
immediate and serious response, given that the armed
conflicts there directly affect unarmed civilians and
drain the natural and human resources of the country.
In that regard, we commend the significant efforts of
MONUSCO and its members to withstand and repel
those attacks. We call on all parties behind the conflict
and violence to end those clashes so as to spare the
lives of civilians and achieve the desired stability in the
security sector.

Third is the humanitarian situation. The ongoing
humanitarian crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a major concern. Nearly 13 million people,
including displaced persons and refugees, are in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance. The international
community should offer them significant assistance
in meeting their humanitarian needs and finding
appropriate solutions to mitigate the suffering of those
in humanitarian need.
With regard to the Ebola virus, which several
colleagues have mentioned, there is fear that itwill spread
in Equateur province. We welcome the announcement
by the Ministry for Health of the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo on Tuesday that the spread ofthis epidemic
is now under control. We commend the tireless efforts
of the Government, together with the United Nations,
the World Health Organization and MONUSCO, to
eliminate this disease.

