Mr. Momen: Injust over six years, the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), with valuable support from the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office (PBSO), has helped to generate a much-needed
focus on the complex challenges of post-conflict
peacebuilding. As the Secretary-General rightly
noted, while its full potential is yet to be realized, the
architecture has started to demonstrate signs of what it
is capable of doing. The 2010 review indeed contributed
to renewing our commitment to strengthening the
architecture and ensuring that it can meet its full
potential.

At the outset, I wish to recognize the constructive
role played by the Chairs of the respective PBC
configurations. Drawing on their experience ofworking
with the countries on the agenda and in the field, their
inputs to this statement have been invaluable.

As indicated in the PBC's annual report (S/20l2/70)
and in the concept paper prepared by the presidency
for this debate (S/2012/511, annex), there is need for
better understanding of the nature and scope of the
Commission's role. Faced with diverse expectations
and challenges, the PBC will certainly benefit from a
common articulation ofits real potential and limitations.
This debate represents an opportunity that should be
fully utilized. I shall therefore begin on a very frank
note.

As an intergovernmental body that is dedicated
to addressing the special needs of countries emerging
from conflict, the PBC was conceived around the
imperative of ensuring the commitment of a broad
range of the most relevant global actors. These actors
include its own members, which are drawn from the
membership of the three principal organs and from the
top financial and troop and police contributors to the
United Nations. They also include institutional donors
and regional actors. This unique membership structure
suggests that the PBC could leverage the collective
political, financial and technical capacities of its
member States and institutional partners in support of
national peacebuilding objectives in the countries on
its agenda.

In contrast to these expectations, the Commission's
engagement has been too frequently defined by the
individual efforts made by the leadership of the country
configurations and, in rare instances, by a few interested
members. The full potential of such a unique political
platform, made up of the most influential global actors,
has unfortunately not been met. This is a statement that
invites serious reflection.

At the same time and despite those difficulties,
the PBC has still managed to show signs of its vast
potential in the area of political accompaniment and
advocacy. To name but a few examples, it has been able
to confer legitimacy upon serious national and United
Nations efforts to build trust between political actors
in the case of Sierra Leone in 2009; manage tensions
accompanying electoral processes in Burundi in 2010;
support national capacity development for police and
the rule of law in Liberia since 2011; support security
sector reform in Guinea, leading notably to the
completion of the largest military retirement project in
the country's history in late 2011; and provide effective
support to the first round of presidential elections in
Guinea-Bissau last March.

The partnership with the international financial
institutions is also an area in which the PBC has
demonstrated signs of potential. The most recent
completion of the new poverty reduction strategies in
Burundi and the Central African Republic offered an
opportunity to strengthenthe UnitedNations partnership
with the World Bank and the African Development
Bank and to integrate peacebuilding priorities into
socio-economic planning and programming for both
countries. In the case oquinea-Bissau, the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank have supported a
significant debt relief, helping to generate a virtuous
economic cycle in the country. In the case of Guinea,
the World Bank is partnering with the Government and
other peacebuilding stakeholders to launch a productive
social safety nets project that will provide employment
to 24,000 young people and women.

Last year's Kigali high-level meeting demonstrated
the PBC's potential to facilitate South-South and
triangular cooperation in critical and recurring
peacebuilding priorities, such as aid and donor
coordination, national reconciliation, reintegration, job
creation, and security sector and justice reform.

It is difficult to imagine how the international
community and the United Nations will be able to
tap into this potential in the absence of the political
commitment of individual Governments, and the United
Nations system as a whole, to render the PBC's efforts
successful. The United Nations and other partners
should view the PBC as an opportunity and a source
of support, not as a competitor or an additional layer of
bureaucracy.

At the same time, the PBC must also make great
effort to enhance its stature and added value. We
must continue to refine and adapt the Commission's
instruments and forms of engagement to changing needs
and circumstances at the country level; strengthen
linkages with the UnitedNations leadership and other key
actors in the field and at Headquarters; explore practical
approaches to facilitating resource mobilization; and
develop ways of assessing peacebuilding progress. In
accomplishing these objectives, the PBC needs the
continued and increased support of the PBSO and other
relevant United Nations and non-United Nations actors
engaged in peacebuilding.

It is significant that this debate on the potential and
limits ofthe PBC is taking place under the auspices ofthe
Security Council, as one of the two parent institutions
of the Commission, along with the General Assembly.
Given the fact that the Security Council is facing an
ever-increasing number of situations to cope with, the
PBC can play a useful role in alleviating the Council's
workload by looking after situations that are not on its
immediate agenda. We thus look forward to innovative
ideas and suggestions from Council members. In the
meantime, allow me to share a few preliminary ideas
suggested by the Chairs group that could provide a
framework for strengthening and taking forward these
relations.

First, the relations between the Security Council
and country-specific configurations should be further
intensified and institutionalized. Such a relationship
could manifest itself most importantly when the
Council is in the process of establishing or renewing
the mandate for a country under PBC consideration.
Council resolutions could also include specific requests
for advice from the PBC around the priority areas
identified with the country concerned. This would
help the Council to receive more focused analysis on
issues ranging from the linkages between security and
socio-economic development, the alignment of key
actors behind national priorities, the opportunities for
connection with relevant global initiatives, and the
status of partnerships between the United Nations and
other relevant actors in the country concerned.

Secondly, I share the Secretary-General's belief that
the PBC would benefit from clarity on the division of
roles and responsibilities with the senior United Nations
leadership in the field. Such clarity would facilitate
the establishment of mutually reinforcing relations in
a manner that would optimize the implementation of
Council mandates and allow for developing coherent
messages and engagement with national actors. We
must assure the senior United Nations leadership in the
field that the PBC is committed to supporting their role
on the ground and that their cooperation is essential to
the work of the Commission.

Thirdly, the advice of the PBC could be most relevant
as the Council considers a transition from one form of
United Nations engagement to another. This advice is
expected to be based on an assessment of progress in
national peacebuilding efforts, of the level of support
from and commitment of the international community,
and of the specific capacities required for the United
Nations country team to continue to support long-term
peacebuilding efforts in the country concerned.

Fourthly and finally, there is need for periodic
information sharing with the Council on country-specific
opportunities and risks. This would help the Council to
identify areas for which greater buy-in and coherence
from the United Nations system and the international
community should be sought and attained in a timely
manner. The Chairs of the PBC country configurations
highly value the opportunity given to them to formally
brief the Council on the situation in the countries
concerned.

We also commend the initiative taken by certain
Council Presidents in organizing interactive informal
dialogues on country-specific issues. As an incremental
step, for instance, a more systematic and periodic use
of the country-specific informal format, possibly on a
quarterly basis, needs to be considered. Such regular
and substantive exchanges could be of great value to the
Security Council ahead of the Council's field visits to
countries on the PBC agenda. They could also focus on
thematic and regional issues concerning more than one
country-specific configuration, for example emerging
threats such as transnational organized crime.

In addition, an annual interactive dialogue on the
occasion of the consideration of the PBC's annual report
could also address broader systemic issues of mutual
interest. We look forward to discussing these and other
suggestions in the full membership of the Peacebuilding
Commission and in the context of the planned informal
dialogue.

It is essential that the countries on the agenda of
the PBC not relapse into conflict. Therefore, we must
continue to maintain our focus on enhancing the PBC's
impact in the field. This impact should be ideally
manifested by empowering national actors to own and
lead the peacebuilding process and by ensuring that the
United Nations and other key actors are positioned to
support this endeavour. The PBC will strive to provide
hope and facilitate the efforts of the national leadership
to achieve sustainable peace and security.

Our goal is also to offer all relevant national
actors a fair chance at building resilient societies and
institutions. This is undoubtedly a goal shared by the
Security Council and the broader membership of the
United Nations. This is a goal that can be attained only
if we manage to muster the necessary political will and
commitment.

In conclusion, I invite us all to take this debate as an
opportunity to recommit ourselves to putting the needs
and aspirations of the peoples of the countries affected
by or emerging from conflict ahead of everything else.
I recall that none of the post-conflict, low-income,
fragile countries can yet achieve a single Millennium
Development Goal, but there is hope that countries that
could manage to reduce violence also could produce
some of the fastest development gains. Therefore, our
commitments must be rock solid and long-term, and we
must persevere. With the Council's concerted effort, we
will win.

