Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): Mr. President, allow
me to convey our appreciation to you for having
convened this timely debate on the working methods of
the Security Council. We also appreciate the precise
concept paper (S/201l/726) circulated by your
delegation in advance of this discussion.

Reforming the working methods of the Security
Council remains a matter of urgency given the decisive
role that the Council plays in the affairs of Member
States. It is therefore encouraging that the Security
Council has done much work recently to improve the
efficiency and transparency of its work as well as its
interaction and dialogue with non-members of the
Council. Just last year, the Council adopted a revised
presidential note (S/2010/507) that reinforced its
intention to enhance dialogue with troop-contributing
countries and the use of informal dialogue.

Undoubtedly, the activities of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, under the able leadership of Ambassador
Ivan Barbalie, have also helped to reinforce this
improvement.

The Council should not, however, rest on its
laurels. Much work could still be done to enhance
efficiency and transparency, thus engendering greater
confidence on the part of the broader United Nations
membership and global public. There is no doubt that a
continued improvement in the content and narrative
quality of the Council's annual report is necessary if
we are to meet the expectations of non-members of the
Council.

Here we commend the efforts of the German
delegation in preparing the annual report for 2010/2011
(A/66/2), particularly for continuing with the practice
of consultation with non-members of the Council. We
would recall that the important suggestions received
from non-members of the Council greatly enriched our
work in preparing the report for 2009/2010 (A/65/2).
This practice should be sustained and improved upon.

To improve on the information available to the
broader United Nations membership, the respective
Presidents of the Council should speak more often to
the media, and lead countries should provide more
information to the public. The Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council will need to sustain their
regular discussions in order to improve
complementarity in the work of those organs. In
addition, the Chairs of subsidiary bodies should be
encouraged to hold periodic briefings on their activities
and schedule more spontaneous and productive
sessions with non-Council members. Adequate and
timely information on their activities will be useful to
the wider United Nations membership.

Nigeria welcomes the efforts made to improve
interaction with troop- and police-contributing
countries and regional organizations. As a major troop-
contributing country, we see great value in enhancing
interaction with troop-contributing countries as well as
the Peacebuilding Commission. This is imperative
during implementation, change in, renewal of, or
completion of mandates, or when there has been a
rapid deterioration of the situation on the ground. The
proper sequencing of such meetings is crucial if we are
to achieve meaningful results. It is also essential to
invite the countries and parties concerned to the
deliberations of the Council to share local perspectives
and specialized knowledge relating to issues on the
Council's agenda. That principle informed our
commitment to greater and more frequent involvement
of the troop-contributing countries in the activities of
the Council's Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, chaired by Nigeria.

The Security Council's field missions have been
useful in providing an adequate impression of local
realities. Council discussions have also been enriched
through dialogue with various actors at the national
and regional levels. As a nation from the continent
accounting for about 70 per cent of the issues on the
Council's agenda, we see such missions as very useful
and productive. It may be helpful to prolong the
duration of such visits so as to provide ample time for
engagement with local and regional actors.

The Council's working methods offer the tools
necessary to ensure efficiency and transparency in its
work. We are under no illusion that the tools are
sufficient to address all challenges. The right mix of
these tools and flexibility will help to underpin the
Council's efforts, pursuant to presidential note
S/2010/507. It is also important to continuously
identify gaps and make the required changes.

Our discussion today, under the Portuguese
presidency, represents such an effort. In that context,
we must not lose sight of the need to improve the
Council's effectiveness in preventing conflicts. The
Council's commitment to Chapters VI and VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and preventive
diplomatic strategies will greatly contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

