Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is extremely
concerned about the increasing number of incidents of
piracy and robbery at sea in the area of Somalia and the
seas around it. We cannot ignore the fact that the
pirates are making use of increasingly sophisticated
methods in their criminal activity and that their goals
are ever-expanding.

Given the extent of these crimes against ships in
the Gulf of Aden, the Russian navy has become
actively involved in combating piracy in the region. At
the present time, the Russian ship Neustrashimy is
right now engaged in operational observation off the
coast of Somalia in collaboration with naval vessels of
other States cooperating with the Government of
Somalia. We have already rebuffed several pirate
attacks. We are studying the possibility of sending
additional forces of the Russian navy to the region.

The resolution adopted today contains a number
of new and important elements. In particular, measures
to combat pirates off the coast of Somalia are now
clearly included in the context of joint efforts to
re-establish peace and law and order in that country.
The resolution welcomes the initiatives of States,
includes the Russian Federation, and of international
organizations to curb this scourge. An important role
must be played by the measures outlined in the
resolution to strengthen the ability of marine shippers,
in cooperation with the International Maritime
Organization, to use their own potential to ward off
pirate attacks.

We are convinced that, for an effective
implementation of the anti-piracy measures approved
by the Security Council, there is a need for agreed and
properly coordinated action by States. Here, the
resolution also represents a step forward, since it is
aimed at the study of ways to improve the coordinating
role of the United Nations. Enhanced attention must
also be paid to such complex issues as those connected
with the detention of individuals involved in piracy and
robbery on the seas and the appropriate jurisdiction for
bringing such individuals to justice. We believe that
this will promote the implementation by States of the
mechanisms provided for in the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Maritime Navigation of 1988, as provided for by the
resolution.
Once again, I would like to note that, in
discussing the problem of piracy off the shores of
Somalia, we all understand, of course, that a long-term
solution to this problem will only be found through a
comprehensive political settlement in this country, with
the cooperation of the United Nations and the African
Union.

