The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of August, I wish
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Ambassador Koro Bessho,
Permanent Representative of Japan, for his service as
President of the Council for the month of July. I am
sure that I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Bessho
and his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with
which they conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Children and armed conflict

Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2016/360)

Letter dated 29 July 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/662)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, the Netherlands, Pakistan,
Panama, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, the United
Arab Emirates, Viet Nam and Yemen to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, and
Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Charles
Whiteley, Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/360, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/662, which contains a letter dated
29 July 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of Malaysia to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give him
the floor.


