Mr. Nielsen (Denmark): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the Nordic countries - Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden, and my own country,
Denmark.

We would like to express our gratitude to the
Malaysian presidency for holding this open debate at
such a critical time for children around the world. We
thank the Secretary-General for his opening remarks,
and we acknowledge the Special Representative for her
tireless efforts and the critical work she has done on
behalf of children, as well as UNICEF for the equally
important work it has done.

Children should not be exposed to war, not as
victims or witnesses, nor as soldiers. Therefore, our
efforts continue in order to prevent children from
ending up in the crossfire, as well as in armed groups
or forces. In the 2015 annual report (S/2016/360) of
the Secretary-General there is a glimmer of hope.
Last year, strong engagement with non-State armed
groups led to the release of over 8,000 children. With
the Sudan coming on board, we welcome the fact that
all the Governments identified for recruitment and use
of children in their security forces are now engaged in
the action plan process. We look forward to working
closely with the Sudanese Government to help in the
implementation of the action plan, including through
the local group of friends led by Sweden and Canada.
In Colombia, we are heartened by both the Colombian
Government and the readiness of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo
to include the protection of children in peace talks.
Also, the progress in Government commitment to the
protection of children during conflict in Afghanistan,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Myanmar,
as stated in the report, is an indication that things
might change.

However, much of the report is heartbreaking to
read. There are still far too many parties to conflicts
listed for grave violations against children. Thousands
of children have been killed during over five years of
war in Syria. The highest number of child deaths and
injuries last year were recorded in Afghanistan. Somali
children face an unbearable situation. In Yemen, the
escalating conflict has had a devastating impact on
children, and grave violations against children have
increased dramatically.

Let me be very clear: all parties must respect their
international legal obligations to protect civilians. Child
protection concerns must be included in all negotiations
to end conflicts. Given that armed non-State
actors - such as Da'esh, Al-Shabaab and Boko
Haram - account for the vast majority of violations,
further reflection on new forms of engagement is
needed. I would like to emphasize three points that are
particularly important for the Nordic countries.

First, protecting the integrity and credibility of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, as well as the
Office of the Special Representative and the Children
and Armed Conflict agenda itself, is imperative. It is
essential that the verification of grave violations against
children in armed conflict is determined impartially
and objectively. The issue of listing and delisting of
parties must be based on factual findings on the ground.

Secondly, children's access 4 in particular girls'
access - to quality education in war and disasters
must be ensured. Education is a vital part of protecting
children during conflict. Attending school can create
a sense of normality and a vision for a better future
in an otherwise chaotic situation. There were attacks
on education in at least 70 countries between 2009 and
2013. Since then, such attacks have escalated further.
We must increase our efforts to uphold the right to
education, even in conflict situations. By making
schools safer for children today, we are protecting
the future.

Finally, as our thirdpoint, training in child protection
for civilian and military personnel is key, particularly
to avoid any incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse
against children. We believe that predeployment
training within these areas should be mandatory for
United Nations personnel. The Swedish Armed Forces
International Centre offers a child-protection course
based on United Nations child-protection curriculums.
Also, we need to protect child-protection advisers in
United Nations missions in order to properly document
and verify child rights violations.

We need to let children be children. The challenges
we face are a call to action. In that regard, we reiterate
our full support for the Special Representative and
her Office, as well as the crucial work by UNICEF,
other United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations in the field. We wholeheartedly support
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, which has led to
tangible progress since it was launched. Moreover, it
is time that we pay more attention to child protection
as a part of peace negotiations. Regrettably, as today's
debate shows, we have a lot of work ahead of us.

