Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Gambari for his
thorough briefing.
Denmark aligns itself with the statement to be
given shortly by Finland on behalf of the European
Union.
Denmark is pleased to note that the cessation of
hostilities between Israel and Hizbollah by and large
seems to be holding, that the Israel Defense Forces has
initiated its withdrawal, and that contacts are ongoing
between the Israel Defense Forces and the Lebanese
armed forces on the schedule for the withdrawal of the
remaining forces.

The situation is, however, still extremely fragile,
as evidenced by the incident that took place this past
weekend. Denmark calls on all parties to show the
utmost restraint and to refrain from any action which
could undermine the current ceasefire.

There is an urgent need to strengthen the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and to
give it the capacity to implement the full mandate
contained in resolution 1701 (2006), including
enforcement of the arms embargo. As already
announced, Denmark is, for its part - pending
parliamentary approval - ready to support the naval
component of an enhanced UNIFIL. Now that the
outstanding issues concerning the rules of engagement
and the concept of operations seem to have been
cleared up, additional Member States will, hopefully,
be able to provide similar specific pledges.

There is also a need to assist the Government of
Lebanon through capacity-building and the provision
of materiel to exercise its authority throughout its
territory, not least to secure its borders and prevent the
illicit delivery of weapons.

Denmark welcomes the urgency and diligence
with which the Secretary-General has approached the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). It
particularly welcomes the timely decision to dispatch
Special Envoys Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen and Mr. Vijay
Nambiar to the region in order to help facilitate
negotiations on the political conditions for a lasting
ceasefire, which would require, among other factors,
the disbandment and disarmament of all Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias, as stipulated in resolutions 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006). We look forward to receiving
their proposals on implementing resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1680 (2006), including proposals to settle
the disputed border areas, such as the Sheba'a farms.
There is also an urgent need to find a solution to the
question of the abducted Israel soldiers and the
Lebanese prisoners in Israel.

All Member States must actively back these
efforts by the Secretary-General and his envoys

through their own channels. As stressed by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Denmark in the Security Council
on 11 August (see S/PV.5511), Denmark pledges its
full support for the efforts of the Secretary-General in
this regard and stands ready to assist wherever
possible.

In spite of the ceasefire, the humanitarian
situation in Lebanon is still disturbing. It is of
paramount importance that the Government of Lebanon
receive support. The Government of Lebanon urgently
needs the capacity to be the lead player in humanitarian
relief and reconstruction efforts. The Danish
Government has already disbursed $4 million in
support through bilateral and multilateral agencies.
Danish experts have been seconded to United Nations
agencies, and a Danish team is part of the general
effort to clean up after the huge oil spill along the
Lebanese coast.

We look forward to the donors conference in
Stockholm next week where we expect United Nations
agencies to be able to present revised plans. Substantial
amounts have already been committed. It is important
that both donors and agencies demonstrate flexibility
so that the new efforts can be geared towards the real
needs on the ground.

In addition to Lebanon, Denmark is particularly
concerned about the situation between Israel and the
Palestinian territories, in particular, in the Gaza Strip.
There remain ongoing hostilities, the humanitarian
situation is deeply worrying and the economy is almost
completely broken down. Also, the political situation
continues to deteriorate. I think that it is obvious that
the long-term negative consequences for the territories
as well as for the Middle East as a whole could be far
more serious if we do not find a solution to all aspects
of this crisis as soon as possible.

We call for the immediate and unconditional
release of Corporal Gilad Shalit of the Israel Defense
Forces and urge the Palestinian leadership to undertake
all necessary efforts in this regard and to stop the firing
of rockets into Israel.

We are also concerned about the detention of
elected members of the Palestinian Government and
legislature. This issue should be resolved without
delay. We call on Israel to exercise restraint. Israel
must ensure that its response is proportional and
measured and carried out with full respect for a State's
obligation to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure in time of war.

Whether in Lebanon or in the Palestinian
territories, all parties must do their utmost to avoid
escalating the situation. The parties have to be ready to
make concessions and to act responsibly and with a
sense of proportion. Additional violence will only
serve to promote the agendas of extremists. Only by
returning to peaceful negotiations can we hope to reach
a comprehensive political solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict, which has already generated so much
suffering and hatred in the region.

