Mr. Feltman: Let me open with my best wishes
to our Muslim colleagues on the occasion of the holy
month of Ramadam - Ramadan Kareem.

The Secretary-General is encouraged by the recent
affirmations by Prime Minister Netanyahu of his
commitment to "the idea of a sustainable two-State
solution", but notes that this must be translated into
actions. This includes a halt to sensitive and unilateral
activities in the West Bank, including settlements, that
could prejudice a final status agreement or prevent the
establishment ofa viable, contiguous Palestinian State.
That message was reaffirmed by major donor countries
at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
assistance to the Palestinians held in Brussels on
27 May.

The Secretary-General welcomes the measures
taken by Israel to ease some restrictions on Palestinians
in the West Bank and Gaza, in particular during the
Muslim holy month of Ramadan, although some have
been revoked in response to repeated rocket fire from
Gaza. He encourages Israel to sustain and expand
those confidence-building measures, which enable the
legitimate movement of people and goods in and between
Gaza and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and
improve the quality of life of Palestinians.

The security situation in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, remained tense. A total of 186
Palestinians, including 28 children and two women,
were injured. Five members of the Israeli security
forces were also injured. The Israeli security forces
conducted approximately 400 search-and-arrest
operations, resulting in the arrest of 510 Palestinians.
In three separate incidents, on 20 May, 10 June and
14 June, three Palestinian men were shot and killed by
the Israeli security forces. First, a man was killed when
an Israeli military Jeep overturned during an operation
to arrest suspected militants. The second incident
occurred as a result of clashes with Israeli military
forces. The third man was killed after ramming his
vehicle into two Israeli policewomen.

On 19 June, a Palestinian shot at an Israeli
vehicle travelling near a West Bank settlement close
to Ramallah, killing one Israeli civilian and injuring
another. While claims of responsibility have not been
confirmed, some Palestinian factions, including
Hamas, praised the attack, which the United Nations
immediately condemned. On 22 June, an Israeli
policeman was critically wounded when he was stabbed
at the Damascus Gate in Jerusalem. The attacker also
remains in a critical condition after being shot by the
policeman. In total, six members of the Israeli security
forces were injured.

The Secretary-General remains deeply concerned
about the situation of Palestinian prisoners in Israel,
notably those in administrative detention, including
Khader Adnan, detained since 8 July 2014, who has
now been on hunger strike for 51 days. The Israeli
Government's decision on 14 June to reintroduce draft
legislation to permit the force-feeding of prisoners
on hunger strike under certain conditions would, if
approved by the Knesset, contravene international
standards.

The demolition of homes and structures in the West
Bank has also continued. This month, 52 structures,
including 17 residences, were demolished, leading to the
displacement of 29 Palestinians, including 17 children.
On 9 June, the Israeli High Court of Justice rejected
a petition to restore planning authority to Palestinian
villages in Area C of the West Bank. The planning and
zoning system as it stands makes it virtually impossible
for Palestinians to build on or develop their land in
Area C.

I reiterate our concerns over the fate of 7,000
Palestinian Bedouin and herders in 46 residential
areas of the West Bank, who may be at risk of forcible
transfer as Israel advances its plan to relocate these
communities to three sites in Area C. The plan may
be linked to settlement expansion in the El area and
others, which would seriously jeopardize the two-State
solution.

In the Gaza Strip, the desperate situation was
exacerbated by a number of security incidents.
During the reporting period, 10 rockets were fired
by Palestinian militants from Gaza, thankfully
without casualties or damage. The Secretary-General
has publicly condemned those incidents. A further
11 rockets were test-fired towards the sea. The Israeli
security forces responded by conducting 11 air strikes
on militant sites in Gaza, again without resulting in
injuries. Concerns are also mounting in relation to
internal divisions within Gaza, including a potential
developing threat from militant salafist individuals or
groups. On 2 June, Hamas security forces reportedly
killed a salafist accused of firing rockets at Israel and
arrested a number of others suspected of carrying
out those attacks. The Israeli security forces shot and
injured 12 Palestinians. I call on Israel to implement
measures to minimize incidents that result in injuries in
the access-restricted areas on land and at sea.

The Secretary-General is closely following media
reports that suggest that a flotilla is expected to
group and head towards Gaza in the coming days. He
continues to believe that a flotilla would not help to
address the dire situation in Gaza and reiterates his
calls for the Government of Israel to lift all closures,
with due consideration of Israel's legitimate security
concerns.

The ever-challenging circumstances in Gaza
highlight the urgent need to strengthen Palestinian
unity. Conflicts, poor governance and the closures have
crushed Gaza's economy. Unemployment spiked to
43 per cent at the end of 2014.

I am nevertheless encouraged by Prime
Minister Hamdallah's commitment to overcoming
these obstacles, including the issue of public-sector
employees in Gaza, by reintegrating the governance
framework under a single authority. The willingness
and capacity of all Palestinian factions to resolve their
differences, including those related to border crossings
with Israel and Egypt, is integral to lifting the blockade
of Gaza and advancing Palestinian efforts to achieve
statehood.

I note the 22 June decision of the Executive
Committee of the Palestinian Liberation Organization
to form a committee to consult with all Palestinian
factions in order to form a national unity Government.
I encourage all factions to maintain a positive approach

to those discussions, which are critical to the future of
Palestinian reconciliation.

The Secretary-General welcomed Egypt's decision,
following consultations with President Abbas, to open
the Rafah crossing from 13 to 19 June and for three days
this week in both directions. Recognizing that such
decisions critically depend on the security environment,
and without diminishing the United Nations primary
objective to see the full lifting of all the closures in the
framework of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009),
it is our hope that the Rafah crossing can be opened
on a regular basis to help relieve the suffering of the
people of Gaza.

While overall progress in the reconstruction of
Gaza remains far too slow, the establishment of the
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism has been vital to
facilitating the entry of material. As of 23 June, more
than 88,500 homeowners have procured construction
material. Furthermore, 135 construction projects
out of 202 submitted have been approved by the
Israeli authorities. I welcome today's approval by
the Government of Palestine for the entry under the
Mechanism of material for constructing 16,000 new
homes to help address the housing gap.

With major construction work expected to begin
imminently, there is an urgent need for additional
funding for the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism,
which will exhaust its funds in September.

The Secretary-General took note of the issuance on
Monday of the report of the independent commission of
inquiry established pursuant to Human Rights Council
resolution S-21/l (A/HRC/29/52). While we do not
comment on the substance of such reports, it is our hope
that the commission's report will contribute to bringing
justice to victims of last year's war and encourage the
parties to engage in serious and credible examinations
of their own behaviour.

I will now say a few words about the situation in
Lebanon and Syria.

Lebanon has now been without a president for over
a year. The vacuum has prevented the Parliament from
legislating on urgent issues and has thereby affected
the economy and the Government's ability to function
effectively. Since 4 June, Prime Minister Tammam
Salam has suspended regular cabinet meetings to ease
political tensions over upcoming senior appointments
in the Lebanese armed forces. Along Lebanon's eastern
border with Syria, Hizbullah has reportedly seized a
number of positions from armed extremist groups,
including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), Daesh and the Al-Nusra Front, in the region of
Qalamoun up to the outskirts of Arsal. The Lebanese
armed forces have been deployed in and around Arsal
to prevent the fighting from reaching the town.

Six months after the launch of the Lebanon Crisis
Response Plan, we urge donors to fulfil existing
pledges to assist the 1.2 million registered refugees and
Lebanese host communities.
General calm remained in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, despite
escalatory rhetoric on both sides and security concerns
in the Golan Heights. Israel continued to violate
Lebanese airspace on an almost daily basis.

Regarding Syria, the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy continues the Geneva consultations with Syrian,
regional and international delegations with a View to
developing recommendations on the operationalization
of the Geneva communique. On 4 June, he held
discussions with the Syrian Opposition Coalition in
Istanbul and from 15 to 17 June with Syrian officials in
Damascus. In Damascus, he also raised issues related to
the protection of civilians, including the unacceptable
use of barrel bombs by Government forces, while also
condemning the use of gas canisters by opposition
groups.

The Turkish Government has raised concerns
about refugee flows resulting from the efforts to oust
ISIL from the Tal Abyad area in Syria. According
to the information available to the United Nations,
approximately 25,000 Syrians from that area sought
refuge in Turkey, although we believe that 2,000
refugees have reportedly already crossed back into
Syria. It is neither just nor possible to expect Turkey
to continue to face those refugee pressures alone. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights is investigating allegations of forceful
displacement of Arabs and Turkmen populations. To
date, we are unaware of any evidence that it is taking
place on a wide-scale or in a systematic way.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our concern that
accepting a fatalistic narrative on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict will only accelerate the deterioration of the
situation. It will also constitute a grave injustice to
those on both sides who want to live peacefully and
securely as neighbours, as two peoples whose pasts will
be forever linked by their ancestral ties to the region
and whose futures stand only to benefit, including
economically. Also, the conflict cannot be viewed
in isolation from the regional turmoil. The risk of
radicalization in the occupied Palestinian territory is
heightened by the continued lack of a political horizon.
Absent courageous leadership, a sustainable solution
will remain a distant and unachievable goal.

