Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome you, Madam
President. As this is the first time I have taken the floor
in the Security Council as Permanent Representative
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, following
our election as non-permanent member last October, I
would like to express our friendship and respect to you
as Head of State and Government of a brotherly South
American country. Likewise, I would like to express
our satisfaction at seeing you preside over this open
debate on inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We thank and welcome the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon; the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, my friend Ambassador Antonio Patriota;
and the Nobel Peace Laureate, Ms. Leymah Gbowee.
We also welcome the representatives of all countries
present today.

While we welcome Chile's initiative to promote an
exchange of views on this important topic, we believe
that the overarching importance of the topic before us
calls for an open and democratic forum of discussion,
such as the General Assembly, so as to guarantee the
full participation of Member States. Although the
Security Council is not the appropriate organ to make
decisions in the area of development, we acknowledge
that its decisions in the field of international peace
and security have a positive impact on the long-term
development ofnations. However, at times, its decisions
on other matters can also have adverse consequences
for the wellbeing and future of countries.

This debate gives us the opportunity to underscore
the importance of inclusive development in building
just, fair and peaceful societies as a fundamental
precondition for preventing conflicts and violence.
However, it is important to recall in this context that the
most serious threats to international peace and security
do not come from the poorest and least-developed
countries; to contend so would be to misconstrue the
current state of global affairs, historical trends and the
imbalance of power at the international level.

We are participating in the work of the Council,
as President Nicolas Maduro Moros has stated,
with a renewed optimism and firm commitment to
peace, respect for sovereignty, international law,
development, social justice, cooperation and solidarity
among peoples, dialogue and peaceful coexistence
among nations, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Latin
America and the Caribbean stands out as a region of
peace, where we have built a regional architecture of
mechanisms to address matters of common interest
through cooperation and solidarity. Over the past two
decades, there have been steady improvements in the
areas of peace, security and development.
Venezuela believes that the international community
must take an open and frank approach in addressing
the root causes of the political, economic and social
imbalances in the current international system that
generate conflicts. Such an approach would help us find
solid and lasting solutions to conflicts, in accordance
with international law. In order to reverse the negative
impacts of the legacy of colonialism, the pillaging of
natural resources and unjust global social, financial and
economic structures, we must strengthen multilateral
efforts to transform socioeconomic policies and norms
bound to the capitalist model of production that is
unsustainable for world.

The international community must put greater
focus on promoting the sustainable development
agenda. In this regard, developed countries must fulfil
their duties in areas such as official development
assistance, technology transfer and climate change.
Similarly, in the economic field, developing countries
must be given preferential and differentiated treatment
and assistance in reaching the internationally agreed
development goals, without conditionality; fair trade
should be promoted; and cooperation is needed in the
restructuring of sovereign debt.

The case of Haiti deserves special attention due to
the inconsistencies in the provision of the $10 billion
in international assistance pledged at the international
donors' conference of 31 March 2010 for reconstruction
following the devastating earthquake of January that
year. In this regard, we call on donor countries to
honour their aid commitments to Haiti, so as to help the
country overcome the economic and social problems
that have plagued it for decades and were only worsened
by that natural disaster.

Latin America and the Caribbean is an example
to the world of a region whose strength lies in the
spirit of cooperation and unity integral to its political
consensus and integration initiatives, where inclusive
development takes centre stage. Our vision of inclusive
and comprehensive regional development is reflected in
our organizations, such as the Bolivarian Alliance for
the Peoples of Our America, Petrocaribe, the Union of
South American Nations and the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States.

At the national level, the promotion of inclusive
and equitable development has been a cornerstone
policy of the Bolivarian revolution through our social
programmes, whereby sovereign petroleum income
is invested in eliminating poverty, social exclusion,
illiteracy, hunger and disease. The Venezuelan
Government sees the inclusion of all members of
society, in particular women, young people and persons
with disabilities, as the ultimate goal of development,
which should provide the legal and structural conditions
required to realize their full potential. Inclusive
development is a right of all Venezuelans. Socialjustice
is our goal.

Finally, we reiterate that we stand fully ready to
work constructively and responsibly towards realizing
the goals, which are among fundamental responsibilities
of this body, of international peace and security.

