Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would also like to express its reasons for
supporting the resolution that we have just adopted, for
we understand that acts of piracy and armed robbery
off the coast and on the territory of Somalia require
real action on the part of the Security Council to help
combat them. It is for the same reason that Costa Rica
has supported previous resolutions adopted by the
Council in the past six months on this matter, namely,
resolutions 1816 (2008), 1838 (2008) and 1846 (2008).

My delegation believes that piracy and armed
robbery off the coast and on the territory of Somalia
are consequences of the crisis being experienced by
that country. However, they are not the primary cause
of the problem. We believe that the Council should
swiftly address the primary cause with the same
speediness with which it addressed the consequences,
in order to cooperate in helping the country achieve
lasting peace and stability.

We also believe that any efforts that may be
carried out to combat piracy and armed robbery off the
coast and on the territory of Somalia must necessarily
have the explicit consent of the Government of that
country, which should always have the last word on
matters that affect it directly. It is also crucial that we
frame those efforts within international law and that we
coordinate closely with the Government.

We would therefore have liked paragraph 6 of the
resolution to include an explicit reference to
international law, in order that the implementation of
all the necessary measures called for by that paragraph
always occurred within the context of international
law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We disagree with those who
understand that an explicit reference to international
law is a way of limiting or eviscerating the operative
part of the resolution. We believe that when the
Security Council acts in conformity with the Charter,
as in this instance, its resolutions not only have
international legal grounding, but they are themselves
international law.

Finally, my delegation calls on States to
implement this and previous resolutions and, in their
efforts to cooperate to combat piracy and armed
robbery off the coast and on the territory of Somalia,
adopt measures both in coordination with the
Government of that country and in close adherence to
the provisions of international law.

