Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Please allow me to
begin, Mr. President, by warmly welcoming you back
to New York. I am pleased to see an old friend and
colleague back in this important post, and we are very
confident that you will lead us very well this month.

I should also at the outset like to congratulate
your predecessor, Ambassador said Ben Mustapha, for
the tremendous work he did during the month of
February. We are pleased that, even though the month
of February was shorter than the month of January,
there were more substantive outcomes in the month of
February than in the month of January, and we
congratulate you.

Mr. President, we would also like to begin-I
will limit my congratulatory remarks at this point, as
this is the last congratulatory remark I will make - by
thanking you for organizing this debate. We think the
subject is an important one, because it advances a very
key principle we believe in, which is the principle of
accountability. In this regard, I must say that it is
somewhat unusual for the Council to meet and review
what heads of Government have decided six months
ago, but your willingness to do this shows that we are
prepared to discuss every subject if we have to.

We are also pleased that the Secretary-General
took time off of his busy schedule to open the debate.
He made some very important remarks. From what I
understood, I think he focused on one key word, which,
if I heard correctly, was "action". In our remarks this
afternoon - and I will try to be brief- we will focus
on another key word, which is "results". That will be
the theme of my remarks this afternoon.

Mr. President, in your paper, which is very
helpful, you posed six questions that we could touch
upon in the course of this debate. But what we decided
to do was in fact to go back to an earlier part of the
paper, where, even before the six questions, you posed,
in the fourth paragraph of the background paper, four
questions which we will try to address.

I will read out what the questions were.

"Indeed, over the past years, the Security
Council has been confronted with truly
fundamental questions. Has it effectively
discharged its primary responsibility in the area
of the maintenance of international peace and
security? Is the Council ready to produce and
implement a well-targeted strategy to fulfil its
primary task under the Charter of the
United Nations? Is there a common will to face
this challenge? And is there any shared vision of
a real way to ensure an effective role for the
Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security?" (S/2001/185, 
p- 2)
I will try to answer each question very briefly.

The first question: has the Council effectively
discharged its primary responsibility in the area of
maintenance of international peace and security? Our
answer is that like any other human institution, the
Security Council has its share of successes and failures,
and indeed the speakers that we have heard this
morning provided us illustrations of both. We can
indeed be grateful that the world at large is at peace.
This is a significant human achievement. But we are
still a long way from seeing the end of the scourge of
war. Millions still live in conflict situations, and as the
representatives of Algeria, Egypt and Namibia, among
others, have pointed out, the response of this Council
to many of these conflict situations has remained
inconsistent. I will mention some examples of
inconsistencies.

For example, while the Council authorized the
deployment of a mission 45,000-strong in Kosovo, for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is the
size of Western Europe, the Security Council has
envisaged a mission of only 3,000 peacekeepers.

We are aware that the reasons are complex, and it
is not possible to go into the complex reasons here. At
the end of the day, the international community will
judge us by our results on the ground. Indeed, in some
cases the Council has proved itself incapable of action
when action was sorely needed. Of course, the worst
cases, which have been mentioned earlier, have been
Rwanda and Srebrenica. But even while these
examples are still fresh in our minds, some United
Nations Members have found it difficult to understand
the continued ambivalence of the Council towards live
cases today, which include, for example, Guinea, which
is the host of 500,000 refugees and whose borders with
Sierra Leone and Liberia continue to be threatened by
attacks. It is clear that perhaps more effective action is
needed in such areas. For the same reason, we believe
the Council needs to monitor the recent developments
in Burundi very closely, for despite the fact that the
peace process has been facilitated by no less a
personality than Nelson Mandela, we continue to run
into great difficulties.

The biggest irony here is that after all the lofty
pronouncements the Security Council has made,
especially on the issue of protection of civilians in
armed conflicts - and we have resolution 1318 (2000)
to testify to that, which was adopted at the highest
political level of the Council - unfortunately, from
time to time, when civilians are in dangerous
situations, the Council has not acted promptly or
effectively. In this regard, I note the points made by the
Ambassadors of Egypt and Namibia about the plight of
civilians in the Middle East.

The second question: is the Council ready to
produce and implement a well-targeted strategy to
fulfil its primary Charter task? Our answer flows from
the first question, so you will not be surprised, Mr.
President, ifI say that the Council's responses have
often been ad hoc. To preserve its freedom of action,
the Council has not worked out consistent criteria or
principles for intervention, and this explains the
inconsistent ad hoc responses. Our concern here is that
the standing and the credibility of the Council will be
diminished by signs of ad hoc responses, rather than
consistent responses. Perhaps the Council has a
strategy, but if it has, it is, unfortunately, not obvious to
the larger public outside.

The third question: is there a common will to face
this challenge? We all know that for most of the cold
war the Council was divided. Briefly, after the end of
the cold war, especially during the Gulf War, the
Council acted with a common will. This was followed
in the early 1990s by problems and disasters, in
Somalia, Bosnia and so forth, which unfortunately
destroyed some of the common will. The challenge the
Council faces today, which is a real challenge, is to
rebuild that common will. The leadership for this, we
believe, as a small State, must come from the major
Powers. We must also demonstrate it, as I said earlier,
on the ground. This common will has surfaced in
places like East Timor, Kosovo and, possibly, Sierra
Leone, but in other areas which were also mentioned
this morning, the Council has not acted as effectively.

The fourth and final question: is there any shared
vision of a real way to ensure an effective role for the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security? Again, the answer, if we want to be
completely honest with ourselves, is no. We do not
have a shared vision yet. This is perhaps one of the
tragedies about the Council today. The Charter gives it
sweeping powers and sweeping responsibilities, but the
custodians of these powers and responsibilities perhaps
have not done a good job in meeting their Charter
responsibilities. The time has therefore come to work
out our common vision. We hope that this debate will
do it.

In conclusion, let me be honest. In the interest of
brevity, I have kept my answers short, but the result of
keeping my answers short is that I have been very
harsh in the assessment; perhaps excessively harsh. But
I have been so with a clear reason, and the reason is
that the many small States like Singapore have an
interest in a stronger, rather than a weaker, Council. We
believe that the only way we can create a stronger
Council rather than a weaker Council is to have such
honest, open discussions about the questions that you
have raised, Mr. President, in your paper.

We also believe that for the Council to become
strong and effective it needs to have a good strong
relationship with the rest of the United Nations
community. Indeed, one of the problems we have
pointed to from time to time is that there is
unfortunately a disconnect sometimes between the
Security Council and the rest of the United Nations
community. Our hope is that a debate like this, if
conducted openly and honestly, will help reduce the
disconnect, and if it helps reduce the disconnect, we
will have a more effective Security Council. We
therefore thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
debate.

