Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to extend my thanks to the
President of the Security Council for his initiative to
convene this meeting, and I welcome his presence. We
would also like to recognize the presence of the
ministers and the Secretary-General at this important
meeting.
08-65213

This meeting is being held to consider a draft
resolution on the question of Palestine, and we hope
that it will represent a reversal of the behaviour of the
Council over the past few years. Libya believes that the
Security Council should consider and, according to the
letter of the Charter, decide this question, which has
represented a continuous threat to peace and security
for more than six decades.

This problem has been accompanied by
tremendous suffering of the Palestinian people and all
other peoples of the region. Violations of human rights,
unprecedented breaches of international law,
remarkable for both their breadth and duration,
continue. It was the cause of many wars and has led to
a continuous cycle of violence.

Despite all of this, the Council has for years
refrained from taking explicit and decisive action on
this question. Even in cases in which the Security
Council has taken decisions and adopted resolutions,
these resolutions have never been implemented due to
the lack of genuine political will by some for a just
solution that respects international law, rejects
aggression and occupation and condemns the
oppression of people.

Libya welcomes, on principle, the attempt to
adopt a Security Council resolution on the question of
Palestine. At the same time, it believes that
generalization of the question, deliberate ambiguity
and disregard for confronting breaches of international
law do not serve peace as much as they hinder it.

The aggressor and occupier could interpret the
text as a form of acceptance of its behaviour and
policy, which, in turn, reinforces such behaviour. The
victims could see this as proof that the international
community is not serious, is biased and has double
standards, which pushes them to further frustration and
despair, with all of the repercussions.

This year, the situation in the region has plumbed
unprecedented depths of deterioration on the ground.
Since 27 November 2007, the date of the launch of the
Annapolis conference, the practices of the Israeli
occupiers have continued to escalate. The killing and
the detentions have continued, settlement construction
has intensified, the siege of the Gaza Strip has
worsened and the number of checkpoints and barriers
in the West Bank, which make daily life unbearable
and normal human activity very difficult, has
increased.

Furthermore, the demolition of houses has
continued as has the building of the separation wall,
most of it on Palestinian territory. In fact, the whole
world has witnessed aggression by terrorist and
extremist settlers against the Palestinians. This
violence has even extended to Arabs within the Green
Line.

We have recently heard some statements by
Israeli officials that provide us with further proof that
behind the settlers' violence, lies, in fact, an official
acceptance and encouragement both inside or outside
the Green Line. All of these acts constitute explicit
breaches and violations of international law, the Road
Map requirements and the Annapolis joint
understandings.

Does not the statement by the Human Rights
Council's rapporteur to the Security Council state that
we should move quickly to apply specific criteria
protecting the Palestinians who are facing collective
punishment by policies that are basically crimes
against humanity? Is it not logical and clear that the
minimum for reaching a just solution would be to
condemn these practices as well as to put an end to
them?

Libya is very eager to bring about peace and has
worked, and continues to work, for peace and believes
that these Israeli practices cannot represent a way to
reach peace. We also believe that ignoring and
disregarding such practices is an unintended invitation
to continue such behaviour.

