Mr. Malloch Brown: For the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the rule of law has
moved centre stage, particularly, of course, for the
countries that we are discussing today - those in crisis
and in post-conflict situations. The rule of law is, after
all, the indispensable platform for development. People
and economies need rules if the sustained interactions
that build societies are to take place.

But, if I may say so, the rule of law is too
important to be left to lawyers. The rule of law must be
rooted in the social and political context of a nation. It
is an expression of the fundamental social contract
arrived at when peace replaces war and people find the
terms on which they can live together: minorities with
majorities; losers with winners; women with men.
Legitimacy, availability and accessibility govern the
success of new laws in a post-conflict society. Do the
laws meet the test of being adequately home-grown, or
has somebody else's legal system been imported
wholesale? Is there a court system able to restrain over-
zealous police and military? Is there one that offers
affordable, rapid redress to the emerging new small
businessmen and women to encourage them to enter
the formal economy by protecting their property rights,
and indeed, giving them the very right to do honest
business when warlords, crime and corruption are still
rampant?

UNDP has been working on these issues
throughout the world. Drawing on a very thorough
recent review of our work in post-conflict and
transitional countries - the conclusions of which have
helped to form and shape the collective thinking of the
United Nations as outlined in the Secretary-General's
report - I would like to reiterate some of the key
distilled lessons from our perspective.
Our starting point, as the Secretary-General made
clear this morning, is that too often international
assistance on the rule of law has ignored the link
between the rule of law and politics. Assistance is
often technocratic and apolitical in nature, focusing on
the transfer of technical know-how to State institutions
and on the technical modernization of institutions such
as the courts and the police. In the first post-conflict
stages, a policeman or policewoman in a
neighbourhood often matters much more than a
computer at the police station, but given violence and
training issues, the first - the bobby on the beat -
may be much harder to pull off.

Too often, rule-of-law assistance neglects the
need to build consensus among national stakeholders
on the type of reform needed. As a result, rule-of-law
reforms, which we - I think, like everybody else
here- consider to include the police and prison
systems, can lack the necessary legitimacy to be truly
effective in providing the platform for sustainable
peace and development. Events in Haiti are one
example of this. There, the failure was larger than a
failure of laws, but the lack of local legitimacy in the
new rule-of-law system, particularly with regard to the
police, was one element in a broader crisis of
institutions.

For that reason, we have found that international
assistance needs to aim at building indigenous support
for reform. Reform efforts rarely incorporate public
participation in the design and implementation of
projects. Crucially, most projects are implemented in
consultation only with Governments, to the exclusion
of civil society. Experience demonstrates that future
United Nations assistance needs a component for
public debate and must rely more on project proposals
by local actors. The United Nations has an important
role to play in facilitating negotiations among national
stakeholders in order to build that political will for
rule-of-law reform. The emphasis that the Secretary-
General put on this point is very welcome.

All this work needs to take place in the context of
a comprehensive approach. The rule of law is a system
of interrelated institutions which cannot be considered
separately: actions in any one impact on them all.
However, we have found that rule-of-law assistance is
often piecemeal and does not acknowledge these
linkages. For example, assistance to El Salvador,
Guatemala and Haiti in many ways viewed the public
security sector separately from the judicial and
correctional sectors. It is the failure to develop
complementary reforms across sectors and institutions
that has often resulted in conflict and lack of clarity on
the roles of different institutions.

Despite that, however, cooperation among donors
is too often the exception rather than the rule, resulting
in a failure to accumulate information and lessons
learned. For example, in Guatemala, a country of 10
million people and 419 judges, by 1996 there had
already been more than 50 reports on various aspects
of its judicial system, financed by 22 donors. In
addition, donors have often engaged in overlapping or
contradictory projects. In Nicaragua, more than 11
donors are involved in rule-of-law reform, often in
overlapping projects. Given this predicament, it is vital
that donors coordinate and accept direction from the
recipient country when they evaluate a country's needs,
develop a framework of assistance and implement the
projects.

Less elevated, but at least as important
practically, is the need for early, transparent
commercial laws to be put in place. That brings
business out of the informal sector and, by protecting
property rights and transactions, allows a market
economy to take shape and provides business owners
with an environment in which they can develop and
provide the growth, jobs and prosperity that are a vital
emollient for the scars of conflict.

Clearly, throughout such efforts - again as the
Secretary-General said this morning - issues of truth
and reconciliation often risk overshadowing early
justice development. But we do need to be cautious.
There is a time and place for the matter of truth and
reconciliation: too early retributive justice can
undermine a fragile peace and the even more fragile
trust between the former enemies on which it rests. Yet
truth and justice postponed means hidden graves deep
in the minds of men and women - at least for the
families of victims. And that can prevent a society
from turning the page to a new era of peace.

More broadly, I would just like to add that we are
working with the Secretariat to support electoral
processes. I recognize that that is on the edge of the
rule of law, but it is critically linked. This year alone,
UNDP will have supported elections in 19 countries,
including two weeks ago in Indonesia and this week in
Afghanistan. Elections matter. They are the road from
post-conflict to longer-term legitimacy and social
consensus. Yet we have learned that if elections are
premature and not placed within the process of
building the rule of law, the electoral process is
undermined. Then, rather than aiding the
reconstruction and recovery process, weak State
institutions can radicalize political discourse and
exacerbate the difficult task of reaching agreements,
building coalitions among national stakeholders and
protecting minority rights.

Finally, I hope that within the United Nations
system we are making good progress in pooling our
expertise and resources to support the various rule-of-
law aspects of peace operations. In Afghanistan, Iraq
and Haiti, UNDP made available some of its own
expert staff to advise the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on such rule-of-law issues. That has
led to joint assessments, joint programming and joint
resource mobilization, culminating in enhanced
cooperation in the United Nations system to support
national capacity-building for the rule of law.

Critical to the work and continued relevance of
the United Nations in this area are the working
partnerships between the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Office of Legal Affairs, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, UNDP and others.

Recognizing the interdependence between the
rule of law and development, and the social, political
and economic context within which the rule of law
must be rooted, it is clear that we owe it to the
countries where we work and to ourselves to deliver
the holistic approach to the rule of law that we preach
to them.

