Mr. Radomski (Poland): At the outset, let me
express our sincere condolences to the Russian
delegation on the sudden passing away of Russia's
Permanent Representative, Ambassador Vitaly
Churkin. At this hour of sadness and disbelief, our
deepest sympathies go to his family and the Mission of
the Russian Federation in New York.

I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
debate with a focus on conflicts in Europe.

Poland fully agrees with the position of the
European Union presented at the beginning of our
meeting by Ms. Helga Schmid, Secretary General of
the European External Action Service of the European
Union. Allow me to present additional comments in my
national capacity.

We fully share the analyses presented in the
Ukrainian concept note (S/2017/108, annex) prepared
ahead of this meeting. New challenges and threats
have certainly emerged in Europe in recent years. Our
major concern is that we have seen European security
architecture undermined by a new type of threats and
conflicts that pose serious risks to rules-based order.
Now, you, Mr. President, asked an important question:
how should we respond to these challenges and threats?
Let me focus on three issues: principles, the role of
regional organizations and the Security Council.

First, with regard to principles, we believe in
a world that is based on the rule of law and not the
law of the mighty. President of Poland Andrzej Duda
underlined this notion in his addresses to the General
Assembly during two previous general debates (see A/7l/PV.9 and A/70/PV.13). We must categorically
reject aggression and any use of force between States.
Europe is no exception, but rather - having the tragic
legacy of two world wars - should serve as an example
of the peaceful settlement of disputes.

State sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and the inviolability of borders are the
cornerstones of both the Charter of the United Nations
and the Helsinki Final Act. Regrettably, we have not
seen these basic principles observed in the cases of
illegal referendum, annexation and the occupation of
Ukrainian Crimea, nor in the eastern parts of Ukraine
that faced aggression and war imposed from the
outside by neighbouring Russia. As a result, since the
start of hostilities in 2014, we have witnessed 10,000
people killed, refugees, internally displaced persons
and civilian populations affected by the military
operations. Today, still, 3.8 million people are in need
of humanitarian assistance, as assessed by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The
territorial integrity and full sovereignty of Ukraine
are key to European security and we definitely need
to stand by it. The use of military pressure cannot be
accepted at the negotiating table. The Minsk agreements
have to be fully implemented and Russia bears a special
responsibility in this regard. We also call on Russia
to use its influence on separatists to ensure the full
implementation of their obligations.

Other areas of protracted conflict that call for our
attention are Georgia's regions of Abkhazia and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, which remain illegally
occupied by neighbouring Russia. Any attempts to
change internationally recognized borders through
so-called referendums or illegal treaties must never be
recognized by the international community.

There is yet another principle that we find important
from the European perspective and would like to
highlight today, namely, the protection of members of
ethnic and religious minorities. Europe has both a rich
tradition of cooperation and a tragic history of conflicts
and tensions on ethnic and religious grounds. The
peaceful coexistence of different nations and religions
is especially vital for stability in the Balkan region.

Let me now turn to the role ofregional organizations.
Throughout decades we developed in Europe a wide
network of regional and subregional organizations and
initiatives with the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council
of Europe as the most prominent examples. They have at
their disposal different tools for the peaceful settlement
of disputes, from consultations, dialogue, mediation and
confidence-building measures to observer missions and
judicial framework. Once a situation or conflict arises,
members should make every effort to effectively use
these mechanisms. The Security Council should further
strengthen its relationship with these organizations,
especially on issues that are discussed both by the
Council and regional organizations.

For instance, in the case of the conflict in Ukraine,
OSCE, through its Special Monitoring Mission, is the
only international organization present in the conflict
zone. We strongly support the efforts of the OSCE. It
is clear that more international presence in Ukrainian
Donbas might help to calm the situation. OSCE
observers must have full and unhindered access to be
able to implement the Mission's mandate, including
to the demilitarized areas and the Ukrainian-Russian
border. The OSCE also plays a significant role in the
resolution of other protracted conflicts in Transnistria
and Nagorno Karabakh.

Last but not least, I would like to say a few words
about the Security Council. Poland believes that
conflicts can and should be prevented or mitigated by
early, well-suited political and diplomatic engagement.
Where the Security Council demonstrates political will
and acts unanimously, good results will follow. But
when its work is hampered by the use or threat of use of
the veto, conflicts remain unresolved and last for years.

We should recall again and again that the privilege
of being a permanent member of the Council is
inherently interlinked with an obligation to take actions
aimed at the fulfilment of the principles and purposes
of the United Nations. The veto must not lead to the
Council's deadlock in the most pressing security issues.

