Baroness Ashton: I want to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, and the Security Council for inviting
me to address the Council on this occasion. I want to
congratulate the Republic of Korea on its presidency
and membership in the Council, as well as Argentina,
Australia, Rwanda and Luxemburg on their election to
the Security Council - especially Luxembourg as a
first-time member.

I would like today to present the different ways in
which, I think, the European Union (EU) contributes
to international peace and security. Our contribution
should be seen in the context of the strong and
long-standing commitment we have to effective
multilateralism with the United Nations at its core. I
want to pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
a good partner and a good friend. The European Union
has always strongly supported his actions. His current
efforts to broker peace in the Great Lakes region is just
one case in point.

I believe that the European Union's contribution
is three-fold: our ability to marshall a wide range of
instruments in what we call a comprehensive approach;
our direct involvement in international negotiations,
including mediation, on behalf of the international
community; and our close work with our international
and regional partners, where only collective efforts can
deliver results. A particular strength of the European
Union is its ability to respond to a crisis with a wide
range of tools and instruments - short- and long-term,
humanitarian and development, security and political.

We are particularly pleased that the long-standing
engagement of the EU in Somalia and the Horn of
Africa, as set out in the Strategic Framework for the
Horn of Africa and carried out in close cooperation
with the United Nations, has contributed to the recent
breakthrough in the political process and in terms
of security in that region. Through our missions, we
have contributed to greatly reducing piracy; it dropped
by 95 per cent over the past two years. Through our
development cooperation and political support, we
contribute to lasting security, what I have coined "deep
democracy" and prosperity.

I was pleased to receive the Somali President,
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, who expressed his
country's appreciation for the EU's efforts at the end
of last month, although he also called for the continued
and comprehensive engagement of the European Union
and the international community. It is imperative that
we all join in that support to ensure effective and
continued progress, as the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/69) emphasizes.

Our support to Mali and the Sahel should also
be seen in the context of a comprehensive European
engagement. The current crisis in Mali provides us
with a challenging test case. The threat posed by
terrorist groups is a threat not only to the existence of
one country, but also to the security of a region and
the international community. It calls for swift and
coordinated international action, and, of course, the
United Nations plays a leading role in that.

The situation on the ground changes rapidly.
Thanks to the intervention of France, which responded
to the Malian President's appeal for help, we are
witnessing rapid advances in the liberation of the
north of Mali. We have also seen progress regarding
the adoption of a road map by the Malian authorities
to restore democracy and constitutional rule and faster
deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA). For all that, challenges and
threats still remain.

What we have called our comprehensive approach
is an integral part of that international response.
Humanitarian aid has been increased by an additional
€20 million from €58 million in 2012. We have also
contributed through security-related measures, such
as the EU training mission to help the Malian Army
to be restructured under civilian authority. We have
given considerable financial and logistical support to
AFISMA. We have made available €50 million through
the African Peace Facility and established a clearing
house to channel national contributions.
Our political support for Mali focuses on
supporting the concrete implementation of the road
map, support for the electoral process and, what is
extremely important, an inclusive national dialogue,
especially with representatives of the people from the
north of Mali. We have also provided economic support
by resuming EU development aid. We are making
available more than €250 million for new projects
across the entire country and for budgetary assistance.

It is important that the Malian authorities investigate
all allegations of human rights abuses. We support
the United Nations intention to deploy human rights
observers to Mali, and we welcome the decision by the
International Criminal Court to open investigations.

Lasting peace and reconciliation and reconstruction
require long-term commitments on the part of the
international community. The donors conference on
29 January, as well as the Support and Follow-up Group
on the Situation in Mali, the third ministerial meeting
of which we were proud to host last week, have helped
to further mobilize international support.

But we need to do more. It is important to stress
the central coordinating role that has been assigned to
the United Nations under resolution 2085 (2012). We
appreciate the leadership that the Security Council
has shown, as well as the recognition that the Council
has given to our efforts. All of us need to support the
United Nations in taking on greater responsibility for,
for example, peacekeeping, particularly in what will be
a crucial stabilization phase.

We will also continue to play our role in the
broader framework of our Sahel strategy, and we look
forward to working closely with the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Romano Prodi, in the context
of the upcoming integrated United Nations strategy for
the Sahel.

In my role as High Representative/Vice-President,
I am responsible for dealing with the Iranian nuclear
programme, and, as the Council knows, the Iranian
nuclear issue remains at the top of the international
agenda. Based on the mandate we have received from
the Security Council, and working together with what
I describe as the E3+3 Governments, but they are
also known as the five plus one group there are six
either way - we are engaging in intensive diplomatic
efforts to seek a negotiated solution that meets the
international community's concerns about the Iranian
nuclear programme. After very lengthy consultations,
we were able to agree on the next round of talks to be
held on 26 February in Kazakhstan. We hope Iran will

 
come to that negotiation with flexibility and that we
can make substantial progress.

Our strength and credibility in negotiating with
Iran derives from the E3+3, but also from the more
general support that we receive from the international
community. I am very grateful for the constant support
of the Security Council, and I would add that our
cooperation with and support to the International
Atomic Energy Agency is also very important. We
remain determined to work towards a solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue based on the dual-track approach.
There is no doubt that the pressure of sanctions has been
instrumental in bringing Iran back to the negotiating
table, but sanctions cannot be an end in themselves. The
key is for Iran to comply fully with its international
obligations.

Like the Security Council, the European Union has
condemned in the strongest possible terms the latest
nuclear test of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. It is a further blatant challenge to the global
non-proliferation regime and an outright violation of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's international
obligations not to produce or test nuclear weapons, in
particular under Security Council resolutions.

It remains vital therefore that the international
community stays united and determined. We will work
with key partners, especially with the Council, to build
a firm and unified response aimed at demonstrating to
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea that there
are consequences for its continued violations. We once
again urge them to abandon their nuclear weapons
programme, including the uranium enrichment
programme, in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner.

In the European Union, I take responsibility for
facilitating the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo,
between Prime Ministers Thaci and Dacic'. So far this
has led to some concrete results. We have an agreement
to take forward the implementation of integrated border/
boundary management, and as a result four gates are
now open and fully operational. We have an agreement
on arrangements for the protection of religious and
cultural heritage, and we have an agreement to appoint
liaison officers to be hosted in the European Union
offices in Belgrade and Pristina.

As the Council may have noted, last week the two
Presidents, Serbian President Nikolie and Kosovan
President Jahjaga, met in Brussels for the first time,
marking an important step between Belgrade and
Pristina. The process continues; a new meeting with
the two Prime Ministers will take place next week in
Brussels. I want to take this opportunity to commend
Prime Minister Dacic' and Prime Minister Thaci for the
way they have approached these discussions, and for
the courage they have shown in doing so. It is not an
easy process for either of them, but they have our full
support, and I also count on the support of the Council.

We are also working closely with partners to address
some of the more difficult challenges to international
peace and security. Here, I want to mention briefly
Syria and the Middle East peace process. In the Middle
East peace process, we believe that the time has come
for concrete steps to be made towards peace, to see
direct and substantial negotiations and to achieve
a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
based on two States - a solution that addresses both
Palestinian aspirations to statehood and sovereignty
and Israeli concerns about security. We believe there is
an urgent need for renewed, structured and substantial
peace efforts in 2013 that will require work with all
international partners, including the United Nations
and the League of Arab States. The European Union
position remains that we will not recognize changes
to the pre-1967 borders other than those agreed by the
parties.

We suggest that the following parameters could
be a basis for resuming negotiations. We see security
arrangements that respect the Palestinians' sovereignty,
protect Israel's security and prevent the resurgence of
terrorism as key. There must be an agreed, just and fair
solution to the question of refugees, and a fulfilment of
the aspirations ofboth parties for the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States.

It will be important to set up an internationally
supported framework for negotiations. I would like to
highlight in this regard the role ofthe Secretary-General
in the Quartet, and to strongly support the important
work done by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
Special Coordinator Robert Serry on the ground. We
will continue to work with all those who are willing to
join the quest for peace, stability and prosperity in the
Middle East, and in so doing to recognize the critical
importance of regional involvement. We think of Jordan
and the role that His Majesty the King has played, and
of other Arab nations, including at this time the role of
Egypt in what has happened in Gaza, and, of course,
the whole question of Palestinian reconciliation. All of
us, I would argue, should engage.

In our efforts to support Syria, we coordinate
closely with all partners at the bilateral, multilateral
and inter-institutional levels. We give lasting support
to the United Nations through common actions and
initiatives, which are crucial to preserving the role
of the Security Council. That includes tackling grave
human rights abuses and war crimes.

We stand firmly behind the complex mission of
Joint Special Representative Brahimi. We hope his
plans will result in concrete initiatives by the Council
to make the Geneva communique (8/2012/522, annex)
operational. We also welcome the recent statements
made by the President of the Syrian coalition, Sheikh
Mouaz Al-Khatib, who has proposed launching
discussions with acceptable representatives of the Syrian
Government. We encourage the Syrian authorities to
seize this opportunity. If together we can set up the
right conditions and a timetable for discussions and add
important confidence-building measures, we might be
able to build new momentum for what has so far been a
most difficult challenge.

But in addition to our political efforts, we have
remained an important donor of humanitarian aid to
Syria; the financial support of the EU and its member
States is now €600 million. We have also imposed
EU-wide sanctions against the regime, and we are
working on improving the operational capacity of
the Syrian opposition coalition, which we accept as a
legitimate representative of the Syrian people.

It will be equally important to engage in planning
for the future and to closely involve the Syrian
opposition coalition in that process. The EU will
support a political transition with effective measures on
the ground, institutional and economic recovery, post-
conflict accountability and needs-disaster assessment.

I have not been able today to refer to all the various
contributions of the EU to the work of the United
Nations. I have very much limited myself to what are
perhaps the most pressing issues. But we harbour a
strong belief in effective multilateralism and wish to
be a good and supportive partner to the United Nations.
Let me end by acknowledging the great responsibility
of the Council for steering the international community
away from conflict and confrontation. In carrying
out its tasks, it can count on the full commitment and
support of the European Union.

