Mr. Holte (Norway): Urgent and unprecedented
changes are needed to stop global temperatures from
rising over 1.5°C. That was stated in the report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change issued
in October 2018. In Secretary-General Guterres' own
words, "Climate change is moving faster than we are."

Let me acknowledge the leadership provided by the
Dominican Republic, a country from one of the regions
most affected by climate-related disasters.

Norway was present at the ministerial level at
the Foreign Ministers Meeting of the Caribbean
Community, as well as the Summit of the Pacific Island
Forum in Nauru. The messages from those meetings
were clear: we are being ravaged by climate change.
The important Boe Declaration on climate is a key
document on the security threats arising from climate
change. The evidence of global warming is also obvious
in my own region - the Arctic. The magnitude of
change in the Arctic is twice the global increase. It will
have profound local, regional and global implications.

The relationship between climate change, peace and
security is complex. Climate change is seldom a direct
cause of conflict, but it works as a threat multiplier.
Annually, 26 million people are displaced by natural
disasters. Global economic losses from extreme weather
events are up 250 per cent over the past 20 years. By
2030, more than 100 million people could be driven
into extreme poverty by climate change.

The consequences are often different for women
than for men. Therefore, our response must be
gender responsive.

Climate change not only aggravates existing
tensions and provides fertile grounds for conflict.
It can seriously destabilize economies, nurture
political extremism and - in some cases - threaten
the very existence of a country, in particular small
island developing States. It also seriously undermines
our joint global efforts to reach the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security. The
climate-security nexus merits, in our View, being firmly
placed on the Council's agenda. It is also a priority for
Norway, as a candidate country for a non-permanent
seat in the Council. Norway also supports the initiative
to appoint a United Nations special representative for
climate and security.

With regard to combating climate change, I see
three major lines of defence. The Paris Agreement must
remain our first line of defence. The Secretary-General's
climate summit in September this year should focus on
enhancing ambitions. Secondly, assisting vulnerable
countries in building their resilience to natural disasters
and adapting to the impacts of climate change should
be our second line of defence, and something that we
need to focus much more on. Our third line of defence
should be integrating the climate-security nexus into
development and security policies.

Climate action is perhaps the indisputable case to
be made for multilateralism. You cannot go it alone. It
is simply not an option. We therefore warmly welcome
the joint initiative of Germany and Nauru to establish
the Group of Friends on Climate and Security.

Amidst difficulty lies opportunity. Estimates show
that bold action against climate change could yield a
direct economic gain of $26 trillion through 2030, as
compared with doing business as usual. Furthermore,
the ongoing renewable energy transition, or should I
say revolution, is likely to reduce the number of energy-
related conflicts.

The next 10 to 15 years are a "unique use it or
lose it" moment in history. There is great urgency.
In a crisis time is always the enemy. As a consistent
partner, Norway is committed to doing its share for our
common future.

