Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea): Allow me
to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for your
initiative of arranging today's open debate devoted to
Africa, to which my Government attaches particular
importance.

We wholeheartedly welcome the Council's renewed
and sustained attention to the problems facing Africa, as
demonstrated in its holding of a series of special sessions:
one in September, another today and probably more than
one next month. We also appreciate your innovative way

 

of organizing today's discussion, by which you will
doubtless lead our meeting to a fruitful conclusion.

Let me now put forward several concrete suggestions
related to the subjects before us for elaboration by the
Council.

First, we consider that there is an urgent need for the
Council to involve itself more directly and effectively in
crises situations in Africa. We all witnessed most
dramatically the crucial role that the Council mission in
East Timor played in reversing the dangerous situation
there, enabling the Council and the parties directly
concerned to work out successfully and expeditiously the
arrangements so badly needed to bring the situation under
control.

In our view, the Security Council might consider
sending such missions more frequently to crisis areas, with
the mandate of fact-finding and possibly of prevention or
management of conflict situations or even of post-conflict
peace-building in close collaboration with the Governments
concerned, the Secretary-General and his representatives.

Secondly, the Council could also examine the
possibility of setting up within the Council a special
working unit, with whatever name, possibly with the
following mandate: to continuously monitor and collect all
relevant information, in close consultation with the
countries involved, the representatives of the Secretary-
General, the Organization of African Unity (OAU), other
regional and subregional organizations and all relevant
specialized agencies and United Nations organs involved
in the situation; and to report to the Council, as necessary,
on the conflict or potential conflict situations with
assessments and recommendations.

Thirdly, I would suggest that the Council explore the
possibility, as a long-term goal, of establishing a kind of
regional centre for African peacekeeping operations, in
cooperation with African Governments, the OAU and
other organizations, with the purpose of upgrading
peacekeeping capabilities in Africa. This centre might,
among other things, monitor the situation within the
region, detect early-warning signals of human rights
violations and humanitarian crises, serve as a clearing-
house for information gathering, provide professional
training and help the Secretariat in making effective plans
for rapid response, including logistical support planning.

Finally, there is a need to build Africa's own
capacity in the area of rapid response to prevent conflicts
or to contain and manage them. For these purposes, we
suggest that training assistance and ongoing staff
exchange programmes be further expanded and that
standby arrangements also be extended to more African
countries as soon as possible.

I sincerely hope that today's exchange of views and
suggestions will produce substantive and practical results
that ultimately will contribute to resolving many of the
urgent problems facing Africa today.

