Mr. Grignon (Kenya): 1 thank you, Madam President,
for having convened today's debate. Kenya welcomes
the global importance and priority that the Security
Council and the international community continue
to attach to the protection of children affected by or
involved in armed conflicts. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/409), which
enumerates the grave violations committed against
children in armed conflicts, and for impressing on us
the urgency of the need for greater protection of our
children.

The recruitment of children as weapons of war
underlies larger and more systemic issues that include
the breakdown of a country's social fabric and imply
a long-term generational aspect to the conflict and
the possibility of future mass atrocities. We need to
address the root causes of conflict, including political,
social and economic inequalities. Child protection
should be part and parcel of any strategy for managing
and preventing conflict. In that regard, we appreciate
the progress being made through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

Kenya is deeply concerned about the fact that
the number of children being recruited or abducted,
and even volunteering to take part in armed conflict
throughout the world, has escalated to unprecedented
levels. Child soldiers are engaged in severe conflicts
where there has been evidence of horrific abuse and
brutal Violence. We call on the Security Council to
address this critical issue as a specific priority concern.
We note with dismay the current unprecedented
challenges presented by the protection of children
who are growing up in situations affected by conflict.
The subjection of children to reprehensible acts of
violence and abuse must move humanity to reimagine
the responsibility to protect; it is indeed our collective
moral imperative and legal obligation.

In Kenya, the volatile situations in South Sudan,
Somalia and, more recently, Yemen are of great concern
and present a clear, persistent and continuing threat to
our national security. Armed groups such as Al-Shabaab
and Boko Haram continue to be emboldened and will
not be defeated or discouraged from abducting and
recruiting children by engagement and diplomacy alone.
The Security Council and the international community
must intercede to save the world's future.

Decades of conflict in our region have resulted in
a continued flow of refugees into Kenya. The burden
of hosting nearly 600,000 refugees continues to
place great strains on the delivery of social services,
particularly in education, health and the provision of
security. The majority of the refugees are women and
children, including ex-soldiers and children involved in
armed conflict. The world must not continue to permit
children to grow up in refugee camps where they can
hardly survive, let alone thrive. We therefore urge the
Security Council to spare no effort and to engage robustly
with the African Union and the Inter-Governmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) in seeking solutions
to end the conflicts in the affected regions. As the world
gathers in September for the United Nations summit to
adopt the post-2015 development agenda, the concept of
leaving no one behind must be applied to all countries
and regions in conflict.

Kenya applauds the launch of the "Children, Not
Soldiers" campaign by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and UNICEF for galvanizing the commitments of
eight concerned Governments to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children in national security
forces by the end of 2016.

We welcome the Secretary-General's call to the
Security Council to continue supporting the children
and armed conflict agenda by strengthening provisions
for the protection of children in all relevant mandates of
the United Nations peacekeeping, special political and
peacebuilding missions.

We recognize that the most effective way to
protect children is to prevent the outbreak of armed
conflicts and to prevent conflicts from escalating. In
that regard, Kenya is actively involved in seeking ways
to end conflicts and find sustainable peace through
cooperation with IGAD. Kenya has been at the forefront
of initiatives to negotiate for peace in the region. The
international community must also urgently and
collectively address effective ways to bring the existing
conflicts to an end.

