Ms. Kane: The report of the Secretary-General
before the Council details the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) from 8
March to 2 June 2006, based on its mandate under
resolution 1546 (2004). I am pleased to brief the
Council today on the activities of UNAMI under the
leadership of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Ashraf Jehangir Qazi.

During the past months, the Government
formation process was at the centre of political
attention in Iraq. Following the election for a new
parliament on 15 December 2005, Iraq's political
leaders engaged in a period of extensive and complex
negotiations, which culminated on 20 May in the
formation of the first constitutionally elected
Government led by Prime Minister Nouri Al-Maliki.
Differences of View within and among the political
blocs delayed three ministerial appointments.
Following further negotiations, this process was
completed on 8 June with the confirmation of the
Ministers of Defence, Interior and National Security.

Through this process, Iraq's political leaders have
shown that they can rise to the challenge of dialogue
and compromise with a view to forming an inclusive
and democratic Government, despite difficult overall
circumstances. This is all the more remarkable given
the serious deterioration of the security situation
following the Samarra bombing in February 2006.

Of particular concern is the mounting loss of
civilian life as a result of insecurity, high levels of
violence and a breakdown in law and order. It appears
that intercommunal violence and criminal activities
have compounded insurgent violence as threats to
06-3890]
national security and stability. Among the most
affected provinces were Baghdad, Ninewa, Salahuddin,
Anbar and, more recently, Diyala and Basra. In Basra,
the Government declared a month-long state of
emergency on 31 May and reinforced its security
presence. Ta'mim - mostly the city of Kirkuk - also
witnessed a growing number of violent incidents.

While the United Nations does not have precise
information about the numbers and breakdown of the
victims and perpetrators of violence, UNAMI
concluded in its latest bimonthly human rights report
that "hundreds of civilians are reported killed or
wounded weekly, including women and children, as
targeted or unintended victims of violent attacks".

The Secretary-General's report emphasizes that
March 2006 was the fourth most deadly month since
May 2003, with twice as many Iraqis killed as in
December 2005. In Baghdad, the Medico-Legal
Institute recently confirmed that more than 6,000
bodies were received in the first five months of 2006
alone. These are indeed gruesome figures. Targeted
assassinations, including attacks against prominent
politicians and their relatives, intimidation, threats and
kidnappings appear to be aimed directly at provoking
sectarian strife, lawlessness and ungovernability, as
well as a general atmosphere of fear and the loss of
public trust in the authorities. This violence has led to
an increase in internal displacement. Since late
February more than 100,000 people have been
displaced, adding up to a total of approximately 1.3
million internally displaced persons country-wide.

It is encouraging that immediately upon taking
office Prime Minister Al-Maliki expressed his
commitment to improve the security situation and
promote national reconciliation as his key priorities.
His new Government must now be empowered to
enable it to heal political and social divisions through
dialogue and confidence-building, to strengthen
democratic institutions and the rule of law and to
improve the living conditions for all Iraqis. This
approach offers the best prospects for ensuring that the
political process impacts positively on the security
situation. A promised review of anti-terror and de-
Baathification legislation will help to shape a more
conducive environment for national reconciliation.

However, achieving positive results in all these
areas will require time. At the outset, the effectiveness
of the new Government will largely be defined by its
06-3890]
ability to inspire the confidence of the Iraqi people by
taking immediate measures to improve security.

First and foremost, this will require the new
Government to gradually take full ownership of its
national affairs, including in the vital area of security,
assisted, as necessary, by the international community.
Efforts by the Multinational Force to speed up the
training and equipping of the Iraqi security forces
remain indispensable in this regard. A determined
effort is also needed to control militias and other
unauthorized armed forces with a View to re-
establishing a State monopoly on weapons. The United
Nations welcomes Prime Minister Al-Maliki's
expressed commitment to this issue.

In addition, in tackling violence, both the Iraqi
security forces and the Multinational Force have a
particular responsibility to act in full accordance with
international human rights and humanitarian law.
Notwithstanding their efforts to address Iraq's security
challenges, the United Nations is deeply concerned
about reported violations of those standards and urges
the Iraqi security forces, as well as the Multinational
Force to ensure full, transparent and effective
investigations of all such incidents to prevent their
recurrence.

Furthermore, the United Nations hopes that the
new Government will make it a priority to set a robust
human rights agenda that addresses both past and
current human rights violations and includes the
establishment of an independent national human rights
commission and a centre for missing and disappeared
persons. A robust human rights protection mechanism
must include investigating all allegations of human
rights violations and bringing perpetrators to justice in
order to prevent the development of a culture of
impunity.

In this context, the United Nations remains
concerned about the large number of detainees held in
detention centres country-wide without investigation or
criminal charges. While we welcome the
announcement by the new Government to release 2,500
detainees - on 7 June an initial group of
approximately 600 detainees was released - more
needs to be done to find constructive solutions to this
issue, including the release of the investigation into the
illegal detention centre of Al-Jadiriya and of other
investigations carried out by the Government on this
issue.
3
In addition to security measures, the new
Government will have to take broader measures with
the ultimate aim of promoting national reconciliation.
Although the new Government bears primary
responsibility in this regard, regional countries and the
wider international community can play an important
role in support of its efforts. The following steps at the
national, regional and international level might be
considered.

At the national level, it is not just the
responsibility of the Government, but of all Iraqi
political, social and religious leaders to eschew the
politics of sectarianism, hatred and violence, in which
everybody ultimately stands to lose, and instead
embrace dialogue, compromise and intercommunal
harmony in the larger national interest, in which all
stand to gain. Through their increasing active
participation in Iraq's democratic process, the vast
majority of Iraqis have demonstrated time and again
that, despite severe provocations, they reject the
politics of extremism pursued by a few and are
determined to resolve their differences peacefully.

This demonstrates that Iraq has a strong
foundation for national reconciliation. Three main
elements are needed to succeed. The first is an
inclusive political process that is responsive to the
needs of all Iraqi constituencies. The second is the
political will by all Iraqi leaders to work towards this
end, and the third element is effective mechanisms to
promote dialogue and consensus-building. The review
of the constitution that was agreed upon last year by
Iraq's political leaders could be an effective vehicle for
advancing the process of national reconciliation,
including for reaching a national consensus on a strong
framework for the Iraqi State. The constitution
provides for the early establishment of a constitutional
review committee of the new parliament. The United
Nations hopes that the new parliament will address this
issue as a matter of priority and remain fully
committed to providing continued assistance through
UNAMI's Office of Constitutional Support in
Baghdad.

The new parliament will also be required to form
specialized committees on important issues such as the
adoption of an electoral law and the establishment of a
new independent high electoral commission. These will
be fundamental steps for ensuring effective
preparations for future electoral events, such as the
planned governorate council and municipal elections.
UNAMI also stands ready to continue its support role
in this important area.

At the regional level, the League of Arab States is
planning to convene a conference on Iraqi national
accord. Such a forum could serve to encourage
dialogue and consensus among different Iraqi political
groups and thus contribute to national reconciliation.
Special Representative Qazi and UNAMI are working
closely with the League of Arab States on the
preparations for that conference - now scheduled for
August - in follow-up to the November 2005 Cairo
conference. Thorough preparations ensuring broadly
and truly representative Iraqi participation and
effective follow-up will be an important element for
the success of the conference.

At the international level, there is now an
opportunity to build a deeper consensus in support of
Iraq's transition, including in the Security Council. In
addition to fulfilling existing pledges and increasing
the levels of debt forgiveness, support for
reconstruction and foreign investment and an Iraqi-led
framework for mobilizing new and additional
international assistance for Iraq that has the broadest
possible support from the international community
should be considered as a matter of priority. For its
part, UNAMI and the country team have continued to
support the new Government in establishing effective,
transparent and accountable public institutions,
providing access to basic services and restoring public
infrastructure. UNAMI has also maintained its leading
role in donor coordination. We look forward to
discussing our future support role in this area in the
context of the priorities of the new national
development strategy.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, the
Organization's presence and ability to operate
effectively in Iraq remain severely constrained by the
security environment. To provide United Nations staff
with the best security possible, and therefore continue
to maintain a presence in Iraq, a number of mitigating
and protective measures are in place. The development
of an integrated long-term United Nations complex in
Baghdad has continued, and new premises in Erbil and
Basra have now been completed. For the foreseeable
future, the United Nations will continue to rely on the
Multinational Force for static and movement
protection.
06-3890]

With respect to dedicated air assets, we very

much welcome the decision by Denmark to offer

UNAMI a dedicated aircraft, and look forward to

discussions on the implementation arrangements of that
offer.

We are also grateful to all other Member States
that, in a variety of roles, support the work of the
United Nations in Iraq from its bases inside the
country, as well as in Jordan and Kuwait.

The United Nations remains fully committed,
circumstances permitting, to implement its mandate
under resolution 1546 (2004). Special Representative
Qazi and his team stand ready to render their good
offices and provide political facilitation to the new
Government, with a View to promoting dialogue and
national reconciliation. In addition, we intend to
strengthen our activities in other key areas of our
mandate, particularly concerning reconstruction and
development. We look forward to a comprehensive and
sustained dialogue with the new Government to
explore how we can best fulfil our mandate within the
prevailing circumstances.

In conclusion, with the establishment of the first
constitutionally elected Government, Iraq's political
transition, set forth in the Transitional Administrative
Law endorsed by resolution 1546 (2004), has been
completed. Over the past three years, Iraq's transition
has moved successfully from the Governing Council to
the Interim Government and the Transitional
Government. That culminated, in December 2005, in
Iraq's first elections for a constitutionally elected
Government. During that process the Iraqi people
showed great courage in participating in two elections
and one constitutional referendum, under very difficult
circumstances. These are important accomplishments
that have laid the foundations for Iraq's democratic
future, which need to be sustained with the full support
of the international community.

That successful political transition, however, has
been accompanied by continued instability, violence
and gross violations of fundamental human rights by
all sides. While it may be understandable that, due to
their transitory character, previous Governments were
unable to take some of the hard decisions required to
address the urgent needs of the Iraqi people, the
establishment of a constitutionally elected Government
for a full four-year term offers new hope.

06-3890]

Throughout their long history, the people of Iraq
have demonstrated that they have all the necessary
human, financial and natural capital to succeed. The
key to success remains finding lasting inclusive
political solutions to Iraq's most pressing challenges
within an overall framework of national reconciliation.
The United Nations remains committed to playing its
part in that endeavour.

