Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I extend congratulations
to you, Madam President, and the United States for
assuming the presidency of the Security Council.
We offer our respect, gratitude and admiration to
the United Kingdom for the way it presided over the
Council last month.
I would like to thank Mr. Gonzalo Koncke from the
Organization of American States (OAS) and Mr. Felix
Maradiaga for their important briefings to the Council
this morning, and also acknowledge the presence of
Foreign Minister Moncada Colindres at the Council
this morning.

Both the OAS and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) have
reported on the unfolding of the human rights crisis
in Nicaragua. Hundreds have been killed. There are
worrying reports of targeted violence and persecution
of peaceful protesters and human rights defenders,
as well as of incidents of torture and sexual violence
against detainees. Accounts of the existence and use of
armed elements loyal to the Government - or so-called
shock forces and mobs - are particularly alarming. The
crisis has potential regional implications, and needs to
be addressed in a spirit of preventive diplomacy. The
Security Council's role is, first and foremost, to support
those efforts.

We urge the Government to revive national
dialogue with all the parties concerned, including the
opposition, civil society and human rights defenders.
Women's participation in that dialogue is crucial. That
is the only way to ensure a peaceful solution to the
current crisis.

We condemn all violence, including from protesters.
The Nicaraguan authorities must act in accordance
with international human rights law. Protests that are
peaceful should never be hindered, and violence against
those who use their right to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly can never be justified.

Regional and subregional organizations are key to
preventing emerging crises from evolving further, as
everyone has said today and the briefings illustrate. We
commend and support the OAS for its role in promoting
a peaceful solution to the situation in Nicaragua. In
that regard, we call on the Government to fully engage
with the OAS, as well as with the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights.

The United Nations also has an important role to
play in supporting a peaceful solution to the crisis,
not least in supporting regional efforts and with
preventive diplomacy. We regret the expulsion of the
OHCHR mission last week, and hope that they will be
invited back without delay. We welcome the Secretary-
General's efforts and encourage him to continue to stay
actively engaged. The European Union will continue its
dialogue with all parties and actively support efforts of
the broader international community.

Sweden has long-standing and friendly relations
with Nicaragua. We are fully committed to supporting
the country in finding a peaceful solution to the current
crisis. Resuming inclusive, meaningful national
dialogue, reinvigorating democracy, restoring the rule
of law, respecting human rights and re-engaging with
the international community, including the United
Nations and the OAS, will be crucial to that.

