Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): At the
outset I would like to commend you, Mr. President, on
your initiative in devoting this wrap-up meeting of the
Security Council's work for March 2005 to African
issues.

It is an established fact that for several years
African issues have occupied the lion's share of the
Council's monthly deliberations. The month now
ending is no exception; it is fully representative of the
international community's efforts to prevent, manage
and settle conflicts in Africa. Indeed, no fewer than
eight conflicts affecting the African continent have
been the object of the Council's attention, from the
oldest to the most recent. In the same vein, I would like
to point out that six of the eight United Nations
peacekeeping operations on the continent, including
the recently established Sudan mission and the Peace-
building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau and the
Political Office for Somalia, have benefited from this
assessment.

Here, we should recall that Africa has half of the
Organization's peacekeeping operations, involving the
biggest number of military and police staff deployed -
almost 61,000 of a total of 77,000 personnel, with a
corresponding financial cost. This means that the
format for the Council's work for the month of March
gives us an excellent opportunity to deal with a range
of issues linked to the quest for greater effectiveness in
the actions of the international community on the
continent. In this connection, my delegation would like
to make the following comments.

The deployment of peacekeeping operations is an
important stage in the process of conflict settlement,
but their mere presence is not a guarantee of success in
the pursuit of the ultimate objective, which is a lasting
peace. It is widely acknowledged that to succeed, those
operations must be based on an overall plan to deal
with the consequences of a conflict: their military
dimension - a ceasefire, disarmament,
demobilization; and their human dimension -
reintegration, readjustment, resettlement or, in the case
of cross-border conflicts, repatriation; but also reasons
which in most cases relate to equitable access to
political power for all social groups involved. Finally,
there must be a programme for the consolidation of
peace that is viable in its institutional, social and
development aspects.

The situations that the Security Council
considered this month show that all international
operations take place in support of such road maps.
What I have in mind are the agreements - Naivasha
for the conflict in the southern Sudan, Arusha for
Burundi, Accra for Liberia, Linas-Marcoussis and
Accra III for Cote d'Ivoire, Lusaka and subsequent
agreements for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and the Algiers Agreement for Ethiopia and Eritrea -
which, of course, are all of differing natures. I would
like to add that in most of those situations United
Nations operations have benefited from a robust,
multidimensional mandate supported by a sanctions
regime that is generally adequate. But, as shown by the
indefinite extension of some of the oldest peacekeeping
operations, it appears that we must face the fact that
the crucial factor for conflict settlement remains the
unambiguous political will of parties to a conflict to
keep their commitments and the trust that necessarily
must be established among them.

While the Charter has given to the Security
Council enforcement measures that allow it to deal
with the lack of political will on the part of one of the
parties to a conflict, this does not come into play if
there is distrust among the parties. In that case, there is
no other choice but to resort to mediation, which
remains almost exclusively regional and subregional in
the African conflicts with which we have had to deal in
March. In this regard I wish to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the member States of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development for their recent
achievements in the service of peace in southern Sudan
and in Somalia and to the member States of the
Economic Community of West African States for their
tireless commitment in Western Africa. I wish to pay
particular tribute to President Obasanjo, current
Chairperson of the African Union, for his involvement
in the settlement of the conflict in Darfur, and to
President Mbeki for his mediation among the Ivorian
parties, which has saved the day. As one can see,
Africans themselves are, with talent and determination,
and often with success, contributing to African
solutions to the conflicts on the continent.

This brings me to deal with relations between the
Security Council and the African Union (AU) in the
framework of the arrangements in Chapter VIII of the
Charter, the relevance of which is becoming
increasingly obvious through the innovative concepts
of the collective security system that is now emerging.

Taking into account the considerable increase in
the need for human and material resources in
peacekeeping and the firm determination of Africa to
shoulder its share of responsibility in the management
and settlement of conflicts on the continent - to which
it gives additional value and an undeniable
effectiveness - Algeria believes that relations between
the United Nations and the African Union must now
develop in an institutional framework that should
eventually equip the collective security system with a
genuine regional pillar provided with adequate
resources for diplomatic and military intervention. The
AU prepared for this by setting up a Peace and
Security Council, which the international community
welcomed, and by creating a standby force.

In renewing our appeal for the institutionalization
of cooperation with the international community, my
delegation would like to highlight the invaluable
contribution made by the African Union mission to
stabilizing the situation in Darfur, despite the limited
resources available to it.

Finally, I cannot conclude without referring to the
specific case of Somalia - which expects from the
international community measures in support of the
restored national consensus - as well as to the
situations of other countries emerging from conflict, in
particular Guinea-Bissau, which are still awaiting
resolute action in the area of peacebuilding. Upon that
depends the ultimate credibility of the reforms effort
upon which we have embarked together.

