Mr. Mammadaliyev (Azerbaijan): Allow me to
join previous speakers in condemning the latest
terrorist attack in Nigeria. In this regard, our deepest
condolences go to all those affected.

1 would like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this very important open debate on United
Nations peacekeeping operations and for your
submission of the concept paper (S/2011/496, annex)
on this topic.
Azerbaijan fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, but I would like to make some remarks in
our national capacity.

Despite serious shortcomings, it is evident that
peacekeeping and peacekeepers have delivered results,
contributed to reducing tensions, and ensured that
peacebuilding processes in different parts of the world
moved forward. At the same time, more should be done
to strengthen international peacekeeping capabilities in
accordance with the needs of national authorities and
relevance to conditions in the host countries.

As a country suffering from the scourge of war
and situated in proximity to other conflicts affecting

the countries of its region, Azerbaijan is determined to
establish lasting peace and stability in the South
Caucasus and beyond on the basis of the generally
accepted norms and principles of international law, the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, and the appropriate documents and
decisions adopted by other international organizations.

Azerbaijan is fully committed to and making
sustained efforts in maintaining international peace,
security and stability, including by contributing to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. The
peacekeeping company in Azerbaijan's Armed Forces
was formed in 1997 and transformed in 2001 into a
battalion. Since 1999, Azerbaijan has contributed
sizable military personal to the peacekeeping missions
in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq. In recent years, the
Government of Azerbaijan has increased its financial
contribution to support the United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Respect for the purposes and principles enshrined
in the United Nations Charter, including in particular
those pertaining to the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs, are crucial to
promoting peace, security and stability in general and
to performing peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions.

It is obvious that peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts and their respective mandates involve important
questions of international law, and a greater degree of
common understanding in this regard is required
among Member States. We believe that the relevant
guiding principles and strategies to be developed with
a view to strengthening the normative framework of
such efforts should strictly adhere to the concept of
State sovereignty, including, inter alia, the consent of
the parties and impartiality. Particular attention should
also be paid to the issues of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.

We believe that there is a need for more effective
cooperation, partnership and coordination among the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the
Secretariat, and troop- and police-contributing and host
countries. It is also important to mention the links
between officers in the field and decision-makers here
at Headquarters in order to ensure that correct
decisions are made in a timely manner. This can be
achieved only through the greater involvement of
troop-contributing countries, which eventually will
lead to an upgrade of peacekeeping itself.

In conclusion, Mr. President, allow me to assure
you that Azerbaijan will continue to support
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding efforts,
address their needs and contribute to the decision-
making process of the Security Council.
38
