Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate Lebanon on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to thank the Chairs of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004) for their briefings.

The work of the Committees is especially
appreciated by my country for their contribution to the
task of eradicating the grave threat that terrorism
represents to all States and societies. Experience
clearly shows that no country can face terrorism alone
or remain indifferent to this crime. Terrorism is an
attack on peace and democratic institutions and
freedoms, and its global nature requires a joint and
coordinated global response.

The activities of the Government of Colombia in
the fight against terrorism are underpinned by our
international commitments and by our respect for the
norms of international law, in particular human rights
law. Through the democratic security policy we have
followed over the past eight years, we have been able
to reduce crime, guarantee the effective enjoyment of
human rights and strengthen democratic institutions.
Day after day, my country contributes to the
international community's work to close the loopholes
that allow for the financing, movement and actions of
terrorist organizations. As a demonstration of our
commitment, Colombia is a party to nine of the 13
international conventions to counter terrorism in its
various aspects.

My country firmly supports the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. My country's
voluntary contributions to this initiative amount to
some $150,000 over the past two years. These resources
are allocated, among other things, to strengthening
national capacities through inter-institutional platforms
and legislative technical assistance.

Colombia also supports the counter-terrorism
mechanisms provided for in resolutions 1566 (2004)
and 1624 (2005), which establish the obligation to
penalize incitement to commit acts of terrorism and to
punish and deny protection and refuge to those who
support or facilitate the financing, planning,
preparation or commission of acts of terrorism. They
reaffirm the need for full cooperation with those
countries on whose territory or against whose citizens
terrorist acts are committed.

My delegation supports the steps recently taken
with regard to the consolidated list of individuals and
entities subject to the measures provided for in
resolution 1267 (1999), in particular those aimed at
guaranteeing due process and timely consideration of
requests for de-listing from the relevant list.

With regard to cooperation with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), I note that Colombia
recently submitted its fifth report on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The report
covers our efforts in the fight against the financing of
terrorism and the allocation of resources to address
terrorist activities. Among the measures adopted by
Colombia to fully implement the resolution, I highlight
Law No. 1121 of December 2006, which criminalizes
the funding of terrorism.

The Government of Colombia, through the
Presidential Agency for Social Action and International
Cooperation, has developed a programme of support
for victims of terrorism. The programme includes the
rebuilding of housing destroyed in terrorist attacks, the
rebuilding of communities affected by violent acts,
humanitarian aid and financial support for the families
of people who have died because of the actions of
illegal armed groups.

In Colombia, kidnapping has also been used to
fund illegal armed groups. With Law No. 986 of 2006,
we extended the benefits and thresholds for the
protection of victims of kidnapping and their families.
We thereby seek to offer a comprehensive
humanitarian response in the form of employment,
financial, tax, education and health benefits, among
others.

Colombia shares the concern of the Security
Council with regard to the links between terrorism and
transnational organized crime, illicit drugs and illicit
arms trafficking. My country welcomes the fact that
the Committee continues to work to strengthen
dialogue with Member States aimed at providing
assistance to strengthen national capacities and to
contribute to the effective implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). This includes the regional dialogue
initiatives undertaken by the Chair of the Committee in
order to address the specific challenges arising from
the survey on the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001).

Additionally, since the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), Colombia has adopted broad legal measures in
the areas of capacity-building, security and training in
order to prevent the access of non-State actors to any
information or material that would help them to
manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons and their means of
delivery. We agree that the implementation of the
resolution requires a long-term approach that will
enable us to confront the challenges of non-proliferation
through cooperation between the Committee and
Member States and between Member States themselves.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the firm
resolve of the Government of Colombia to continue to
cooperate with the United Nations in the fight against
terrorism and to buttress the efforts of other countries
to address the factors that support this grave scourge,
including drug trafficking, the financing of terrorism
and other manifestations of crime in general. Although
painful, my country's experience has left us with a
better capacity, good practices and lessons learned that
serve as a basis for our cooperation in international
actions in this area.

