At the outset, I would like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and our remarkable trio of youth activists and briefers for their comprehensive and enlightening briefings this morning. It is always encouraging to hear from the youth about their role in, and contribution to, peace processes in various conflict zones around the world. South Africa welcomes the initiative of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, which, during its tenure in the Council in 2015, ushered in landmark resolution 2250 (2015). We also commend Peru for its important role in taking forward the youth, peace and security agenda, especially with regard to the adoption of resolution 2419 (2018), and we welcome the Dominican Republic's initiative to convene today's open debate in this uncertain environment resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its impact on young people worldwide. During South Africa's presidency of the Council, we sought to prioritize the role of young people and their contribution to the youth, peace and security agenda in our efforts to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020. That resulted in the adoption of a Council presidential statement (S/PRST/2019/15) containing six additional measures to be taken in order to mobilize our youth to accelerate the implementation of that initiative. That resonates with the Secretary-General's call this year for a global ceasefire. The role of youth in relation to peace and security is of particular importance to the African continent, where 60 per cent of the population, according to some estimates, is under the age of 25. South Africa supports efforts to fully harness and promote innovation in young people's contribution to peace through investing in their capacities, redressing the structural barriers that limit youth participation in peace and security, and emphasizing partnerships and collaborative action where young people are viewed as equal and essential partners for peace. Those aspects are highlighted in the 2018 "The missing piece: independent progress study on youth, peace and security" (see S/2018/86). They are also reflected in the challenges presented in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/167), compounded by the additional challenge of youth human rights violations. We would like to share some thoughts on the five key pillars of action. First, on participation, we acknowledge the role played by young people as agents of change. They were instrumental in advancing the goals of the broader struggle for liberation and democracy in our country. Young people who were often at the front lines of the battle for freedom are now also at the forefront of combating poverty, inequality and unemployment in South Africa. The South African Government has therefore made the empowerment of youth central to its development agenda and has set up programmes dedicated to job creation, development and youth education. Today, thanks to the heroic role played by our youth throughout the anti- colonial and anti-apartheid struggles, we celebrate the twenty-sixth anniversary of our freedom in South Africa. Secondly, on protection and prevention, South Africa supports ensuring a safe and enabling environment for youth in conflict situations, particularly young refugees and internally displaced persons. That is vital to creating a post-conflict environment for their participation in the economy and society in general, and can serve as a preventive measure for addressing inequality, discrimination, exclusion and human rights violations as drivers of conflict - as identified by the Secretary-General. In that regard, investment in the meaningful participation of young people in politics and the socioeconomic sphere is therefore vital. The Council must also not forget the plight of millions of young migrants in various corners of the world. Thirdly, with regard to partnerships, disengagement and reintegration, it is important to build on the active engagement of young people and youth organizations in multilateral processes in order to ensure long-term partnerships and to make sure that the voice of young people is reflected. Most important, we need to mainstream and institutionalize youth participation and partnerships in all peace and security processes. In that regard, we would like to highlight the Continental Framework on Youth, Peace and Security, developed by the African Union's Peace and Security Council as part of the continent's peace and security architecture, as well as the study on the roles and contributions of youth towards peace and security in Africa. These serve as good frameworks to be replicated elsewhere. With regard to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, it remains essential to prioritize young people who have spent their formative years as participants in armed conflict and extremist groups, as they are particularly vulnerable. Fourthly, society must pay particular attention to Security Council reforms as new Council organs are established for post-conflict situations. Fifthly, with regard to the empowerment of young women, South Africa continues to be concerned about a trend of youth programmes prioritizing the societal role of young men over young women. That is further exacerbated by the disproportionate targeting of young women in the form of sexual and gender-based violence. Therefore, the outcomes of this meeting should advance the implementation of Council resolution 1325 (2000) - adopted during Namibia's presidency - the twentieth anniversary of which we celebrate today, and its subsequent resolutions, including resolution 2493 (2019), on women and peace and security, adopted in October 2019 during South Africa's presidency of the Council. I would like to conclude by emphasizing that South Africa believes that we must harness the dynamism and positivity of young people and build resilience in order to counter recourses to violence as means of pursuing misguided interests.
