Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to
thank Ambassador Osorio for his briefing today. We
are grateful for his able leadership, which has done so
much to ensure that the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) remains active and
focused on the implementation of its important
mandate.

One year ago, the Council adopted resolution
1929 (2010) in response to Iran's continued
non-compliance with its international nuclear
obligations. Iran's continued failure to comply with
those obligations reminds us how important sanctions
are and how important it is that the international
community implement and enforce them.

I will focus on three points today.

First, let me turn to the latest report of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), which clearly demonstrates Iran's
continued non-compliance, lack of cooperation with
the IAEA and refusal to resolve the outstanding issues
related to its nuclear programme.

Most notably, the Director General's report
confirms once again that Iran is continuing its
enrichment- and heavy-water-related activities, in
violation of the demands of the Council and the IAEA
Board of Governors. The report also highlights Iran's
continued refusal to respond substantively to
information indicating that its nuclear programme may
have military dimensions.

These developments only deepen our concerns
about Iran's intentions. So does Iran's recent
announcement that it intends to triple production of
near 20 per cent enriched uranium and move that
production to its enrichment facility near Qom, a
facility built in secret and with an unclear purpose,
despite years of IAEA requests.

The Council established many years ago that Iran
must demonstrate the "exclusively peaceful purpose"
of its nuclear programme. The IAEA Director
General's latest report underscores why Iran must be
held accountable and why the international community
must continue to demand that Iran comply fully with
its international obligations and fully implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, in the light of Iran's continued
non-compliance, the international community must
further strengthen the implementation and enforcement
of United Nations sanctions. The 1737 Committee, the
Panel of Experts and States Members of the United
Nations each play an important role here. The United
States strongly supports the Panel of Experts. We
welcome the Council's decision last week to renew the
Panel's mandate for another 12 months.

The United States remains impressed by the
Panel's high quality, professional work. We are
particularly pleased that the Panel has been able to
uncover so much information about Iran's attempts to
evade United Nations sanctions. The Panel's recent
final report contains troubling findings, including
significant evidence about several reported violations
of United Nations sanctions related to Iran. In its
report, the Panel made 30 recommendations to more
tightly enforce United Nations sanctions. We
encourage the Committee to take immediate steps to
implement these recommendations. Our goal should be
to implement them before the 1737 Committee reports
back to the Council in September.

The Panel's final report must be quickly
disseminated to all States Members of the United
Nations, as is standard practice for United Nations
expert panels. The report, which the Council has not
yet released publicly, highlights information and best
practices that can help States carry out their
obligations. It needs to be shared. Making these reports
publicly available shows important transparency. It
also underscores the fact that we are serious about
implementing the sanctions we have imposed on Iran.

That brings me to my final point. My
Government remains committed to a diplomatic
solution, but diplomacy can succeed only if Iran
complies with its international nuclear obligations and
engages seriously with the international community to
address the world's concerns about Iran's nuclear
programme. As we and our P5+1 partners stated last
week, we have tried several times to engage Iran in a
constructive dialogue towards a comprehensive,
negotiated long-term solution to the global crisis of
confidence about Iran's nuclear programme. But Iran
was not prepared to enter into a genuine dialogue
without preconditions, so our attempts have reached no
substantive result.
11-3854]
We reaffirmed our unity of purpose to use direct
diplomacy in the context of our dual-track strategy to
resolve our shared concerns about Iran's nuclear
programme. Our objective remains clear: to prevent
Iran from developing nuclear weapons. We remain
committed to working closely towards that goal with
our partners in the 1737 Committee, the Panel of

Experts, the Council and the international community.

