Mr. Pascoe: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to introduce the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Somalia (8/2009/503).

As we all know, after almost two decades of
armed confrontation, violence and upheavals, stability
will not come overnight to Somalia. However, we
have, in the Djibouti Agreement, a structure that
provides a path to follow, as the Government,
supported by the international community, moves
towards restoring peace and security.

In the report under consideration, the Secretary-
General emphasizes that the key priority of the
international community should remain to support the
Government in the areas of security, political dialogue,
piracy, development and humanitarian assistance. I will
now briefly touch on progress in those areas.

First, on security, our focus has been to enable
the Government to strengthen its security measures and
structures. The past few months have not been easy. No
one could have expected that they would be. The
Government has overcome repeated attacks by foreign-
funded, heavily armed groups. Police and troops loyal
to the Government are being trained, thanks to the
international community's commitment and support.
There is slow but notable progress towards stability.
The determined commitment of the African Union and
its Mission in Somalia to remain fully focused on the
country has been crucial. It is all the more impressive
given the suicide bombing last month at the Mission's
headquarters in Mogadishu.

A top priority at the present time is to support the
Government's efforts to maintain security. There must
be financial support for the Government through the
Joint Security Committee. Training initiatives by
Member States are, of course, welcome, but they must
be well coordinated. I therefore request that all donors
work thorough the Joint Security Committee and with
the United Nations in order to ensure that the efforts of
all contribute to our shared goals. In that regard, we
should recognize the significant strides now being
made by the Government itself towards managing its
resources.

Speed is the most critical element with regard to
the international community's assistance in the area of
security. Money received today in Somalia will have a
far greater impact on stability than that which arrives
in three months' time. Extremely generous pledges
were made at the summit in Brussels in April. They
09-54835
need to be fulfilled immediately. Under-Secretary-
General Malcorra and I will host a meeting tomorrow
with key donors to assess the situation regarding the
fulfilment of pledges that were made in Brussels.

In order to speed up the process, I would like to
suggest that, in addition to contributing to the trust
funds, some development partners could start
implementing direct bilateral economic and financial
cooperation with Somalia. We expect some countries to
begin to implement such bilateral cooperation in the
near future. The contract signed by the Somali
Government with an internationally recognized
auditing firm should be fully used to increase the
transparency and confidence in the use of such
funding.

There is also an urgent need to mobilize and
deliver additional resources to the African Union and
its Mission in Somalia. The Department of Field
Support is doing an excellent job in providing
equipment and other logistical support through the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM
(UNSOA). The representative of that Department will
give the Council more details on that following my
briefing.

On the political level, the Government continues
its openness to dialogue in Somalia with all parties
ready to commit themselves to peace. The United
Nations and members of the international community
support that approach and have encouraged internal
political dialogue. Meanwhile, Somaliland has again
demonstrated its long tradition of resolving peacefully
its internal political disputes.

To enable us to support the Government's efforts
at political dialogue, we are increasing the number of
visits to Mogadishu by senior staff of the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS). We
must also continue to work towards a significant
presence on the ground. Establishing a secure facility
for the international community's representatives in
Mogadishu remains one of our top priorities. Moving
part of our operations from Nairobi to Mogadishu will
greatly add to our effectiveness and credibility, as we
join representatives of the African Union, the League
of Arab States, Libya and Yemen, who are already in
Mogadishu.

We also continue to work closely with, and
provide assistance to, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, which is the African organization for
09-54835
the region and can wield considerable influence on
local and regional actors, thus performing an essential
role in increasing stability in Somalia.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia worsened
dramatically in the reporting period due to intensified
fighting in Mogadishu, growing insecurity in much of
southern and central Somalia, and a deepening drought.
In August 2009, the latest United Nations food security
assessment calculated that some 3.7 million people, or
50 per cent of the population of Somalia, are in need of
livelihood and humanitarian support, up from
3.2 million in January 2009.

The World Food Programme (WFP) urgently
requires $217 million to cover the shortfalls 0f216,000
metric tons of food from September 2009 through
March 2010. WFP is running out of food to feed its
3.3 million planned beneficiaries, with limited shortfalls
having begun in September. Water, sanitation and
health activities also remain seriously underfunded at
only 19 per cent.

In addition to humanitarian assistance, there is a
need for development assistance to begin the
reconstruction of Somalia. The efforts of the
international community should be focused on building
institutions that can deliver goods and services to the
Somali people and begin the process of weaning
Somalia off reliance on humanitarian assistance. With
improved security and political dialogue, the
entrepreneurship of many Somalis will be fully
exploited for the success of the country.

On piracy, we would like to praise once again the
critical role played by the international maritime
presence off Somalia's coast. We thank the
Government of Japan for facilitating the fourth meeting
of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
which was held in New York on 10 September. During
that meeting, it was again recognized that the core of
the problem is the lack of security on land.

In this regard, it is critical that we strengthen the
central Government and the regional authorities and
help to provide economic opportunities for fishing
communities and other rural populations. Assisting
Somalia to establish and train a coast guard and rebuild
its navy will, of course, be essential over the long run.
The recent agreement between the Transitional Federal
Government and the Puntland authorities is a step in
the right direction and deserves our assistance. We
3
continue to support efforts to prosecute suspected
pirates by regional countries.

The United Nations is in the process of
establishing a trust fund for anti-piracy activities, the
terms of reference of which were approved by the
Contact Group. I urge all Member States, organizations
and the private sector to contribute to the trust fund. In
the meantime, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the International Maritime Organization, the
Office of Legal Affairs and UNPOS continue to work
closely with the international community and the
Somali Government in the fight against piracy off the
coast of Somalia. In addition to capacity-building, our
work includes developing guidance circulars for
Governments and ship owners, ship operators and
masters; providing an intergovernmental forum for
discussions and negotiations on issues relating to the
safety and security of international navigation; and
reporting on incidents of piracy and armed robbery
against ships.

After years of conflict, peace will not come to
Somalia overnight. Stability must be promoted,
national and external spoilers must be neutralized.
Targeted sanctions can be one effective way to deal
with the spoilers. Our approach must be flexible to
support the process and to be able to include people on
and remove them from the list as appropriate, so that
the list can fulfil its political role.

Once again, I want to thank the Council for
turning its attention to the critical topic of Somalia. It
is crucial that we help this country succeed, and the
Council's role is of course essential to that success.

