Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Like colleagues who have taken the floor
before me, I wish to extend our warm thanks to you,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I should also
like to thank your friendly country for having
organized this debate, as well as the distinguished
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam and other
members of his delegation for their committed work in
the Security Council last month. I should also like to
thank the Secretary-General for having personally
attended this meeting, as well as Under-Secretary-
General Holmes, the Deputy High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the representative of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for being
present here today.
My delegation endorses the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

It must be said that civilians continue to pay the
highest price in armed conflicts, despite the legal
developments and international conventions relating to
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts, beginning
with the Geneva Conventions relating to the protection
of civilians in times of war and including numerous
resolutions of the Security Council. The irony of
destiny means that the gap between the texts and their
implementation keeps getting wider - that is the gap
between what constitutes law, on one hand, and what
we actually see happening on the ground, on the other
hand, with regard to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Approximately a decade has elapsed since the
Council began deliberating this important subject. The
delegations that have participated in the debate, the
Security Council, the Secretary-General, Deputy
Secretary-General and Special Rapporteurs continue to
call on all parties to show greater respect for
international law and to guarantee the rights of
civilians in armed conflicts. Here we should like to
recall the deliberations that we had the last time when
the Security Council debated this issue on 25 June
2009. During that debate, a number of countries
stressed the odious and flagrant aggression perpetrated
by Israel against Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip.
During that debate, the majority of delegations called
upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply with
international law as it pertains to the protection of the
Palestinian civilians in Gaza with regard to the need to
facilitate humanitarian aid access. They also stressed
the importance of a commission of inquiry to
investigate the war crimes committed by Israel during
its aggression. Despite the resolutions and reiterated
calls by the Security Council and the international
community for Israel to put an immediate end to its
illegal practices and policies, Israel has not only
ignored those appeals but is still pursuing its
aggressive policy against Palestinian civilians - a
policy which, as the whole world knows, includes a
state of siege, the closing of border crossings, arrests,
restrictions on the movements of students and the
medically ill, the obstruction of the delivery of
donations of goods such as medicines to the area,
collective punishment, the confiscation of homes and
land, the building of settlements and the burning of
farms. That is in addition to the arbitrary repressive
practices against the civilian population in the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights, which run counter to
international law and international humanitarian law.

The report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48), which
was led by Judge Goldstone, provides irrefutable
evidence of serious Israeli violations of international
humanitarian law and the Charter in the course of its
heinous attack against Gaza. Those violations
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Palestinian civilians were deliberately targeted,
including through the systematic destruction of
infrastructure, oppression and persecution aimed at
collectively punishing a people under siege.

The evidence set out in the Goldstone report is
not the only grounds for condemning Israel for its
aggression in 2008. A number of commissions and
international envoys have submitted reports to the
United Nations on Israeli aggression, including the Ian
Martin report on attacks against United Nations
facilities. Israel's actions constitute a singular example
of systematic aggression as a method of collective
punishment. As such, they violate all the rules and
principles stipulated in international law, international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions of 1949,
as well as the additional protocols thereto.

I wish to ask the Security Council whether Israel
has halted any of its practices. In paragraph 2 of a
recently adopted resolution, the Secretary-General is
called upon to request the Council to consider the
Goldstone report, which includes objective
recommendations addressed both to the Human Rights
Council and the Security Council. It also calls upon the
Council to fulfil its responsibilities under the Charter
and to take every measure necessary to ensure that
those guilty of those crimes are brought to justice, so
as to put an end to the Israeli authorities' mentality of
impunity. I would also like to ask the Council whether
Israel has honoured any commitments to date since the
Council placed on its agenda at the end of the 19905
the issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

With regard to the situation of the Syrian
population in the occupied Syrian Golan, there is really
little difference from that of the Palestinian people.
Israel's occupation continues. Land is still being
confiscated. Water resources are still being stolen.
Mines are still being planted. Settlements continue to
expand. Israel is continuing its repressive policies
against Syrian civilians in the Syrian Golan by
imprisoning them or placing them illegally into
detention camps, thereby jeopardizing their lives.
Israeli practices in the occupied Syrian Golan have
really gone beyond all legal and ethical bounds. In a
recent episode, a two-year-old child was separated
from his mother under the pretext that he was born
inside of Israel and that his parents were still studying
in Syria.

In order that this debate may have credibility,
Syria calls on this body to compel Israel to authorize
family visits for Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian
Golan by opening the Quneitra border crossing. In that
regard, my delegation has sent letters to the Secretary-
General and the Presidents of the Security Council and
the General Assembly. We have also addressed letters
to intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations requesting that they intervene to resolve
this issue. We hope that the statements that have been
made in today's debate, as well as on other occasions,
will not remain mere words.

Also with regard to international law, Israel's
occupation of the Syrian Golan is a dual situation that
requires that the Council to level a dual charge. For not
only has Israel occupied the Syrian Golan since 1967,
it has also taken the illegal and provocative decision to
annex the Syrian Golan. The Council rejected that
decision unanimously in a resolution calling it null and
void.

