Mr. Begec (Turkey): As we approach the fiftieth
year of the occupation of the Palestinian territories,
the prospects for a lasting peace remain grim. The
revitalization of the peace process is not only necessary
to grant a dignified life to the Palestinian people, but
also a fundamental requirement for achieving stability
within the region. We are very concerned about the
deteriorating situation on the ground. The expansion of
illegal settlements, land confiscations, the displacement
of native communities, denying the Palestinians' right
to use natural resources and the prevailing culture of
impunity erode the viability of a two-State solution.

The total area allocated to settlements has doubled
since the Oslo peace agreements, as part of Israel's
policy to keep East Jerusalem isolated from the West
Bank and Gaza. As recently as the beginning of July,
the Israeli Government advanced new plans for 800
additional housing units in illegal settlements. In
addition, 10 per cent of the West Bank is cut off from
the rest of the territory by the separation wall. The
current situation is neither acceptable nor sustainable.
The Israeli Government's practices in contravention
of international law must stop. Furthermore, the
preservation of the status and sanctity of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif are essential for stability and future harmony.

The historical injustice against the Palestinian
people is fuelling resentment, alienation and radicalism
in and beyond the region. The only way out of this
impasse is to convince the Palestinians that their future
will be better than today. That can be achieved only
if the Palestinians sit at the negotiation table as the
State of Palestine with equal standing with Israel. In
that regard, the recognition of the State of Palestine
by more than 137 countries and its full integration
into international forums would raise hopes for the
possibility of a two-State solution on the basis of the
Arab Peace Initiative. In addition, initiatives such as
the Paris ministerial conference, in which we also took
part, represent important opportunities at a time when
the revival of the peace process has become an urgent
necessity. Last but not least, to reach a lasting peace,
it is also crucial for the Palestinians to voice their
legitimate demands for unity. Turkey will continue its
efforts aimed at Palestinian reconciliation.

Empowering the Palestinian people and improving
their living conditions through development assistance
and investments is more urgent than ever. In that
understanding, Turkey's $200 million pledge for the
period from 2014 to 2017 is channelled into various
projects, such as the construction of an industrial
zone in Jenin in the West Bank, a hospital in Tubas
and a girls' dormitory for Al-Quds University.
The agreement to normalize our bilateral relations
with Israel was concluded on 26 June in Rome, in
accordance with the parameters put forward following
the Mavi Marmara incident.

That will be instrumental to further increasing our
efforts to alleviate the humanitarian situation in the
occupied territories, particularly in Gaza. As a follow
up to that, the first shipment of our humanitarian aid
reached Gaza on 4 July through the port of Ashdod. In
addition, the Turkey-Palestine Friendship Hospital, with
a 200-bed capacity, will be ready to provide services
following the installation of medical equipment. The
construction project for 320 housing units in Gaza will
also soon be finalized.

The establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-l967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, continues to be the only
viable solution. Turkey's commitment to supporting the
Palestinian people to that end will never cease.

The ongoing grave situation in Syria, in particular
the devastating humanitarian conditions, continues to
unravel the very principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Turkey continues to shoulder a large part of the
burden of the ongoing devastation. The humanitarian
and security repercussions of the crisis constitute
a direct threat to our national security. The chaos in
the northern part of Syria has played into the hands
of terrorists, targeting our citizens as well. We have
a common interest in bringing peace and stability to
Syria through a genuine political transition. However,
no substantial progress has been made on the following
fronts, upon which the efforts of the international
community have been concentrated.

The cessation of hostilities, which is systematically
violated by the regime and its supporters, has actually
ceased to exist. The talks on establishing a ceasefire in
Aleppo go hand in hand with the regime's attempts to put
the city under siege. That is what the word "ceasefire"
means to the regime. The humanitarian situation is no
different. The provision of basic needs continues to
be interrupted. Its timing, content and geographical
scope are almost completely left to the mercy of the
regime. The regime continues to use barrel bombs and
attack civilians and civilian infrastructure, such as
hospitals, mosques, markets and camps for internally
displaced persons. The Security Council must ensure
the implementation of all the measures envisaged by its
very own resolutions.

If the picture on the ground is to remain unchanged,
there will be no prospect for a successful outcome in
the next round of talks in Geneva. The opposition,
represented by the High Negotiations Committee
cannot be expected to negotiate under fire. In addition,
attempts to dilute and weaken the opposition will
only harm the process. Without further delay, the
regime should be pressured to talk about the political
transition with concrete timelines, a new Constitution
and elections. A transitional governing body with full
executive powers should be established. After six years
of brutality and crime, the Syrian people cannot be
expected to settle for anything less.

