Mr. Tshibanda N'tungamulongo (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As the Russian
presidency of the Council comes to a close, allow me to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, for the important
work that has been done, and tell you that my country,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, felt honoured to
see the Russian Federation, a friendly country, leading
the Council's deliberations throughout the month
of March. I would also like to thank you for giving
me the opportunity to speak at this Council meeting
devoted to the reconfiguration of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his personal involvement in mobilizing
the leaders of the Great Lakes region and Southern
Africa for the signing of the Framework for Peace,
Security and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, signed in Addis Ababa on
24 February. That agreement lays the foundation, for
the first time, for a lasting peace in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and for peaceful
coexistence between it and its neighbours, especially
those to its east.

Finally, I would like to express to the Council the
appreciation of the people and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the efforts by the
United Nations for more than 15 years now to preserve
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of our country
and to ensure peace and stability there.

By deciding to deploy an Intervention Brigade
with an offensive mandate in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to neutralize all the
harmful forces that are committing the worst atrocities
against civilians, the Council has decided to take a
significant and innovative approach to traditional
peacekeeping mechanisms. Thanks to that decision,
the United Nations has once again proven its active
solidarity with those who suffer the horrors of war, as
is sadly the case in my country. It has also shown its
unwavering determination and an increasingly resolute
commitment to work for peace and security in the
world, in accordance with the tasks assigned to it under
the Charter of the United Nations.

Given that renewed commitment by the
Organization, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
reaffirms its determination to fulfil its commitments
under the Framework and welcomes the intention of the
Secretary-General to visit the region soon to undertake
an initial assessment.

In that context, we intend to continue with greater
determination the efforts already undertaken in the
context of rebuilding and strengthening the State,
particularly the work on the reform of the security
sector. That is an even easier task now that the
appropriate legal framework is in place, with the recent
adoption of the key laws that are required, namely,
those concerning the organization and functioning of
the armed forces and the Congolese national police, and
those on the status of the staff of those two bodies.

The situation that has prevailed in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of Congo for nearly two
decades has resulted in millions of deaths, millions of
internally displaced persons, hundreds of thousands
of refugees and countless victims of abuse, attacks,
rape and other unspeakable violations of human rights
that particularly affect vulnerable populations, that is,
women and children.

Throughout this long period, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has spared no effort in promoting
peace and seeking to eradicate the armed groups, which
are those primarily responsible for disturbing the peace.

Faced with this almost existential challenge, the
United Nations has been the most loyal, constant and
decisive partner our country could have. Witness
the joint operations between the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in 2004 and 2005;
Operations Kimia I and Kimia II, in 2008 and 2009,
respectively, with MONUC's support; Operation
Amani Leo, with the support of MONUSCO, from 2010
to 2012, and the active involvement of first MONUC
and then MONUSCO in repatriating to their own
countries those elements of the Forces democratiques de
libe'ration du Rwanda who opted for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.

Despite the encouraging results of that cooperation,
which would not have been possible without the
invaluable contribution of the troop-contributing
countries, to whom we are grateful, it has become clear
over time that the unprecedented human drama that the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has undergone is an exceptional situation that demands
exceptional measures if we are ever to be able to
definitively put an end to the hellish continuing cycle of
conflict in that part of the country. That is the historic
idea and importance of the Council's decision today
to create the Intervention Brigade within MONUSCO
and under its command, and with MONUSCO's own
mandate strengthened from now on. There can be
no more eloquent expression of the international
community's determination to settle once and for all
the issue of the negative forces, with no exceptions, in
the Great Lakes region.

We dare to believe that a new age is beginning in
this martyred part of Africa, one of respect for the rule
oflaw and human rights, ofpeaceful coexistence among
communities and States, of security and stability for all,
and of regional cooperation and lasting development. In
that context, considering the role played by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region in implementing the Framework agreement,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo welcomes the
appointment of Ms. Mary Robinson to that important
post. I would like to assure the Council that she will
receive all of our support and our full collaboration.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the gratitude
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for the unanimous adoption of resolution
2098 (2013), reconfiguring MONUSCO's mandate
and establishing the Intervention Brigade. May its
deployment come as soon as possible. The life and
dignity of the men, women and children of North Kivu,
South Kivu, Ituri and North Katanga depend on it, as
does the credibility of the Organization.

