Mr. Kusljugie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank
you, Madam, for giving me the opportunity to make a
statement on behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina on such
an important issue. As members are aware, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still going through the process of post-
conflict national reconciliation - a process in which
the United Nations, together with the Peace
Implementation Council and the Office of the High
Representative, played a key role.

The topic of war and post-war reconciliation,
though painful and somewhat embarrassing for us, is
one that compels us to speak our mind. The topic is
still so controversial that it is difficult for us to agree
among ourselves, even though we have aligned
ourselves with Ireland's statement on behalf of the
European Union.

However senseless, devastating and tragic wars
may be, they all are different. They differ in many
ways: their nature, their goals, the causes that triggered
them, how they ended, and their consequences. Yet
they have one thing in common that should serve as a
clear warning: they can happen anywhere, and to
anyone. Fifteen years ago, living carefree lives in a
prosperous country in the heart of Europe, none of us
would have believed that a war of such proportions
could occur. Yet it did, and it went on
uninterruptedly- before the eyes of the entire
world- for three and a half years, until the
international community decided to put to an end to the
suffering of civilians in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
enforce the peace.

With respect to lessons learned, we are certain
that everyone will agree that the prevention of conflict
and the development of efficient early-warning
procedures are among the most important tasks facing
the United Nations. The Dayton Peace Accords brought
peace but failed to distinguish between the aggressor
and the victim. Since that time, we have been
methodically examining facts and figures related to the
war.

The first fact - perhaps the only one every
Bosnian citizen will agree upon - is that there was no
winner. Rather, we all lost - each to a different extent,
of course, but who can establish an objective measure
of a personal loss?

Another fact that almost all parties to the conflict
will agree on is that the war was imported to Bosnia
and Herzegovina as part of a broader conflict in the
region. There are differences of opinion in various
parts of the country as to its origin, but, as trials
progress at the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991, the evidence presented and the verdicts
delivered are leading to the conclusion that the
totalitarian regime of then-President Milosevic devised
a plan to divide Bosnia and Herzegovina by force,
annexing the half, more or less, of Bosnian territory
that contained his own nationals.

The Tribunal epitomizes the role of the United
Nations in the process of post-conflict national
reconciliation in Bosnia. Its main task is to prosecute
persons responsible for war crimes, thus
individualizing responsibilities and absolving nations
of potential collective guilt. Its second main task is to
establish the facts and set the historical record straight,
since, as we established earlier, there was no winner to
write the history of that war.

Searching for the truth is like putting together a
gigantic jigsaw puzzle - there are so many pieces, and
each has to fit in its place. Operative paragraph 17 of
General Assembly resolution 57/10 calls for the
Secretary-General

"to submit a report on United Nations activities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina during the period from
1992 to 2002, in view of the experience gained
and lessons learned, as a positive contribution to
future United Nations operations".

That report will, hopefully, provide us with many
pieces of the puzzle, making clear the role of the
United Nations during the war and in the context of the
post-war recovery and setting the facts straight in an
objective manner, thus helping local stakeholders to
develop a dialogue built on the foundation of the
impartial truth. We eagerly await that report.

If we examine the roles of the key players in the
war, we can see that one of the very few shortcomings
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, compared with the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, was that it did not identify and
punish those media representatives who incited ethnic
hatred. The role of the media, controlled and directed
by non-democratic regimes in the region of the former
Yugoslavia, was a crucial element in the process of
manipulation and brainwashing that prepared the
ground for the spread of ethnic intolerance and
violence.

Moreover, the role of the media in the post-
conflict peace-building and reconciliation process is of
the utmost importance. The various reconciliation
programmes should concentrate on creating an
environment that allows independent media to work
unobstructed - media whose task will be, along with
other civil society actors, to convey the truth about the
past and to address the suffering of the victims of
violence.

Allow me to draw the Council's attention to one
of the most important problems facing post-conflict
reconciliation: the issue of missing persons. One of the
most tragic consequences of the war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as in other recent wars, is the vast
number of missing persons, mostly civilians. Resolving
the issue of missing persons is not only a humanitarian
imperative but also a very important political issue, and
it is one of the basic preconditions for establishing
durable peace and stability.

The primary responsibility for carrying out such
tasks lies with the authorities under whose jurisdiction
crimes may have been committed. However, if the
authorities concerned are not willing to go forward
with the excavation of possible mass graves and other
investigative activities, the task will pass to
international organizations and entities. Such
undertakings are expensive and depend on the full
political and financial support of the international
community, as well as on the military and logistical
support of the peacekeeping forces in the field. The
process should be properly coordinated, thus avoiding
overlapping mandates and providing adequate use of
financial resources.

Even though the process of tracing and
identifying missing persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is far from being completed, we would like to take this
opportunity to express our gratitude to all the
Governments - particularly to the Government of the
United States of America - that have provided
political and financial support to the process.

Allow me to sum up by making two brief points.
First, I cannot stress enough that reconciliation is a
fragile, long-lasting and cumbersome process. The
mandate of the first High Representative of the
International Community to Bosnia and Herzegovina
was one year, on the assumption that that was enough
time for him to finish his job. Eight years later, the
fourth High Representative has as much work to do as
the first one did. The first United Nations peacekeeping
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina also had a one-year
mandate. None of the other United Nations
peacekeeping operations that followed ever thought
that they could complete the mission within a year.

Last but not least, countless examples from
recorded history - including that of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - teach us a single, valuable lesson:
national reconciliation is not possible without a
national catharsis. Catharsis can be achieved only by
self-examination through the prism of objective and
unquestionable facts - provided that all the other
necessary conditions exist: an environment free of fear,
xenophobia or collective guilt; an atmosphere of
dialogue and understanding; and forgiveness, as the
most noble of all human virtues.

Truth and reconciliation commissions,
international criminal tribunals, special national court
chambers, and international and inter-religious
institutions are merely the tools that can help achieve
that ultimate goal.

