Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, we thank you for having convened
this meeting and Mr. Nickolay Mladenov and Mr. Hagai
El-Ad for their important briefings.

Peru notes with deep concern the continued
violence between Israelis and Palestinians. We cannot
but deplore the deaths and injuries and the worsening of
the humanitarian situation in Gaza, with no solution to
the prolonged conflict in sight. We continue to condemn
the disproportionate use of force by Israel and the
indiscriminate actions against civilians carried out by
Hamas. International law, international humanitarian
law and human rights are being flagrantly ignored.

We must continue to reject hate speech, incitement
to violence, recourse to terrorism, laws promoting
discrimination and anti-Semitism, all of this within a
particularly unstable regional context. The settlements,
demolitions and evictions in occupied Palestinian
territory openly defy international law and specific
resolutions of the Council, including resolution 2334
(2016), and theyjeopardize the territorial integrity ofthe
Palestinian State and hence undermine the possibility
of achieving a political solution to the conflict.

We note with particular alarm the legal and
humanitarian consequences of the demolition of a group
of structures and the eviction of a Bedouin community in
Khan Al-Ahmar. We believe that the Israeli authorities
must ensure that this demolition is halted, in accordance
with international law. We are also alarmed about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
Poverty, injustice and marginalization are a breeding
ground for radicalization and violent extremism.

We believe that the provision of goods and basic
services, as well as overcoming the isolation of
millions of Palestinians, must be priority issues for the
international community. In that regard, we commend
the implementation of development projects in Gaza
that are being promoted by the United Nations, with
international support. We stress how important it is that
the crossing points of Kerem Shalom and Rafah remain
open, with adequate security, and that the fishing zone
on the Gaza coast not be reduced, as this would have
humanitarian consequences.

We wish to underscore the generous contributions
announced by various States to provide predictable and
sustainable funding for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and also to alleviate the serious energy crisis affecting
the people of Gaza. We note, however, that this entity
continues to face a critical financial situation and that
it is therefore vital to continue mobilizing the support
of the international community. We also deplore the
recent announcements about the possible closure of its
offices in East Jerusalem, despite the legal framework
regulating its functioning in accordance with resolutions
adopted by the United Nations and other instruments of
international law.

Peru continues to encourage the parties to resume
direct negotiations with a View to achieving the only
viable solution to the conflict: two States living
securely within mutually recognized borders and with
Jerusalem as a shared capital.

The United Nations and the Council in particular
are called upon to provide such a solution and to protect
civilians affected by the conflict. In this regard, we
wish to conclude by expressing our recognition of
and support for the important diplomatic work done
by Mr. Mladenov and to thank him for periodically
reminding us, in a clear and balanced way, of our
responsibilities as an international community.

