Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2010/401). I also
thank Mr. Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing. I welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. I listened attentively to
the statement made by Mr. Hyseni.

The overall situation in Kosovo is calm at
present. But the security situation remains complicated
and fragile. In particular, there are many uncertainties
in the north. Once again we condemn the terrorist
violence in northern Mitrovica that took place in early
July. That incident shows yet again that an early and
appropriate settlement of the Kosovo issue would be
conducive to peace and stability in the Balkan region
and in Europe at large. We call upon all parties
concerned, the United Nations and the other countries
in the region to work together to ensure stability in
Kosovo, safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of
all ethnic groups in the region, in particular those of
Serbs and other ethnic minorities, and make a genuine
effort to facilitate the reintegration of ethnic minorities
and preserve religious and cultural heritage.

We have noted the advisory opinion delivered by
the International Court of Justice regarding Kosovo's
unilateral declaration of independence. All along,
China has maintained that respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity is a fundamental principle of the
contemporary system of international law and is the
basis of the international legal order. We respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and
support the efforts that the Government and the people
of Serbia have made in that regard. We have always
considered that the best way to resolve the Kosovo
issue is for the two sides to engage in negotiations
within the framework of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and seek a mutually acceptable solution. In
no way does unilateral action contribute to a settlement
of the issue, but can only complicate the situation.

The advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice does not pose an obstacle to efforts by the two
sides to resolve this issue through negotiations. China
hopes that the relevant actors will continue to urge the
two sides to resume dialogue and consultation and seek
a mutually acceptable resolution.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) remains
the legal foundation for the settlement of the Kosovo
issue. We appreciate the positive role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
UNMIK in maintaining stability in Kosovo and support
the Mission in its ongoing efforts to fulfil its mandates
pursuant to relevant Council resolutions and in
vigorously promoting constructive dialogue among the
parties concerned. We hope that the parties concerned
will continue to respect the mandate of UNMIK and
maintain their support for and cooperation with the
Mission in a joint effort to find a proper settlement to
the Kosovo issue.

