Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important open debate, and I
thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, for his
valuable briefing.

The year 2018 was challenging in terms of the
question of Palestine. In the absence of any political
horizon, mutual distrust deepened and civilian casualties
mounted. As a new year begins, we look to the parties
to take concrete steps to restore confidence and build
the right environment to eventually renew negotiations.
We reiterate our call for the cessation of all acts of
violence, provocations and incitement. Japan urges the
Government of Israel to freeze its settlement activities.
We call on the Palestinian parties to sincerely engage
in reconciliation in order to bring Gaza back under the
control of the Palestinian Authority. The Government
of Japan is determined to continue its engagement to
help keep the hope for a peaceful future alive.

Developing economic independence for Palestine
is a prerequisite for achieving the two-State solution.
Japan places importance on providing support in the
area of information and communications technology
(ICT), since ICT will enable Palestine to be connected
to global markets despite its geographical limitations.
This year, at the Jericho Agro-Industrial Park, we intend
to expand programmes to the ICT area, including by
establishing, inside the Park, a Palestinian industrial
capacity development centre focusing on ICT.

With respect to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), in 2018 Japan provided its highest-ever
contribution, focusing more on education and health
care. We are committed to continuing our support to
UNRWA and encourage others to do likewise.

During the last high-level week, Prime Minister
Abe announced a new programme to invite elementary
and junior high school teachers from Gaza to Japan
each year. The first group of teachers will visit Japan
in March. We hope that programmes such as those will
help Palestinian youth find hope for the future rather
than turn to radicalism. Ultimately, Japan continues to
believe that the issue of Israel and Palestine, including
final-status issues, should be resolved through
negotiations, in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and past agreements.

Let me also take this opportunity to the wider
region. With regard to Yemen, Japan welcomes the
breakthrough last month in Stockholm. We commend
the work of the Security Council to support the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, including
through the adoption of resolutions 2451 (2018) and
2452 (2019) and the establishment ofthe United Nations
Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement. We hope
that the Agreement will lead to peace in Yemen and
provide a swift resolution to the immense humanitarian
challenges the Yemeni people face.

