Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time I take the floor under your presidency,
Sir, I would like to express our warmest congratulations
to you personally and to your country, Kuwait, on
your well-deserved accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June. Knowing your
commitment to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the rule of law at the international
level, I am particularly pleased to see you presiding over
the Council for the second time during your two-year
term. Let me also thank my colleague Mr. Jiirg Lauber,
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission for his constructive contribution to
this debate following his visit to Burundi from 6 to
10 May. I would also like to thank the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, my dear friend
and brother Mr. Smai'l Chergui, for his contribution to
this briefing via video-conference from African Union
headquarters in Addis Ababa, although some of his
remarks departed dangerously from the decision made
by the Heads of State and Government of the African
Union at their summit on 10 and 11 February.

The Heads of State articulated a four-point message
at the summit. They first congratulated the Government
of Burundi on its preparations for the 2020 elections.
Secondly, the Heads of State and Government welcomed
the statement by President Pierre Nkurunziza that he
would not stand for the 2020 elections. Thirdly, they
made an appeal for peaceful elections in Burundi.
Fourthly, and finally, they called for the lifting of the
sanctions weighing on Burundi. Those were the four
substantive points of the decision made at the summit
of the Heads of State and Government of the African
Union in February, while Mr. Chergui's comments
were connected to what was said at the summit that
took place in Nouakchott in 2018 - one year ago. I
think the expert who prepared his statement used the
content of the 2018 summit instead of the summit that
took place three months ago. We are therefore of the
view that the decision of the Heads of State made during
the summit take precedence over other considerations
and supersede what was said by the secretariat of
the African Union. I wanted to make that distinction
before continuing.

Lastly, I wish to thank the other members of the
Council who make every effort to support compliance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
in the Council's handling of the situation in Burundi.
Once again, we regret that a few countries continue
to maintain the same stubborn positions that they have
had for more than four years, instead of looking at the
situation in Burundi objectively and with discernment.
Some have gone further, forming a coalition of five and
calling for an unnecessary meeting on Burundi last
month, as if there were an emergency in the country
(see S/PV.8538). What is surprising in all of that is
that some of those countries that have been taking
aim at us for four years without interruption are also
having trouble. Some of them are experiencing major
institutional crises. Others are experiencing an identity
crisis. Still others are experiencing acute social crises,
while others are experiencing all three. And yet they
continue to worry about Burundi. That was just a brief
side note.

Although this meeting was imposed on us, it
is my pleasure to participate and give the Council
an overview of the situation in my country since the
previous Council meeting on Burundi on 19 February
(see S/PV.8465). I hope this will be the last briefing on
Burundi, which has rightfully requested over and over
again to be removed from the Council's busy agenda.

As my colleague Ambassador Lauber said so well,
who has first-hand information following his visit to
Burundi last month, I can confirm that since 2017 the
political and security situation in Burundi has been calm
and stable and is fully under control. Preparations for
the 2020 elections are at a very advanced stage, both in
terms of organization and budget. National mechanisms
for the preparation of elections are gradually being put
in place, while calming measures to promote a climate
conducive to the holding of peaceful elections next year
are steadily increasing. Without being exhaustive, I
would mention the following measures.

The Constitution of 7 June 2018 is already
the primary fundamental legal framework for the
organization of the 2020 elections. The Kayanza road
map to peaceful elections in 2020 was adopted with
broad support from the entire political class. The
Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI)
has already been established and is operational. The
revised electoral code was adopted by the Burundian
Parliament in April by deputies of the ruling party and
the opponent Agathon Rwasa together in a climate of
compromise and spirit of mutual exchange, and by
a tally of 105 votes out of 108. The Council can see
that the electoral code is consensual. The decision was
also made to finance the entire electoral cycle with
national resources.
The political space in the country was expanded
with the approval of Mr. Rwasa's new opposition party,
the Congres national pour la liberte. Contrary to what
is being said, that party continues to open new offices
within the country without any interference. The
decision of the President of the Republic to renounce
voluntarily his constitutional right to run in the 2020
elections is a gesture of high political and democratic
value that could serve as an example across the
continent and elsewhere. The release earlier this year of
more than 2,000 prisoners, including the young rioters
and insurgents from 2015, is also part of this campaign
to promote reconciliation and political tolerance before
the major electoral event in 2020 and beyond.

Moreover, on the organizational aspect of the
elections, at their summit in February the Heads of State
and Government of the African Union congratulated the
Government of Burundi for initiating the preparatory
process for the 2020 elections, in particular the
establishment of the Independent National Electoral
Commission and of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. The summit also welcomed the statement
by President Nkurunziza that he would not stand for
the presidential elections in 2020, while also urging the
Government and the political parties to work together
for the smooth conduct of the forthcoming elections. On
the same occasion, the Heads of State and Government
of the African Union reiterated their request to the
European Union to immediately lift the unilateral and
immoral sanctions against Burundi and its people.

On the whole, the dialogue among political parties
in Burundi with regard to the holding of elections in
2020 is taking place in a spirit of openness and political
tolerance. We want to point out that almost all of the
decisions that have been taken in Burundi in that regard,
including the Kayanza road map for peaceful elections
in 2020, the establishment of the CENI, Parliament's
adoption of the electoral code and the return to the
country of several political leaders who fled in 2015,
have been on a basis of consensus. Among them are
former national Presidents and Vice-Presidents,
parliamentarians and other senior Government officials
who have now been reintegrated into their political and
professional lives.

The foreign actors who apparently want to take the
dialogue issue away from Burundi, despite the fact that
facilitation ended on 1 February, have three objectives.
The first is destabilizing Burundi on the eve ofthe 2020
elections. The second is encouraging the putschists of
2015, who are now on the run and sheltered, fed and
protected by the same actors who have been attacking
Burundi, diplomatically and politically, since 2015.
The third is distracting Burundians' attention from
the important things, which are the organization of the
2020 elections and the implementation of the national
development plan. When the time comes, all of those
outside actors will have to face up to their responsibility
for the consequences of their interference in matters
that come under Burundi's sovereignty. Burundians
and the world are watching. For their part, as a matter
ofprinciple, the people of Burundi will remain opposed
to any attempt at foreign interference at any time,
anywhere and under any circumstances, whether by a
State or a regional or international organization.

The security situation is generally excellent
throughout Burundi. From north to south, west to east
and in the centre, day and night, Burundian citizens
are enjoying their civil and political rights in complete
peace of mind. That positive assessment is shared by all
the well-intentioned regional and international actors
who have visited our country since 2017, most recently
President Felix Tshilombo Tshisekedi, President of the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, who made a working
visit today to meet with his Burundian counterpart
President Pierre Nkurunziza to discuss issues of
common bilateral, regional and international interest.

On the humanitarian front, we are pleased with the
massive voluntary return of the Burundian refugees who
fled the country in 2015. Besides the thousands who have
returned on their own without assistance from the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
between 1 August 2017 and 29 May of this year, 70,285
refugees have been voluntarily repatriated to Burundi,
primarily from Tanzania but also from Kenya, Uganda
and the Central African Republic. Only a few days
ago, on 11 June, just this week, 397 refugees returned
to the country from neighbouring countries through
Burundi's southern border. The massive voluntary
return movement is clear evidence of the restoration of
peace, tranquillity and stability in Burundi, despite the
comments of various foreign actors, who continue to
deliberately inflate the number of refugees still in exile
in order to keep Burundi in a state of artificial crisis.
Beyond our national efforts, the support of our partners
in the reception and socioeconomic reintegration of the
thousands of returning refugees remains essential, and
the same applies to local host communities.

With respect to Burundi as an item on the Security
Council's agenda, it is clear that we are on it for political
reasons and external interests that have nothing to
do with the welfare of the Burundian people. Our
current political and security situation is no threat to
international peace and security and does not justify
arbitrarily keeping my country on the Council's agenda.
The continued series of meetings on Burundi, which
have nothing to do with the reality on the ground, is a
destabilizing factor rather than one that promotes peace
and tranquillity. Such unnecessary meetings indirectly
encourage the 2015 putschists who fled the country and
are being pursued by Burundian justice. We therefore
reiterate our legitimate call for taking Burundi off the
Security Council's agenda and allotting the precious
time spent on Burundi to the world's many other
hotspots. Burundi's place is with the United Nations
agencies and programmes that address socioeconomic
development, with a view to supporting our efforts
to implement our national development plan and the
Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

We repudiate the unjustified political and diplomatic
aggression against Burundi and its people. Muscular
diplomacy must give way to mutually beneficial and
respectful cooperation. Such double standards and
disproportionate, unfair pressure will not bring us
to our knees, 57 years after the end of colonialism in
our country, a nightmarish period in our history from
which the Burundian people are still trying to awaken.
Foreign actors must stop infantilizing the Burundian
people, who are proud, dignified and very attached to
their political independence and ubuntu values. They
are mature enough to handle their own affairs without
any foreign interference, whether near or far from our
borders. Any attempt to meddle in our domestic affairs
uninvited will always bump up against our patriotic
response, as it did during the regime-change conspiracy
in 2015. We are aware that the 2015 plot is not yet
dead and buried. There are some who seek to revive
it in subtle ways that are less apparent and difficult to
detect at first glance but that fortunately do not escape
our vigilance.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
highlight two major projects that are now the focus
of the Burundian people, the 2020 electoral process
and the implementation of our national development
plan. The principal one is the process of implementing
the development plan, which covers a lO-year period
from 2018 to 2027. The Government of Burundi
has committed to redoubling its efforts to mobilize
domestic resources to fund a majority of the priorities
that have been identified. We also thank the United
Nations country team in Burundi for its support and
invite our partners to contribute to it if they wish. The
second major project, which is very important to us
right now, is the organization of the 2020 elections,
which are an internal matter exclusively of national
sovereignty. Support to this process can be provided
only at the request of the Government of Burundi, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Any attempt to create a new role or
redefine an existing role in favour of the United Nations
rather than Burundians in Burundi's elections would
encroach on national sovereignty and be a flagrant
violation of the Charter, which states in Article 2 that

"[n]othing contained in the present Charter
shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in
matters which are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any state or shall require the
Members to submit such matters to settlement
under the present Charter".

I would like to end my statement with that quotation.
I thank you once again, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting. I hope it will be the Council's last
meeting on Burundi.

