My delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. As reported, the humanitarian needs in Syria remain substantial, as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the economic downturn continue to affect millions of people in the country. My delegation welcomes the ongoing humanitarian response by the United Nations and its humanitarian partners as well as the increased deliveries of aid during this difficult period. These humanitarian actors are working in a challenging environment, where they are risking their lives to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people; some have even paid the ultimate price. And we are certain that expressing our gratitude will never suffice in the face of the enormity of this sacrifice. In this regard, allow me to convey my delegation's deepest condolences to the families of the three humanitarian workers who were killed in northern Aleppo a few days ago. Today I wish to stress the following points. First, my delegation welcomes the continued cross-border operations and efforts to scale up deliveries through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing. We are fully aware that, after the 10 July decision (resolution 2533 (2020)), the cross-border deliveries have met with various challenges. Indonesia therefore encourages all relevant parties to enhance coordination and redouble their efforts aimed at finding ways to close the gaps created by the closure of the Bab Al-Salam border crossing. After hearing Under-Secretary-General Lowcock's briefing earlier, we strongly believe that we should give appropriate focus to closing these existing gaps. Genuine and active coordination is also needed for the cross-line convoys to the north-west of Syria. We note that, in this regard, there is an ongoing discussion to complement the cross-border operations. My delegation looks forward to the immediate deployment of these cross-line convoys. Secondly, there should be no interference in the process of humanitarian aid deliveries. We urge all parties to refrain from impeding the delivery process of basic and life-saving assistance. It is critical that safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access be assured to all areas in Syria and to all civilians in need. This also includes ensuring the availability of such basic services as access to safe drinking water. We are pleased to note that the water supply from the Allouk water station has reached people in Al-Hasakah since the end of August. A long-term solution is key to preventing future disruption of this vital infrastructure. On access to the north-east, my delegation is pleased that, despite some gaps, aid deliveries are continuing to the area, both by air and land convoys. We urge immediate approval for the remaining humanitarian assistance. Thirdly, it is urgent that any kind of tension or escalation be avoided. The Syrian people need sustained calm, and they need it now more than ever. Humanitarian and medical workers also need a safe environment so that they can execute their tasks effectively. Indonesia reaffirms that all parties to the conflict must not avoid their obligations to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure, pursuant international humanitarian law. Supporting and maintaining relative calm and creating new conditions for peace must be our priority. And we must continue to pursue peace through diplomacy. Some might say that it is very difficult for Syria, but it is indeed possible. We must therefore work to make it happen for the Syrian people in the hopes of achieving a better future.
