Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for giving me the floor at this meeting. As you
know, my country, Mali, is currently undergoing one of
the direst moments of its history. Our people today is
suffering deeply, reeling and lost, but we have not lost
all hope. I am certain that my people will be able to
join forces across the nation to overcome the
challenges we face.

Mali has never been in a worse situation. Not
even in our worst nightmares could we have imagined
our current suffering. The situation is indescribable and
unprecedented. We have never experienced its like.
Nowhere in the world has such a situation been seen;
even a precedent might have helped us to overcome the
depths of despair.

Even as I speak, our people is divided and our
country threatened with partition. Northern Mali is
today occupied by Tuareg rebels and Salafists.
Hundreds of thousands of refugees and internally
displaced persons are living in unimaginable
conditions. As the adage says, bad luck never arrives
alone. Mali is today ostracized by the international
community. This is the first time we have found
ourselves in this position. We have never experienced
such a situation before.

How did our country get to this point? Only a few
weeks ago, we were known and held up as a beacon
and a country where the democratic model had taken
root, and were often cited as an exemplar for the
African continent. How is it that today our country
finds itself ostracized by the international community,
torn apart, having lost its status and even subject to
embargo?

I do not wish here to go into the profound causes
of this situation; to do so would take too much time. I
believe that I will have the opportunity to retrace that
history on another occasion. I commend you, Sir, and
the Council for having provided us with this
opportunity to speak and for having adopted today's
presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/9) on the painful
situation, the institutional and security crises and the
humanitarian challenges in my country.
12-28357

Today, as I said, the people of Mali is divided,
occupied and beset by serious institutional problems
that have led us to be ostracized by the international
community. We ask the Security Council to help Mali
find a way out of the current crisis. It is a critical time,
and the challenges are both numerous and complex.
Today, it is a matter of survival.

I think that, today, the international community is
speaking in a single voice with regard to a return to
constitutional order, the elections and the
condemnation of the coup, but the reality on the
ground is indescribable. What we seek today is to help
Mali to get back on its feet. The Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) has imposed
sanctions on Mali, and we understand that. We are full-
fledged members of ECOWAS and the African Union.
However, I have to say that it is the first time that we
have seen such sanctions imposed on a member State
under particularly difficult conditions.

At a time when we have hundreds of thousands of
refugees and displaced persons; when our territorial
integrity is severely threatened; when the north is
occupied; when there are all kinds of threats; when the
populations in the occupied north are in complete
distress, and when, in the southern part of the country,
there has been a schism since the 22 March coup; and
when there is all kinds of scheming by young
politicians, is this the time to close our country's
borders and to leave the people further thirsty and
hungry? I believe that ECOWAS and the African Union
should not exacerbate the situation that we are
currently experiencing. To the contrary, at this time
they should help us find a way forward.

The military officers who undertook the coup
have asked to sit down with essential national forces -
all our country's stakeholders, political parties and
civil society - in order to seek a national consensus
that could lead to the country finding its footing and
accepting the minimal solution to emerge from this
situation. I would therefore appeal to the Council to
help Mali to emerge from the situation.

