I thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their reports and briefings. We welcome their reappointment under resolution 2529 (2020), which renews the mandate of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for two years. We also welcome the appointment of Mr. Abubacarr Tambadou as Registrar. We assure them of France's full support for their efforts to combat impunity and preserve the legacy of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. In order to carry out all of its activities on two continents, the Mechanism must have adequate financial resources. By contributing more than $4 million per year, France actively plays its part. In return, it is incumbent upon the Mechanism to continue the concerted efforts of the two Branches, at The Hague and in Arusha. The reporting period was marked by the health crisis. However, pending legal proceedings have moved forward, given that three important rulings - in the Prosecutor v. Stanisie and Simatovic, Prosecutor v. Turinabo et al. and Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladi¢ cases - could be issued as early as the end of the first half of 2021. We welcome the adaptability demonstrated by the Mechanism's three organs and its staff in order to ensure the continuity and coherence of their activities. The trial in the Prosecutor v. Felicien Kabuga case is also expected to begin next year. Following his arrest in France - the result of close international cooperation - that trial will be another important moment for the victims, national reconciliation in Rwanda and international criminal justice. We have taken note of Mr. Kabuga's initial appearance on 11 November at The Hague, where the accused was temporarily transferred pending a new judicial decision. Our priority remains ensuring that justice is served as soon as possible. We know that the Prosecutor's team based in Kigali is fully mobilized to move proceedings forward. Following the confirmation of the death of Mr. Augustin Bizimana, it is of the utmost importance that the six suspects still at large be brought before the courts. To that end, we once again urge States to cooperate fully with the Mechanism, in accordance with their international obligations. We regret that some partners still refuse to do so, in spite of the numerous appeals from the Prosecutor and many Member States, relayed in the Council. With regard to cases referred to national jurisdictions, France reaffirms its full mobilization to bring the Prosecutor v. Laurent Bucyibaruta case to a conclusion within a reasonable time frame. In particular, our objective remains to ensure that no crime of genocide will go unpunished, which has notably resulted in the strengthening of the judicial resources devoted to the prosecution of participants in the genocide of Tutsis in Rwanda who reside in France. The creation of the National Anti-Terrorist Prosecutor's Office on | July 2019, as a specialized prosecutor's office that includes responsibility for combating crimes against humanity and war crimes, has allowed for the allocation of two additional prosecutor's posts. Finally, no lasting reconciliation can take place without the acknowledgement of crimes and responsibilities. We consider unacceptable the denial of crimes and the glorification of those who are responsible for genocide and war crimes and have been convicted by international criminal tribunals after impartial and independent proceedings. In a year commemorating the terrible events related to the conflicts of the 1990s in the Western Balkans, we renew our call to all those responsible to refrain from statements denying the crimes committed.
