Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation joins
other representatives in sincerely congratulating Japan
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December. We also express
our appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to your
delegation for the initiative to convene this very
important debate today. You will agree with me that we
cannot exhaust this debate today given the limited time
at our disposal, as it is a subject that involves a wide
range of cross-cutting issues that are characterized
by volatility, uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity.
Furthermore, those scenarios occur within the context
of complex interdependency, often with far-reaching
implications for humankind.

In discussing contemporary threats to peace and
security, I wish to highlight some of the issues facing
us, which include, but are not limited to, international

terrorism, cyberwarfare, human trafficking,
transnational organized crimes, the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons and environmental challenges,
including trans-border crime. Those issues take place
in every corner of the world and their repercussions are
felt by many, irrespective of where the incident may
have occurred. No country is ever truly immune to the
direct or spillover effects of such phenomena. Those
constantly growing trends of interconnected instability
and insecurity pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. It is therefore necessary for us
to act collectively, as members of the international
community, to address them.

As envisaged in its Charter, the United Nations has
remained a cornerstone of international and multilateral
efforts to maintain international peace and security. At
the same time, Article 24 of the Charter specifically
mandates the Security Council to play a leading role
in realizing that objective. In that undertaking, it
is incumbent upon the Council to act proactively to
identify and address security challenges before they
deteriorate into full-blown conflicts. In that regard, it
is imperative for the Council to deploy all the necessary
tools at its disposal to effectively deal with emerging
threats. It is also important that the United Nations act
as a whole and as a coordinated entity in order to derive
the maximum benefit from the utilization of its wide
range of assets.

However, we cannot place the burden of
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security solely on the United Nations. My
delegation is of the View that continental bodies such as
the European Union, the African Union, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, among others, should play a
critical role in safeguarding international peace and
security within their respective regions. Because they
are on the ground, they are better placed in terms of
time and space to appreciate and address security
challenges as they arise. Coordination and cooperation
at this level are vital, as they greatly enhance the global
reach of the United Nations in response to complex
emergencies and threats.

The existence of partnerships such as those
between the African Union and the European Union,
and the United Nations and the African Union, is also
a welcome development. It is incumbent on all of us
to ensure their effectiveness and fitness for the people.
Our enhanced engagement and coordination with these
organizations, and their engagement and coordination
with one another, will go a long way to addressing
conflict and security challenges.

The role of subregional entities such as Southern
African Development Community (SADC), the
Economic Community of West African States and the
East African Community, among others, cannot be
overemphasized. They are critical building blocks for
the continent's peace and security architecture. From
my own experience at SADC, we have structures - such
as the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation and the Southern African Regional Police
Chiefs Cooperation Organization - that are tasked
with addressing peace and security challenges in the
subregion. They play a key role in conflict resolution
and management and preventive diplomacy, as well as
in negotiations and the coordination of deployments of
SADC military forces within the region.

I would be remiss if I did not highlight the
importance of individual countries' contributions
to international peace and security, particularly
in addressing contemporary security challenges.
Individual countries have a responsibility to ensure
sound and effective institutions of governance, social
cohesion, citizen economic empowerment and a whole
range of other issues geared to improving the well-
being of their citizens. While we advocate for the free
flow of goods and services and the free movement
of people across international boundaries, we are
cognizant of our collective accountability for effective
border management controls, which help to reduce the
incidence of crime and insecurity and thereby limit
the prevalence and scope of contemporary peace and
security threats.

Finally, Botswana attaches great importance and
value to sustainable peace in countries in our region
and beyond. We maintain that peace and security are
fundamental prerequisites for promoting economic
and social development and long-term political
stability. Against that backdrop, we must be steadfast
in our commitment to the principles of democracy,
accountable and inclusive governance, respect for the
rule of law and the promotion and protection of human
rights for all. With that, Mr. President, I thank you very
much for the opportunity you have given me.

