Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank the Chairman of the Ministerial Committee on
Syria of the League of Arab States, His Excellency the
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Qatar, as well as the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States, for their briefings to the Council, as
well as for the praiseworthy efforts that they continue
to undertake to bring peace to Syria.

Since mid-March 2011, Syria has experienced a
serious crisis, with adverse impacts on neighbouring
countries that are hosting thousands of refugees. The
observer mission to Syria, deployed by the League of
Arab States on 26 December 2011, sought to put an end
to the repression of protesters and to bring all forms of
violence, whatever their source, to a halt.
Unfortunately, the violence, far from being rooted out,
continues. Until recently, we spoke of protesters with
bare hands; today they have become a rebellion, having
begun to take up arms.

Faced with such a situation, it is hardly surprising
that the mission of the League of Arab States did not
achieve the expected results and that the mission itself
had to be suspended. My country deplores the fact that
the members of the mission were unable to conduct
their work freely and without hindrance. Even worse,
the violence continued while the mission was still on
the ground.

Togo condemns the violence, murders,
kidnappings, extrajudicial executions, rapes and
violations of human rights that have been perpetrated
in Syria. My country calls on the Syrian Government to
put an end to the violence, lift the siege of certain
neighbourhoods or cities, and order the military and its
tanks to return to their barracks.
The League of Arab States has proposed a road
map that includes the formation of a Government of
national unity with the essential goal of preparing and
convening general and presidential elections in the
country in the near future. President Bashar al-Assad
would transfer his mandate to the Vice-President, who
would work with a Prime Minister elected by consensus
and who would manage the transitional Government.

The implementation of the road map presupposes
an end to the violence and engagement in honest, open
and inclusive dialogue. However, this all depends on
the goodwill of the Syria authorities in its
implementation. Unfortunately, we have seen that the
current Government is not prepared to step down,
much less take part in the transition process as
recommended by the road map. That is why Togo is
concerned about the likelihood of the implementation
of the League of Arab States' far-reaching road map,
elaborated in the framework of Chapter VI of the
Charter.

Could the Security Council not take action on this
initiative - the outcome of the efforts of a regional
organization authorized to propose ways of ending the
crisis - without being accused of supporting the
violence? On the other hand, could the Council, given
the current situation, call upon the President of Syria to
step down, without being accused of supporting one of
the parties to the conflict? This body, which is
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, must be able to engage in honest and
heartfelt discussions so as to arrive at the best way to
help Syria find a way out of the difficult situation
facing its people, a situation that the delegation of
Togo believes has gone on for far too long.

However, at this stage it is imperative that the
violence stop. The Council must speak with a unified
voice, leaving aside narrow interests, and launch an
urgent appeal to the Syrian authorities to stop the spiral
of violence. Togo believes it is now utterly clear that
we must not put in the same category acts of violence
perpetrated by the Government and those of protesters.
Nevertheless, so as to ensure that peace and the
inclusive dialogue we are hoping to see remain
possible, the Syrian opposition must stand by its initial
approach of achieving democracy without Violence.

Togo believes that the endeavours of the Arab
League should be supported and that it should be
encouraged to make greater efforts to bring about a

rapprochement between the Syrian regime and the
opposition, with a View to enabling direct negotiations.
Such negotiations should be held under the auspices of
the Arab League and with the support of the United
Nations, with a view to finding a lasting solution to the
crisis and thereby averting the potential civil war that
looms on the horizon.

