The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/771, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2008/737, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
2

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Viet Nam

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1848 (2008).

In connection with the resolution just adopted on
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized
to make the following complementary statement on
behalf of the Security Council:

"As is known, the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (S/2008/737) states in paragraph
11, 'the situation in the Middle East is tense and
is likely to remain so, unless and until a
comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of
the Middle East problem can be reached'. That
statement of the Secretary-General reflects the
View of the Security Council."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under S/PRST/2008/46.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stages of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 dm.
08-64433

