Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, and your team for a successful presidency.
You, Sir, have guided the Council through an eventful
month. Uruguay and the other new members of the
Council have really hit the ground running. I very much
agree with Mr. Motohide Yoshikawa on brevity.

We appreciate that you, Sir, have chosen to hold a
wrap-up briefing at the end of your month. I note that the
three most recent presidencies all held informal wrap-
ups outside the Chamber with all General Assembly
members. Those have the same benefit as these formal
meetings in terms of transparency, but they have the
added benefit of allowing interactivity and allowing
all General Assembly colleagues to ask us questions.
Whether we do them formally or informally, I hope
that we can use these sessions to draw lessons on our
working methods. Here are three specific suggestions
drawn from experience this month. They are not
criticisms of the presidency; quite the opposite, they are
encouragement to go further still in modernizing the
working methods of the Security Council.

First of all, we saw in Burundi how Council visits
can have a real impact on the challenges we face. We
sent a strong message when we returned to Burundi
just 10 months after our last visit and we made clear
during the visit that we expect progress on what I
call the three "Ds": de-escalation, dialogue and some
form of deployment of an international presence.
However, there is a fourth "D": delay. There was a
delay in agreeing the visit to Burundi and I think that
delay was not good enough. The situation degenerated
and our delay weakened our message at a time when
sustained pressure was needed. So, I wonder whether
we should move away from consensus in agreeing such
visits. If some Council members do not want to come
on a visit, let us not allow them to undermine the entire
Council. Going further, perhaps there would be value
in setting aside a week every four months or so where
all Council members would be encouraged to visit an
area on our agenda, whether as a whole or in a group
or even individually. This so-called visiting week could
allow us all to do some real diplomacy and outreach
and engagement and even prevention or resolution of
conflicts.

Secondly, we are at our best when we respond to
events quickly and efficiently. Our work on Colombia
this month was a good example of how we can work
quickly and flexibly to get an important issue onto our
agenda, and I am hopeful that our actions will herald a
new era for everyone in Colombia. Even our meeting on
Madaya in Syria had a bright side in terms of putting a
spotlight on an immediate issue that could put pressure
on those responsible. It was well timed, given the
London conference next week, and I hope the profile
that we have given will encourage every participant in
London to pledge generously to help both the immediate
and the long-term needs of the people in Syria and the
region. That means more support for education, job
creation and ultimately more hope for the future.

Not all of our meetings have such a clear purpose.
Regular debates, regular briefings and regular
consultations fill up our programme of work and often
lead just to the repetition of well-known positions,
rather than to genuine engagement or progress. The
Council adds most value when responding to events
as close to real time as possible, rather than according
to an arbitrarily fixed reporting cycle. So, rather than
clogging up the programme of work, let us try to leave
enough time to be agile in the face of ongoing issues.
The crises of the world do not operate on a quarterly
basis, so our response to them should not either.

Thirdly, and finally, one of the most important
responsibilities for the Security Council in 2016 is to
recommend to the General Assembly who the next
Secretary-General should be. Outside the Security
Council, a lot of people are doing good work to help
us answer that question. Inside the Council, we have
some catching up to do on what we want from the next
Secretary-General, what challenges he or she will face
and how we can work together to overcome them. To
address those questions and more the United Kingdom
will call for discussion under the "Any other business"
rubric on that issue next month. To ensure that we get
the best candidate for the job, it is vital that we mirror
the activism being shown on that issue outside the
Council.

In conclusion, I commend Mr. Elbio Rosselli for
January and wish Mr. Rafael Dario Ramirez Carrefio
good luck for February. Let us all focus on improving
still further our work in terms of our transparency,
interactivity, efficiency and impact.

