Mrs. Vives Balmafia (Andorra) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish to thank the Swedish presidency and its Prime
Minister, His Excellency Mr. Lofven, for convening
this open debate to express our positions. We have also
had the honour of co-sponsoring resolution 2427 (2018),
unanimously adopted by the Security Council today.

I also appreciate the enlightening briefings
delivered by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia
Gamba, and the Executive Director of the UNICEF,
Ms. Henrietta Fore, as well as thank Ms. Yenny
Londofio, civil society representative, for her analysis
and courageous and forward-looking proposals.

I would like to underscore aspects that are
particularly significant, in our opinion. As Yenny
Londofio said, listening to the words of child victims
and young people and incorporating their experiences
is one of the keys to the resolution. They must be given
a voice, as set forth by the Convention on the Rights
of the Child - a very powerful instrument today,
the monitoring of which creates a very solid basis
for prevention.

The resolution also incorporates the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. The transformation of
the world must end the root causes that can lead to
conflicts, inequalities, poverty and marginalization,
which in some ways can become the framework for
violating children's rights. We also value the focus
on the reintegration of children, the identification of
the challenges of their stigmatization, the need for
attention to their physical and mental health and their
social integration. No one should be left behind. Each
and every child matters - they have their lives, rights,
relationships, identities and communities.

In Sustainable Development Goal 4, as has been
reiterated in the reports of the Secretary-General and
in the resolutions and presidential statements of the
Security Council and now, as has been recalled in this
meeting, education plays an essential role in conflict
prevention. It can facilitate the reintegration of children
by adapting to each situation to provide them with the
necessary training for their social insertion. It can also
equip them with the appropriate skills and values, as
well as pay close attention to the specific needs of
girls and young women. The values of coexistence
and knowledge can create resilient societies with the
resources to prevent armed conflict.

Through the collaboration and coordination of
United Nations agencies with local entities on the
ground and the elaboration of action plans, it has been
possible to achieve progress with States and non-State
armed groups, such as the most recent cases in Mali,
Nigeria, the Central African Republic, the participation
in Colombia and what we just heard about in the Sudan.

However, 2017 saw an upsurge in very serious
attacks on children that should not be tolerated. The
verification of violations of children's rights must
therefore continue. My delegation is committed to
supporting children enjoying their present and trusting
in the future. For that reason, in addition to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
Andorra has acceded to the Paris Principles and the
Vancouver principles. We urge those who have not yet
done so to join those declarations.

We are part of the Group of Friends of Children
in Armed Conflict, and we welcome and endorse the
statement delivered by the representative of Canada.
We have also signed the Declaration on Safe Schools
and align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Argentina. The universality
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, to which Andorra is a party, would provide
greater capacity to combat impunity, since it considers
intentional attacks on educational establishments as
war crimes. Since 2006, Andorra has also provided an
annual contribution of funds to the Office ofthe Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.

Allow me to conclude by commending the
commitment made by offices, agencies, States and
organizations. We reiterate our support for the results to
be tangible and thereby- contribute to the consolidation
of lasting peace, with children as genuine agents and
protagonists of the transformation of the world.

