The Secretary-General: It is good to see so
many ministers here for this important meeting, and I
am pleased to join the Council for today's discussions
on Haiti. Let me start by extending a warm welcome
and my congratulations to President-elect Preval.

The first round of national elections that took
place last month was a vivid illustration of the faith of
the Haitian people in the democratic process and of
their determination to make a fresh start. That was
clear from the high turnout of voters who waited
patiently to cast their ballots, and from the peaceful
and pluralistic nature of the electoral process.

Let me also recognize the important contribution
that the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) made in helping to ensure the political
space and security needed for successful elections. I
am sure that the Council will join me in expressing
gratitude to my Special Representative, Juan Gabriel
Valdes, for his distinguished leadership.

These developments should encourage us to even
greater efforts in Haiti, which is only beginning its
long journey towards a stable and democratic future. It
needs and deserves our assistance to reach that
destination. That means a vigorous partnership
between the leadership and the people of Haiti on one
hand, and the international community on the other.

We all must reinforce President-elect Preval's
efforts to encourage broad political reconciliation.
Haiti's institutions of governance require generous
support. So do the people of Haiti, who every day
endure a level of hardship and insecurity that is
unacceptable and also incompatible with the stability
of the country.

Days after the elections, the Security Council
decided to extend the mandate of the United Nations
operation in Haiti for a further six months. At the same
time, it expressed its intention to authorize further
extensions. It is right and, indeed, necessary that a
multidimensional peacekeeping operation continue. Yet
the efforts of MINUSTAH can tackle only the most
urgent needs. We need generous and coordinated
bilateral assistance to supplement and build on those
efforts.

The men and women of Haiti have demonstrated
their faith in a better future. Let us work with the
President-elect and his team and with the people of
Haiti to ensure that they do succeed.

