Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Special Representative Moussa and African
Union Special Envoy Madeira for their statements this
morning.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) has plagued
Central Africa for far too long. The United States
commends Special Representative Moussa and the
United Nations for the comprehensive regional strategy
devised to address the threat posed by the LRA once
and for all. The real test of the strategy will be whether
it translates into concrete action on the ground. The
United States encourages United Nations missions
in the region to help implement it and calls on other
nations to address the gaps and areas for improvement
that the United Nations has outlined.

The United States, in partnership with the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations, supports the
Governments of the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
Uganda in their efforts to apprehend Joseph Kony and
the top LRA commanders. Two months ago, President
Obama announced that the United States will continue
the deployment of a small number of United States
military advisers who are assisting the forces of the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, South Sudan and Uganda in pursuing the
LRA and protecting local populations.
We welcome the significant progress made in
weakening the LRA and commend Uganda on the
capture of LRA senior commander Caesar Acellam
Otto last month. The number of people reported killed
by LRA attacks is low compared to previous years
and most attacks are focused on looting food and
supplies, suggesting that the LRA is in survival mode.
Nevertheless, we must not forget that the LRA has
been weakened before and has re-emerged when the
pressure on it is reduced. Since the majority of reported
LRA attacks and abductions occur in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the efforts of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in coordination
with the Congolese Government to increase focus on the
LRA and help protect civilians are especially critical.
More must be done to ensure that the LRA cannot
gain breathing room in any part of the region. A future
free of the LRA will require the continued resolve and
stronger collaboration of regional Governments, and we
welcome the AU's initiative aimed at helping to foster
increased cooperation.

The United States believes that, along with military
pressure, encouraging and helping members of the LRA
to surrender is critical to weakening the organization.
The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
the Central African Republic, MONUSCO and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan have already begun
to expand disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration activities across all
LRA-affected areas. In the weeks since Caesar Acellam
Otto's capture, a few LRA fighters have surrendered
peacefully. The United States is working with United
Nations missions and military forces in the region to
expand communications, including by distributing
leaflets and making radio broadcasts urging LRA
fighters to defect. We join regional Governments in
calling on the remaining fighters and abductees in the
LRA to surrender peacefully and return home. To assist
in that effort, the United States is funding programmes
aimed at addressing the psychological and social needs
of former abducted children and helping them reunite
with their families and communities.

As we support the region's efforts to dismantle
the LRA and rehabilitate its abductees, we must
continue to support the communities besieged by the
LRA threat. The strategy of the United Nations rightly
emphasizes the protection of civilians and humanitarian
response. The United States funds programmes to help
LRA-affected communities develop protection plans
and connect with other communities. We also provide
humanitarian assistance that targets 240,000 people
across the LRA-affected region.

Beyond that of the LRA, the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) has a
difficult set of challenges to address. Piracy and armed
robbery at sea affect the peace and security of West and
Central Africa. We are pleased to see that UNOCA and
the United Nations Office for West Africa are making
progress on the Council's request earlier this year for
support to States and subregional organizations in
convening a joint summit on piracy and armed robbery
at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, and in developing a
comprehensive strategy to address that threat.

In conclusion, we would like to commend the
thousands of United Nations peacekeepers, observers
and humanitarian and human rights workers for their
dedication and sacrifice as they work to promote peace
in Central Africa.

