Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on having brilliantly led the Council's
work under your presidency. Your success, Sir, would
not have been possible without your entire mission's
great contribution throughout the month of March.

As many delegations have noted before me, Security
Council meetings held in March covered practically all
the crises that are unfolding in different parts of the
world. I will address several of them.

Upon France's initiative, the Council undertook
a visit to the Central African Republic, Ethiopia and
Burundi from 9 to 13 March 2015. In the Central
African Republic, our visit allowed us to immerse
ourselves in the reality on the ground and to see the
United Nations many contributions through the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and other
international forces, in particular Operation Sangaris
and the Central African Republic's armed forces.
Their presence allowed for substantial progress to be
made, despite the difficulties encountered in fostering
an inclusive political dialogue and in organizing
democratic, transparent, credible and peaceful elections
in the Central African Republic.

It is worth noting that, despite the beginning of the
stabilization process in that country, in particular in
Bangui, the situation in the Central African Republic
remains precarious and the challenges are immense.
They include, among others, the holding and success
of the Bangui forum, which should lay the path to be
followed for the country's future; the implementation
of a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process for the cantonment of armed groups; the
redeployment of State administration throughout the
territory; the organization of constitutional referendums
and inclusive legislative and presidential elections; and
the establishment of a truly national army.

In this regard, we understand and share the concerns
of the transitional authorities over the deplorable lack
of financial resources needed to organize the elections.
We call on the international community to provide
consistent assistance to the Central African Republic
for its transition so that it may undergo a dynamic
process of stabilization and peace. We dare to hope
that, through the visit to the Central African Republic,
the Council was able not only to evaluate the progress
achieved, but also and above all to understand the
immense scope of the stabilization work that remains
to be done.

With regard to the Council's visit to Addis Ababa, it
is part of the annual joint consultative meetings between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council on peace and security issues on that
continent. We welcome the cordial atmosphere and
mutual understanding that characterized this meeting,
which was recognized in the issuance of a joint
statement. Nevertheless, the time taken to negotiate
that joint statement demonstrates that the concerns of
the African continent are not sufficiently understood
by some Council members. There is therefore a need
for an effort towards mutual understanding between the
two Councils so that the joint meetings will contribute
to making progress on the points under consideration.
From that point of view, we support the proposal
made during the joint meeting by the delegation of
New Zealand intending to limit the agenda of the
joint meeting to two or three items in order to have
enough time to discuss them and to set up a follow-
up mechanism after the discussions through permanent
contacts. We welcome the fact that the joint meeting
considered, among other issues, the threat of the Boko
Haram terrorist group.

As announced in Addis Ababa, Chad, on behalf of
the three African Council members, presented a draft
resolution on the deployment of a joint multinational
force, which is under consideration and will soon be
submitted for adoption. The African members of the
Council, the African Union, the States members of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission and Benin hope that
it will be adopted in the days to come. We note that
progress has already been made in considering the
text, and we thank all delegations for their valuable
contributions and constructive cooperation.

The Security Council's visit to Bujumbura was
a major step forward. It made it possible to send a
message of trust and calm to the actors in Burundi in
View of the upcoming elections, which are schedule to
take place in April, by insisting in particular on respect
for their obligations under the Arusha Accords and
the Constitution. We hope that the upcoming coming
elections will be free, democratic and transparent and
that they will take place in a peaceful atmosphere. We
welcome the maturity of the strong forces in Burundian
society and hope that they will make every effort to
avoid a reversal of the peacebuilding process, which
has made it possible to break away from war.

The Council's Visit to Africa was a genuine
opportunity for the various actors of the countries
visited to express themselves without time limitations
or other restraints. Such a visit of the Security Council
to the field is a lot better than the reports presented
in New York. It allows the Council to see the reality
in all its dimensions and aspects. We congratulate
the French presidency and the Angolan co-presidency
on their leadership, patience, organization skills and
coordination throughout the Security Council mission.

The debates on 25 March (see S/PV.7414) and
27 March (see S/PV.7419) focused on current important
issues, as demonstrated by the very broad participation
of Member States. Despite the laudable efforts of
the international community to assist child Victims,
the problem of children associated with non-State
armed groups is far from being resolved. The moving
and poignant testimony of Mr. Junior Nzita of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, who was recruited
by rebel forces against his will at age 12, reflected
the difficulty of the situation facing child soldiers. In
that regard, Chad is pleased to have been cited as an
example for having succeeded, with the help of United
Nations agencies, in removing child soldiers from its
armed forces and ensuring their reintegration. Chad is
ready to share its modest experience in that area with
any country that so wishes in order to eradicate the
scourge of child soldiers.

With respect to the issue of attacks and abuses
committed against ethnic and religious minorities in
the Middle East, we are pleased that France has drawn
the attention of the international community to the fate
of these minorities. We also welcome the convergence
of perspectives that emerged from the public debate on
this issue. We welcome the plan of action proposed by
the Secretary-General to protect these minorities and
the initiative of France to organize an international
conference on this subject. In addition to the measures
to be taken to protect the victimized minorities, we
must underscore the urgent need to provide them with
humanitarian assistance in accordance with their needs
and help them return to their lands of origin.

In conclusion, we reiterate our congratulations to
you, Mr. President, and your entire team on having
conducted an exemplary presidency of the Security
Council and for the excellent work accomplished
this month. I cannot conclude without wishing the
delegation of Jordan every success and assuring it of
Chad's full support.

