Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
We welcome the Security Council's renewal for
another year of the compromise on the International
Criminal Court (ICC) so painstakingly put together in
resolution 1422 (2002). Like any compromise, the
resolution does not address all of our concerns about
the Court. It balances divergent positions and helps to
ensure against undermining of United Nations peace
operations.

Like resolution 1422 (2002), resolution 1487
(2003) exempts States that are not parties to the Rome
Statute but that participate in United Nations
operations from the ICC's jurisdiction in a manner
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and
with the 1998 Rome Statute. The resolution is
consistent with a fundamental principle of international
law: the need for a State to consent if it is to be bound.
That principle is respected by exempting from ICC
jurisdiction personnel and forces of States that are not
parties to the Rome Statute. It is worth noting that the
resolution does not in any way affect parties to the
Court, or the Rome Statute itself. Nor does it, as some
today have suggested, elevate an entire category of
people above the law. The ICC is not the law.

The provisions of this resolution are as relevant
and necessary today as resolution 1422 (2002) was a
year ago. We all know that United Nations operations
are important if the Council is to discharge its primary
responsibility for maintaining or restoring international
peace and security. We also all know that it is not
always easy to recruit contributors, and that it often
takes courage on the part of political leaders to join
military operations established or authorized by the
Council. It is important that Member States not add
concern about ICC jurisdiction to the difficulty of
participating.

We have heard the argument that this resolution is
not necessary, and we do not agree. I would suggest
that even one instance of the ICC attempting to
exercise jurisdiction over those involved in a United
Nations operation would have a seriously damaging
impact upon future United Nations operations. We are
disappointed, of course, that not every Council member
shares our View, but we are not at all persuaded that our
concerns are overstated or that they lack validity.

The United States yields to no country in its
historical leadership in the struggle for international
justice and accountability for war crimes. After all, the
United States was the first country to codify the laws
of war and international humanitarian law. It was also
an original participant in the creation of every
successful international effort to date to adjudicate
allegations of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
It has been, and will continue to be, a strong supporter
of the tribunals established under the aegis of the
Council. But, unlike the ICC, those tribunals are
accountable to the Security Council.

The ICC is not a United Nations institution. Some
would even say that it challenges and weakens the
United Nations Charter system and the Council's place
in it. The ICC is vulnerable at every stage of any
proceeding to politicization. The Rome Statute
provides no adequate check. Having every confidence
in the ICC's correct behaviour, however that is defined,
is not in our view a safeguard. We have already seen in
other forums the potential for politically motivated
criminal charges against national leaders and military
officers, including over the recent Iraq hostilities. Our
primary concern, of course, is for American personnel
that may find themselves subject to ICC jurisdiction,
even though the United States is not a party to the
Rome Statute.

As Ambassador Negroponte explained last year,
the power to deprive a citizen of his or her freedom is
an awesome thing, which the American people have
entrusted to their Government under the rules of our
democracy. The International Criminal Court does not
operate in the same democratic and constitutional
context and therefore does not have the right to deprive
Americans of their freedom.

The United States therefore has a fundamental
objection to the International Criminal Court. In our
View, it is a fatally flawed institution. Many others,
including some of our closest friends, do not share that
view. We are thoroughly familiar with our respective
positions and understand that those positions are not
going to change in the foreseeable future. We all need
to acknowledge that fact and its implications.

This resolution represents a compromise that
respects the strongly held views of those who support
the ICC and the equally strongly held views of those
who do not. Such respect is important to maintain. This
compromise, therefore, is important to maintain.

