Mrs. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Cuba supports the statement delivered by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The situation in the Middle East region remains
a matter of constant concern for the international
community. That has been reflected in the many
previous debates held by the Security Council. However,
despite repeated open debates in the Council on the
issue, where we have witnessed overwhelming support
for the Palestinian cause, this organ has so far failed to
adopt a draft resolution demanding that Israel put an
end to its aggressive policies and settlement practices.
The inaction of the Council in the face of such practices
is alarming. It is unacceptable that the Security Council
continue to be held hostage to the veto, or the threat
thereof, by the United States to prevent this organ from
fulfilling its mandate and protecting the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people.

Cuba reiterates its call on the Security Council
to fulfil the responsibility entrusted to it under the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security and to adopt the necessary measures
to demand that Israel immediately put an end to its
occupation of Palestinian territory and other Arab
territories, end the blockade against the Gaza Strip, stop
the construction and expansion of Israeli settlements,
cease the construciton of the separation wall on
occupied Palestinian territory, halt the destruction and
confiscation of Palestinian lands and property, end
the forced displacement of hundreds of thousands of
Palestinian families and end the transfer of settlers into
occupied Palestinian territory, among other Violations
of international law, international humanitarian law
and United Nations resolutions.

The Council should also hold Israel accountable for
its aggressions and flagrant, massive and systematic
violations ofthe human rights ofthe Palestinian people,
and for its war crimes and collective punishment
against that people. The Israel's settlement campaign
and prolonged impunity threaten the viability of a
Palestinian State and affect the possibility of resolving
the conflict in a fair, lasting, comprehensive and
peaceful manner.

Cuba welcomes the regional and international efforts
being made to resume peace talks between Israelis and
Palestinians, including the French peace initiative for
a multilateral peace conference and the Arab Peace
Initiative. We take note of the report of the Middle East
Quartet. In this regard, we deplore attempts to equate
the responsibilities of a people under occupation with
those of the occupying Power. We reiterate that the
Security Council must fulfil its obligation to promote a
negotiated solution that guarantees an end to the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory.

The only possible solution to the Palestinian
question is the peaceful coexistence of two independent
States, with the establishment of an independent,
sovereign and Viable State of Palestine, with its capital
in East Jerusalem and within the pre-1967 borders,
in which the Palestinian people may exercise all their
rights, including the right to self-determination. Cuba
is convinced that the settlement of this long-standing
conflict would help to greatly reduce the tensions
experienced today the Middle East.

With respect to Palestine's 2011 application for
recognition as a State Member of the United Nations,
Cuba reaffirms its full support for the admission of
Palestine as a full Member of the Organization and
calls on the Security Council to consider and accept
that request without further delay. That is the will of the
vast majority of States Members of the Organization.
Otherwise, the General Assembly should act resolutely
to decide the case.

On the situation in Syria, Cuba reiterates that it
will be possible to achieve peace in that country only
by respecting the right of the Syrian people to decide
their own destiny. A political solution, reached through
dialogue and negotiations without preconditions, is
the only viable solution to the conflict in Syria. Cuba
welcomes the extension of the cessation of hostilities
and the new paths that it has opened with a view to
acheivingt a political, peaceful and negotiated solution
to the conflict.

We support the Syrian people's aspirations to live
in peace and choose their own destiny without outside
interference. Those who have fueled the conflict from
the outside, with the declared aim of imposing regime
change, are responsible for the thousands of civilian
victims of the conflict. We regret the loss of innocent
lives as a result of this situation and condemn all acts of
violence against the civilian population of that country.

The threat posed by extremist groups in Syria,
some of which practice terrorist methods, is the main
challenge facing the Arab nation. The fight against
that scourge requires the assistance of the international
community. Cuba reiterates that an interventionist
agenda must not be promotedunder the pretext of f i ghting
terrorism. We demand the cessation of violations of the
sovereignty of Syria and the withdrawal of a foreign
military presence that does not enjoy the consent of or
operational coordination with the Syrian Government,
the only legitimately elected authority in the country.
We recognize the efforts and cooperation of the Syrian
Government in facilitating access to humanitarian aid,
while reiterating that humanitarian assistance must be
delivered in strict compliance with General Assembly
resolution 46/182.

The Council is called on to promote a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the conflicts in the Middle
East that will safeguard the sovereignty, security and
territorial integrity of all States of the region. The
peace, security, welfare and development deserved by
all peoples, including those of Middle East, depend
on the decisive action of this organ, under the powers
conferred by the Charter of the United Nations. The
General Assembly should also exercise all its powers
under the Charter.

