Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to join other
members of the Council in welcoming the United States

Secretary of State, Mr. Mike Pompeo, who is with us in
the Chamber today. I also wish to express our gratitude
for the briefings delivered by the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo;
the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, Mr. Serge
Christiane; and, of course, the Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom. We also welcome the presence
among us today of the representatives of Germany and
the Islamic Republic of Iran.

As this is likely to be the final time that my delegation
will participate as a member ofthe Council in a meeting
in this format on the topic of non-proliferation, I wish to
reiterate that Bolivia is part of the world's first densely
populated region to be completely free of nuclear
weapons and, as provided for in the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, of which Bolivia is a signatory, we have
assumed the responsibility of contributing to putting
an end to the arms race - especially the nuclear arms
race - and to consolidating a peaceful world. In that
regard, we reiterate our call for a world free of nuclear
weapons, which is a view we have consistently promoted
in our efforts on the Security Council to ensure that the
Middle East joins the world's five nuclear-weapon-free
zones.

Bolivia strongly reaffirms its commitment to the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), given that it
represents an unmistakable achievement of diplomacy
and multilateralism and is an expression of the ability
of States that respect international law to carry out
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes without discrimination, in accordance with
articles I and II of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. In that vein, I wish to emphasize
a point raised in paragraph 2 of the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/1089), which has been introduced today
and is the sixth report since the adoption of resolution
2231 (2015), to the effect that,

"the Islamic Republic of Iran continues the

implementation of its nuclear-related commitments,

as verified by the International Atomic Energy

Agency, in the face of considerable challenges

brought about by the withdrawal of the United

States of America from the Join Comprehensive

Plan of Action and its subsequent decisions to

reimpose all its national sanctions that had been

lifted or waived pursuant to the Plan".

In that regard, we once again express our regret over
the decision of the Government of the United States of
America to withdraw from the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and its imposition of unilateral sanctions
against the Islamic Republic of Iran. We believe that
we should be able to generate an atmosphere of mutual
trust among States so that aspirations to a total and
verifiable denuclearization of the Middle East can be
made a reality as early as possible. The clearest symbol
of victory for multilateralism and political dialogue is
indeed the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, and
full compliance with it should serve as a guarantee for
the strengthening of other denuclearization plans, such
as that of the Korean peninsula.

For my delegation, the 12 years of intense
diplomatic activity that achieved an overall, long-
term and appropriate solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue through the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
which the Security Council endorsed unanimously in
resolution 2231 (2015), cannot be postponed by the
unilateral decision ofa Member State or a group of States
of a region that jeopardizes the very implementation of
the Plan.

In light of this, Bolivia welcomes the resolve of the
Plan participants that have renewed their commitment
to its fully and effectively implementation. At the
meeting of the Joint Commission, held in Vienna on
6 July, and at the ministerial meeting of the E3/EU+2
and the Islamic Republic of Iran, held in New York
on 24 September, they outlined initiatives aimed at
protecting the freedom of economic agents wishing
to maintain legitimate trade relations with the Islamic
Republic of Iran, in accordance with resolution 2231
(2015).

In that understanding, it is the responsibility of the
Security Council to preserve the Plan of Action as it was
conceived, guaranteeing reciprocal commitments to its
full implementation, in good faith and in a constructive
atmosphere based on mutual respect. In this context,
the Council membership is the main guarantor in terms
of avoiding any action that threatens to undermine
the Plan. We therefore express our full support and
welcome for any future initiative of the Secretary-
General to ensure the validity of the Plan.

Bolivia once again expresses its interest in seeing
future reports providing more in-depth information
regarding annex A, since both annexes - A and B - are
comprehensive and complementary for the effective
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

Finally, as a pacifist country, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, reaffirms its commitment to preventive
diplomacy, multilateralism, non-interference and
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of States, in the understanding that these are
universal principles recognized by the international
community.

