Mr. Baali (Algeria): I will start my statement by
paying a special and well-deserved tribute to my
countryman Lakhdar Brahimi, without whom no
resolution on Iraq would have been contemplated, let
alone adopted.

The adoption of the resolution on Iraq constitutes
an historic moment for the proud Iraqi people, who
after thirty years of dictatorship and fifteen months of
foreign occupation will, inshallah, recover, by 30 June,
their independence, their sovereignty and their dignity.
This resolution also marks a new chapter for the Iraqi
people in their legitimate quest for stability, prosperity
and democracy.

Yet the future remains loaded with dangers and
uncertainties and the resolution we just adopted is not
aimed at - or capable of - eliminating all
uncertainties and all dangers. In fact, the challenges the
Iraqi people are facing are formidable, and it is indeed
up to them and to the Government that will lead the
country until legitimate institutions are elected to make
the political transition work and to make their dream of
a free and democratic Iraq come true.

Until that day happens, and for it to happen, Iraq
will have to work hard to create the necessary
conditions for its people to live in peace and security,
to put together a credible and self-reliant army to
protect it from internal and external threats, to develop
a genuine democratic process that would benefit all
Iraqis, and to use the remarkable human and natural
resources that make that country so unique to rebuild
an economy ravaged by years of war, sanctions and
neglect and to restore hope and confidence to the Iraqi
people.

The most daunting and pressing priority for the
leadership of Iraq will be, evidently, to do its utmost to
reduce the level of violence and to bring peace and
stability to the country. In this regard, I must
emphasize that insecurity cannot be solved through
military means alone and I would like therefore to join
my voice to the appeal made by Mr. Brahimi yesterday
to the Iraqi Government to reach out to those who have
been vocal critics of the past year's process. In this
context, the national conference constitutes the ideal
forum to promote a meaningful dialogue and a true and
national reconciliation and to build a strong consensus
on Iraq's political future.

While not perfect, the resolution we have just
adopted is undoubtedly the best we could get under the
present circumstances and is indeed a well-balanced
text which, among other things, manages to reconcile
two extremes: the concept of the sovereignty of Iraq,
which had to be totally restored and reasserted beyond
any doubt or limitation, and the necessity of
maintaining on Iraqi soil the presence of an effective
and fully operational multinational force requested and
invited by a Government-in-waiting that has not yet
assumed its responsibilities and which, given the
circumstances, had yet to make dramatic decisions.

My delegation is particularly grateful to the
sponsors for having responded constructively and
positively to four crucial demands that my delegation
had put forward at the very beginning of the
negotiations, namely, first, that full and undiminished
sovereignty be restored to Iraq; secondly, that the
Government of Iraq exercise full authority and
responsibility in governing Iraq, including on security
issues and over its financial and natural resources;
thirdly, that all armed Iraqi and security forces be
placed under the sole authority of the Iraqi
Government; and, fourthly, that the consent of the Iraqi
Government be required in respect to sensitive military
operations carried out by the multinational force, as
well as regarding the engagement of its own forces in
multinational force operations.

Yet our task is not over. This is certainly the
beginning of a long and perilous journey for the Iraqi
people. There is also a long way to go for this Council,
which has to remain fully engaged to ensure that the
resolution it has unanimously adopted is properly
implemented, that the will of the Iraqi people is fully
respected, that the United Nations is fulfilling its
leading mandate in optimal security conditions, and
that the political transitional process which the Council
has endorsed will indeed lead to a fully sovereign, free,
stable and democratic Iraq - an Iraq at peace with
itself and with its neighbours and capable once more of
making history.

