The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Bangladesh.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report. We agree with the steps he has
identified for the success of the peace process and with
his observations contained in the report.

We would like particularly to thank Ambassador
Greenstock for his statement at the outset of our debate,
in which he shared with us his first-hand experience with
regard to the situation as it exists now in Sierra Leone.

Bangladesh believes that overall progress has been
made in Sierra Leone, despite difficulties which continue
to exist. We are happy at the role played by regional
countries in facilitating the implementation of the Lorne
Peace Agreement. In particular, the role of President
Konare of Mali, in holding, first, the second meeting of
the Joint Implementation Committee on 24 January and,
then, the special meeting on 1 and 2 March.

However, as the Secretary-General has mentioned in
his report, much clearly remains to be done to further the
peace process in Sierra Leone. We have a number of
concerns. They are in five broad areas.

First, regarding the deployment of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), there have
been reports of obstruction of UNAMSIL forces, seizure
of arms from UNAMSIL troops and refusal to cooperate
with UNAMSIL by rebel groups, in particular by
elements of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). This
is totally unacceptable. UNAMSIL must have freedom of
movement. All parties must also cooperate fully with
UNAMSIL during its deployment and discharge of
mandate.

We believe that only the early establishment of a
credible peacekeeping mission throughout the country can
create the security conditions and the climate of

 

confidence that are essential for the successful conclusion
of the peace process. Since a substantial part of the
deployed UNAMSIL troops are actually forces that had
been with the Economic Community of West African States
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) mission, it may be
important for Mr. Annabi to comment on how smooth and
effective was the inclusion of ECOMOG troops in
UNAMSIL operations.

Secondly, a particular concern remains about the intent
and activity of the RUF, particularly its leader Mr. Sankoh.
He has been quick to pledge his total commitment to the
peace process, but his deeds have seldom matched his
words. In recent months, his activities and those of the
RUF have been particularly suspect. RUF is yet to provide
a list of combatants and has handed over very few of its
weapons. We understand that it possesses a credible force
that can break the peace at any time. We believe that the
Council should be prepared to take specific measures to
force Mr. Sankoh and the RUF to comply fully with the
Lome Peace Agreement. In my capacity as the Chairman of
the Sierra Leone sanctions committee, I am doing my best
to enforce the sanctions imposed on Mr. Sankoh and his
colleagues.

Thirdly, the slow disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process remains a concern. The
Secretary-General has mentioned in his report that the slow
deployment of UNAMSIL, administrative aspects relating
to the functioning of the camps and the lack of a realistic
target date and awareness about the modalities of the DDR
programme have all been hindrances in this regard. While
improving those would help, the success of the programme
will ultimately depend on the ability of the Government of
Sierra Leone, through its National Commission on
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration and in
cooperation with its national and international partners, to
set up its efforts to implement all aspects of the DDR
programme, which will be important.

In this regard it is also important, as the Secretary-
General has also pointed out, to address the question of
restructuring of the police and armed forces. Genuine DDR
can be achieved only through a national process, under
credible authority and with the participation of all parties.
In this connection, I would like to ask Mr. Annabi whether
he sees a short- or medium-term possibility of the Sierra
Leonean police becoming an effective force. Is there any
possibility for their deployment in the DDR sites?

Fourthly, the extension of state control over the
territory of Sierra Leone is a must for a sustainable peace.
This aspect is closely linked to my previous point. Unless
a democratically elected national Government has
administrative control over all the provinces, including the
Northern and Eastern Provinces, as well as on economic
activities, including the exploitation of the country's
strategic resources, there cannot be a successful DDR
process, reintegration of former combatants or an end to
illegal mining of diamonds and other resources that
continue to boost the ability of former rebels to renew
hostilities. UNAMSIL, as is pointed out rightly in the
report, has no mandate to step in to prevent illegal
economic activities. I believe that the Council can look at
this limitation closely in future.

Fifthly and finally, the continued violation of the
human rights of Sierra Leoneans, including abductions,
and the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the country
are matters of concern. Recent reports that former rebels
have committed atrocities near areas where UNAMSIL
has been deployed are indicative of the relative impunity
they enjoy. Also, humanitarian personnel have been
obstructed and assistance has not reached people in need.
We consider that these are among the priorities that need
to be looked at by the Council.

In conclusion, let me thank Mr. Annabi for his
excellent presentation. We agree with him about the
proposal to extend the periodic reporting from 45 to 60
days.
I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of Sierra Leone has asked to
speak. I invite him to make his statement.

