Mrs. Zappia (Italy) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank France and Foreign Minister Le Drian for
taking the initiative to convene this open debate and
for promoting resolution 2462 (2019), adopted today, of
which Italy had the honour to be a sponsor. I also want
to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for the
information that he kindly shared with us from Rome,
and the other briefers for their important contributions
to this debate.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

(spoke in English)

Today Italy's Foreign Minister said once again
that terrorism exploits globalization and the digital
revolution. Countering the financing of terrorism should
therefore be a priority for all national Governments and
international organizations. The resolution that the
Council adopted unanimously today makes a significant
contribution to that by emphasizing the importance of
harmonizing existing rules and recommendations and
strengthening important operational aspects. In that
context, I would like to highlight four points.

First, greater attention should be paid to
complementing each and every investigation related to
terrorism with specific financial investigations. Even
minor and low-budget crimes can leave financial traces
that can be usefully exploited to better comprehend
the terrorist environment and take more effective
operational action. We should therefore constantly
encourage and promote closer cooperation between law
enforcement and financial intelligence.

Secondly, the analysis and recommendations of
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), in particular
the new counter-terrorist financing operational plan
adopted in February 2018, are of key importance.
We greatly value the paragraphs of today's resolution
pertinent to this area and encourage all Member
States to implement the provisions coherently while
cooperating with one another as fully as possible.

Thirdly, Italy is doing its part wholeheartedly, as
we are strongly committed to countering terrorism
financing both nationally and internationally. We have
actively implemented all the United Nations and FATF
measures and recommendations, including by taking
preventive action and rigorously implementing United
Nations sanctions regimes. We have adopted a national
risk assessment strategy that has been accompanied
with a strong coordination effort among all the relevant
national bodies. Italy's counter-terrorism prosecution
office works according to a comprehensive protocol that
includes pre-investigative and systematic exchanges of
information with financial intelligence units and other
relevant controlling bodies. It focuses specifically on
suspicious operations and persons included on relevant
lists, with hundreds of thousands of names and numbers
matched and checked yearly.

Equally importantly, our Guardia di Finanza shares
its know-how with all other relevant national bodies and
actively provides cooperation and capacity-building
at the international level. In that respect, I would
like to highlight the importance of the memorandum
of understanding signed today in Rome between
the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the general
headquarters of the Guardia di Finanza, and mentioned
by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov this morning
in his videoconference briefing. The memorandum
establishes coherent and structured collaboration in
the field of capacity-building. Dedicated courses on
countering the financing of terrorism and related
matters will be provided to law-enforcement officials
and civil servants of Member States that request
such support.

Fourthly and finally, I want to underline that
the right balance between security concerns and
the protection of all people's fundamental rights and
dignity remains a priority for Italy. Non-governmental
organizations and associations that are committed to
humanitarian action and advocate fundamental human
rights play a critical role in alleviating the suffering
of entire populations, families and individuals. Such
crucial activity could suffer from inappropriate and
unnecessary limits and obstacles.

Italy remains committed to addressing the
scourge of terrorism and its related financial threats
in a determined and comprehensive way, while
also continuing to enhance its cooperation with
Member States that may need assistance in capacity-
building projects.

