Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): As the world is preparing
to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide perpetrated against the Tutsi in Rwanda, which
would also be a reminder of the memorable failure of
the Security Council to save a million citizens of this
world, the conscience of the international community
has once again been stained by the ongoing conflict in
Syria, which is in its thirtieth month.

We said "Never again" after what happened in
Rwanda, but since 1994 the community of nations
has stood by powerless and witnessed horrendous
massacres and ethnic cleansings in many corners of
the world. As in 1994, when the Security Council was
prevented from intervening in Rwanda because of an
unwarranted realpolitik prevailing in the Council,
mostly among permanent members, the Council was
once again unable to save more than 100,000 people
in Syria because of ever-present divisions among veto-
wielding members.

The horror of the Syrian crisis culminated with
the 21 August chemical attack in Ghouta, where 1,500
innocent lives were taken by poisonous weapons banned
a century ago. Ibelieve that the whole world was shocked,
likely by the painful images of children gasping for
their last breath. There is a saying in French that says
that some good can always be found in a misfortune.
The images of the suffering of those children seemed
to have opened our eyes. I am therefore grateful to the
United States of America and the Russian Federation
for the framework (S/2013/565, annex) they have agreed
on related to the destruction of the chemical weapons
stockpile in Syria that was translated into resolution
2118 (2013), which we have just adopted unanimously.
We were encouraged that the resolution contains
provisions for the destruction of Syrian chemical
weapons by endorsing the decision of the Executive
Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). We particularly welcome
the decision of the Security Council to impose coercive
measures under Chapter VII should the Syrian parties
not comply with the resolution.

Furthermore, Rwanda was pleased that the Security
Council agreed on the need for accountability and for
the revival of the Geneva process. Indeed, while 1,500
Syrians were gassed to death a month ago, we cannot
lose sight of the fact that more than 100,000 men,
women and children were massacred over the last 30
months with conventional weapons. We know for a
fact that a military solution has so far failed in Syria
and cannot be a viable answer for the country and the
region. That is why Rwanda welcomes the revival of
the Final communique of the Action Group for Syria
(S/2012/523, annex) and the political transition in Syria.

I take this opportunity to urge the Security
Council, particularly those permanent members that
have influence on the Syrian parties, to ensure that
the international conference on Syria to implement the
Geneva communique is convened as soon as possible
and that parties negotiate in good faith and with a
sense of responsibility, with a view to finding a lasting
solution and ending calvary of the Syrian people. I am
encouraged by the information provided tonight that
an agreement may have been reached on starting a
"Geneva II" conference in mid-November.

Nonetheless, given the horrendous crimes
committed in Syria, Rwanda is of the strong belief that
any political solution should ensure that all those who
committed crimes in Syria are held accountable before
a court of law. We therefore welcome the accountability
provisions contained in the adopted resolution. Rwanda
will play its part to ensure that they are implemented.

Let me conclude with a message that the President
of Rwanda wished me to convey to the Council:

"I reiterate my conviction that the primary
responsibility of this global body is the
responsibility to protect. The agreed objective of
maintaining international peace and security would
be pointless if geostrategic interests prevailed over
the lives of innocent men, women and children. I
therefore commend the Security Council for slowly
evolving on this issue, and Rwanda, informed by
our experience both in 1994 and in the Security
Council, is ready to continue working with other
Member States to ensure that protection of human
lives and the integrity of women and children are
always at the centre of our decisions."

