Mr. Talbot (Guyana) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the States members of
the Rio Group - Argentina, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay,
Venezuela and Guyana.

At the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir,
and the Argentine Republic on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March 2006 and on your excellent leadership of the
Council. We also recognize and welcome the presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru. In addition, the
Group thanks the Secretary-General for the report
(S/2006/ 109) submitted for the Council's consideration.

For the members of the Rio Group, this open
Security Council debate on small arms provides an
opportunity to encourage the complementarity of
efforts by the international community and the United
Nations system in the light of the threat that such
weapons pose to security and stability throughout the
world. For us, it is very important to stop the illicit use
of small arms and light weapons and to promote the
implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

This meeting is being held a few months before
the General Assembly reviews the progress achieved in
implementing the Programme of Action and considers
what still needs to be done in that regard. Thus, it is an
opportune time for the Security Council to provide its
support and inspiration to the Assembly with respect to
the review process and to show its own commitment to
contributing to the collective efforts aimed at
eradicating the illegal flow of small arms, as well as
the efforts that the Council is carrying out in its own
right to ensure the implementation of its decisions in
the area of small arms and light weapons.

There can be no doubt that the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons represents a grave threat
to the security and stability of many regions of the
world. Latin America and the Caribbean are not
immune to the trade's destabilizing impact on States
and societies. We are also very aware of the complex
and multidimensional nature of the problem, which
involves, inter alia, the dimensions of security, conflict
prevention and resolution and crime prevention and
humanitarian, health and development dimensions.

Indeed, the very nature of the problem requires a
holistic and coordinated response on the part of the
international community as a matter of obligation.
Such a response must tackle all of the aspects of the
problem so as to address the threat it poses to life and
to human survival. A coherent and comprehensive
approach on the part of the United Nations must be a
crucial part of such an international response.

The Rio Group believes that in order to tackle the
challenge of the illicit trade in small arms, we urgently
need to strengthen cooperation and international
assistance, including technical and financial assistance,
when appropriate, to support and facilitate efforts at
the local, national, regional and global levels designed
to prevent, combat and eradicate that scourge. This will
also require a strong commitment and leadership on the
part of the Member States; the support of international,
regional and subregional organizations; and the
commitment of civil society.

An ongoing problem in this area is the growing
ease with which civilians obtain access to arms and
ammunition, through a variety of ways and means,
both licit and illicit. As a result, the Rio Group believes
that we must ensure stricter control and broader
regulations on the part of national authorities with
respect to those arms that are in the possession of
civilians, in order to prevent not only the spread of
violence but also to minimize the human, social and
economic cost incurred by the use of such weapons.

Our countries would like to reiterate the need to
deal with the causes behind the demand for small arms
and light weapons and to promote a culture of peace in
which conflict resolution can be achieved through
dialogue and other peaceful means, avoiding the use of
violence and the resort to arms.

While we await the upcoming review of the 2001
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, the Rio Group cannot but
express its conviction that the progress we have seen
and the measures that have been adopted to date fall far
short of what we might wish for or require in tackling
this challenge. For example, the members of the Rio
Group, which were very clear in stating their
preference for a legally binding instrument allowing
States to identify and trace, in a timely and reliable
manner, small arms and light weapons, all were
disappointed by the fact that that goal was not
achieved. However, the Group is ready to contribute to
strengthening cooperation in this area, building on the
limited progress we have achieved this far. In that
respect, the members of the Rio Group all have
acceded to the Inter-American Convention against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials.

The Rio Group believes that, in order fully to
achieve the goals established by the Programme of
Action, the international community must tackle areas
such as identification and tracing, export and import
controls, as well as brokering. In that respect, the
Group stresses the need expressly to ban the transfer of
any type of weapon to non-State agents.

Allow me to comment briefly on a few aspects of
the Secretary-General's report.

First, with respect to arms embargoes, we believe
that the Security Council must create new mechanisms
to guarantee compliance with arms embargoes.
Furthermore, we support recommendation 5 in the
report of the Secretary-General, which calls on
Member States to enforce all Council resolutions which
impose such embargoes, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, and to adopt their own national
legislation in this area.

We also support recommendation 9 of the report,
which encourages States that have not already done so
to establish the necessary legislative and other
measures, including the use of authenticated end-user
certificates, to ensure effective control over the export
and transit of small arms and light weapons.

Likewise, the Rio Group supports
recommendation 10 of the report, which calls on the
Security Council, during the application of arms
embargoes, to give particular attention to the restriction
of the supply of ammunition suitable for weapons
already extensively available in the countries and
regions where arms embargoes have been imposed.
Furthermore, we cannot fail to mention the threat
posed by the diversion of small arms and light
weapons, in particular Man-Portable Air Defence
Systems (MANPADS), to terrorist groups. In that
respect, we welcome the decision to expand the scope
of the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms
as a global transparency and confidence-building
measure, and we encourage arms-exporting countries
to exercise the utmost responsibility in their
transactions and to prevent flows of arms and
ammunition to conflict areas.

In conclusion, the Rio Group will continue to
seek greater interaction between the Security Council
and the General Assembly, duly taking into account
their respective mandates in order to promote a
coherent and effective response by the United Nations
to the challenges posed by small arms.

