The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

Let me begin by thanking our briefers this morning,
welcoming the unanimous adoption of resolution 2347
(2017) and paying tribute to France and to Italy for
bringing this issue to the Council.

Today, all our briefers and all members of the
Council have really brought home the sheer scale of the
problem that we face. Whether in Timbuktu, Palmyra
or Bamiyan, this is an issue that goes beyond statues,
beyond artefacts and beyond museums. What we are
witnessing is a systematic and corrosive assault on
history, religion and the very fabric of identity. What
we are witnessing is, in many cases, war crimes.
This is not just wanton pillaging and vandalism; this
is a matter of international peace and security. Stolen
statues in Syrian and Iraq do not just line the pockets
of opportunists and looters; they provide a source of
revenue for Da'esh. And in the region, the destruction
of religious and cultural sites is about more than just
bricks and mortar. Sectarian division can be fuelled by
pickaxes and sledgehammers, just as it can be by bullets
and by guns.

So let us respond to this cultural destruction with
the same intensity and the same unity of purpose as
we do to any other threat to international peace and
security. Though this resolution today, we have taken
a step forward in doing so. The unanimous adoption
of the resolution shows the strength of our resolve
and of our condemnation of such actions. It shows
our commitment and determination to act against
perpetrators so that we can combat terrorism, prevent
conflict and protect vulnerable communities.

But as with so many issues before the Council,
implementation is now needed. The United Kingdom
will do its utmost to do so. That is why we have
established a $30-million cultural programme fund
to support projects that help to foster, safeguard and
promote cultural heritage in countries affected by
conflict. These projects are helping complete the
new museum in Basra, helping to protect heritage
and traditional crafts skills in Kabul, and supporting
advanced archaeological techniques and technology for
achaeologists across the Middle East and North Africa.
It is an effort furthered by the British Museum, which is
training Iraqi heritage sector workers so that they have
the skills needed to assess and record the condition of
their heritage sites and carry out rescue archaeology,
as required.

It is already bearing fruit. A participant in the
training has been appointed by the Iraqi state board
to lead the assessment of the site of Nimrud, recently
released from Da'esh control, and another participant is
looking forward to returning to Mosul Museum soon.
But it is not enough to train civilians. It is often the
brave men and women of the armed forces who are at
the front line of the threat against cultural heritage.
That is why the United Kingdom last year set up a
cultural property protection unit so that respect for
cultural property is further integrated into the training
and operations of our armed forces. This includes
respecting domestic and international law, as well as
the obligations of the 1954 Hague Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict and its protocols, which we will ratify shortly.

The action we take as a Council or as Member
States will count for little unless we show that there are
real consequences for those who carry out these acts. To
truly rid the world of this scourge, we need to deter and

punish as well as prevent. Ahmad AI Faqi AI Mahdi was choose to attack cultural heritage - a warning that the
the first person convicted by the International Criminal Council must ensure ls heeded.

Court for attacking protected sites, but he cannot be the I resume my functions as President ofthe Council.
last. lfwe are to deter others from following his path, we There are no more names inscribed on the list of
need to see more convictions and more consequences. speakers.

His story should serve as a warning to all those who The meeting rose at noon.
