The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Uganda.
I join colleagues in thanking the Secretary-
General for his reports on the deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2009/297 and S/2009/352) and
the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Le Roy, for his briefing. I wish also to
express appreciation for the contribution to the debate
by the Special Representative of the President of the
Russian Federation, Mr. Mikhail Margelov. I also
welcome the participation of the representative of the
Sudan in the debate.

I wish also to commend UNAMID and its
leadership for the important contribution they are
making in maintaining and improving the security
situation as well as in protecting the civilians in Darfur.
In this regard, Uganda condemns continued incidents
of attacks against UNAMID and humanitarian staff.

Uganda is encouraged that the deployment of
UNAMID is making progress. We commend the
Tripartite Mechanism, which has facilitated this
process, and encourage all the parties to continue their
cooperation within the Mechanism.

Uganda would like to see a peaceful resolution of
the conflict in Darfur. We are concerned about the
continued insecurity, the lack of progress in the peace
process and the negative effect that has on the
humanitarian situation.

We commend the Joint Chief Mediator,
Mr. Bassole, and the Government of Qatar for their
efforts, which led to the resumption of talks between
the Government of the Sudan and the Justice and
Equality Movement, which had been suspended on
18 June of this year. We call upon the Government of
the Sudan and all the opposition groups to engage in
the negotiations envisaged by the end of July without
any preconditions.

Uganda supports the work of the African Union
High-Level Panel on Darfur, led by former South
African President Thabo Mbeki, in its complementary
role in the search for peace in Darfur. Uganda
welcomes the commitment of the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) to abide by
and peacefully implement the recent decision of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration on the final settlement
of the Abyei dispute. The resolution of the Abyei
dispute is a major step in the implementation of the
CPA.
The increasing tension along the border between
the Sudan and Chad is a cause for great concern.
Uganda once again calls upon the two countries to
improve their relations and to implement the various
bilateral agreements that they have reached, including
the most recent one, signed in Doha. The normalization
of relations between the Sudan and Chad is critical for
a comprehensive and lasting peace in Darfur.

Uganda supports the extension of the UNAMID
mandate. In this respect, I wish to express our
appreciation to the delegation of the United Kingdom
for providing the draft resolution for our consideration.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

