Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I deeply thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura for his efforts. We stand fully behind him,
the Secretary-General and the political solution, for
which he tirelessly strives and which can be the only
way forward.

When we spoke in the Chamber last week (see S/PV.7919), on several occasions we expressed our
outrage over the atrocity in Khan Shaykhun, near
Idlib. But let us not forget that, every day, the Syrian
people continue to suffer the Syrian people continue to
suffer the brutality of war in all its forms. Despite the
horrifying images and their gruesome description in the
world media, heroic efforts by humanitarian workers
and endless discussions in the Security Council over
the years, the - now routine - brutality has continued
unabated. It is high time to end the war.

I believe that we have reached a critical moment. In
order to move forward, Sweden calls upon the Council
and the wider membership present in this room to
redouble efforts on three or four fronts. First, we must
reinvigorate the political process; secondly, revitalize
the ceasefire, and, thirdly, grant full humanitarian
access. I would like to add a fourth point and that is
that the Council must fully shoulder its responsibilities.

First, we all know that a political solution is the only
way to end the Syrian tragedy, which has now lasted over
six years. The shared objective remains a negotiated
transitional political process, in line with resolution
2254 (2015). We therefore welcome the conclusion of
the fifth round of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva. The next
round of talks should resume as soon as circumstances
allow in mid-May. We offer our wholehearted support
to the Secretary-General's Special Envoy and his
leadership, including his efforts to ensure the full and
effective participation of women and civil society in
the political process. While we welcome the progress
from the talks and that both parties have engaged on
all 3+1 baskets, we still feel that they need to do more.
In the next round, the Syrian Government's delegation
needs to seriously, meaningfully and concretely engage
on all baskets. The opposition delegation has engaged
constructively and maturely, but needs to continue
efforts to maintain unity.

Secondly, over the past couple of weeks we have
witnessed an intensification of fighting. The ceasefire
developed through the Astana process is increasingly
threatened. The United Nations-led political process
will be seriously at risk without an effective nationwide
ceasefire. We therefore urge the guarantors of the
ceasefire agreement to live up to their commitments
from Astana and to step up their efforts, including
towards a more effective monitoring mechanism. We
call upon all actors present here today with influence
over the parties to help put an end to violations and
reduce violence.

Thirdly, we all urgently need to do more to increase
humanitarian access. Convoy deliveries during the last
week of March shows that access to besieged and hard-
to-reach areas is possible when there is a will. We call
on the Syrian authorities here today to simplify the
approval process, as requested by the United Nations
We urgently need a systematic shift to sustained and
unhindered humanitarian access. United Nations aid
convoys are ready to assist 300,000 people every week
who are now suffering in horrendous conditions in
hard-to-reach and besieged areas. They must be given
the administrative approval to do so.

With regard to the repugnant attack in Khan
Shaykhun on 4 April, we regret that the Council has
so far not been able to agree on a strong resolution.
There must be a rapid, full and impartial investigation
to confirm the use of chemical weapons and those
responsible for that horrendous attack must be held to
account. We will continue to pursue efforts to that end.

Unspeakable atrocities and crimes against humanity
have been committed during the conflict. While long
overdue, we must now do our utmost to end the war in
Syria. We all agree on the need for a sustainable political
solution. Let us therefore engage seriously to make it
happen. This is a shared responsibility, particularly and
not least for the Security Council.

