Mr. Thoms (Germany): Germany fully aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the European Union (EU). Allow me to make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.

As we are all aware, there is a dangerous global
phenomenon that threatens the very existence of States
and human lives - the growing violence spread by
international terrorism. In light of the recent activities
of terrorist organizations, we welcome Chad's initiative
in organizing this thematic debate.

Today's resolution 2195 (2014) aims at fighting
the troubling link between terrorism and transnational
organized crime, with a particular focus on Africa.
Both issues are indeed deeply intertwined. Terrorist
groups need money and they need arms. In order to
procure those means, they rely heavily on cross-border
trafficking. Regional initiatives and enforcement
measures remain crucial to fight transnational
organized crime at the local level, and they need to be
pursued further. In that context, we highly commend
ongoing efforts to combat the illicit trade in drugs, a
major source of income for terrorist groups. Recently,
the West Africa Commission on Drugs presented
a cross-border analysis of that problem. The swift
implementation of its recommendations remains key.

Another important financial factor in the field of
transnational organized crime is wildlife trafficking.
Wildlife trafficking and poaching are growing at an
alarming rate, especially in Africa. Operations are
increasingly conducted on a large scale by transnational
organized criminal groups, often linked to terrorist
organizations. This threat requires an effective,
comprehensive and well-coordinated answer by the
international community, encompassing countries of
origin, transit and destination. As co-Chair ofthe Group
of Friends on Poaching and Illicit Wildlife Trafficking,
Germany continues to actively support efforts aimed
at addressing and combating wildlife crime, including
through a General Assembly resolution.

Besides drying up the funding of terrorist groups,
we also need to cut off their access to weapons. Illicit
arms that flow into North Africa, and the Sahel in
particular, pose a great danger, including to our own
security. Germany early focused on capacity-building
and securing stocks in Libya and the Sudan and is
extending its efforts to several other countries in
the Sahel region. We support regional arms control
cooperation initiatives like the Sub-regional Arms
Control Mechanism, which includes the Sudan, Libya,
Chad, the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Over the past few years, we have
dedicated substantial funds to further projects in the
region and have increased funding again for 2015. We
support corresponding initiatives by the EU. Germany
will also pay particular attention to that issue within the
framework of its Group of Seven presidency.

Overall, Germany remains highly committed to
assist African States in their efforts to improve their
internal security architecture. Under its Peace and
Security in Africa programme, the German Foreign
Office has funded a variety of projects with a budget
of some $200 million over the past six years. Among
others, these projects were designed to further foster
African Union institution-building and police capacity-
building in countries such as Burundi, Mauritania, the
Niger, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote
d'Ivoire, South Sudan and Chad. We are convinced that
our current and future efforts will contribute to this
resolution's purpose offighting transnational organized
crime and terrorism.

