Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the 15 States
members of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), and I welcome the excellent reports
of the Secretary-General presented to us today on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau (S/2013/680 and S/2013/681).

In view of the fact that my delegation is taking
the floor for the first time this month, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your presidency of
the Council for November.

My delegation has taken note of the reports of the
Secretary-General and has listened to the briefing by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, as well as the various statements
by the speakers before me.

Since the adoption of resolution 2013 (2013) on
22May,therehavebeenanumberofpositivedevelopments
and concrete results in Guinea-Bissau under the Special
Representative's watch, particularly regarding the
restoration of constitutional order, preparations for the
presidential elections, the strengthening of the judicial
and security sectors, and preparations for post-crisis
reconstruction after elections have been held. That is
why, on behalf of the Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS, I would like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative for the results obtained to date, and to
affirm the entire Community's support to him in the
challenges still to overcome. We firmly believe that his
experience as a statesman and his charisma as a Nobel
Peace Prize laureate have greatly contributed to those
positive developments. He is to be congratulated on his
commitment, particularly considering that his country,
Timor-Leste, has contributed to the financing of the
electoral process to the tune of $6 million and is fully
involved in the voter registration planned for December.

Despite those encouraging results, we have to admit
that much remains to be done, particularly in the area of
security and stability. For their part, at the forty-third
ECOWAS Summit, the Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS committed firmly and concretely to
extending the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB) for an additional 12 months, until 16 May
2014.
In that specific context, and to support the electoral
process under way, ECOWAS is ready to make a
contribution of $19 million for the financing of the
presidential elections scheduled for 16 March 2014. In
addition to that contribution, ECOWAS also intends
to send two formed police units as reinforcements to
ECOMIB. We have been informed that there is an urgent
request to meet logistics and air needs to guarantee the
security of the electoral process and ensure calm and
peaceful elections. We take this opportunity to call for
such equipment and materials to be made available.

Like all of Guinea-Bissau's development partners,
ECOWAS remains mobilized to provide all possible
support for a return to constitutional order and
economic recovery in Guinea-Bissau. I also take the
opportunity of this meeting to note the gratitude of
ECOWAS to all partners of the international community
who continue to provide substantial support to this
brotherly country of our subregion. In that regard, I am
pleased to welcome the contributions announced by the
European Union and the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, totalling some
$800,000. Likewise, the West African Economic and
Monetary Union announced funding of $2 million. We
are therefore very encouraged by all of this good news,
and believe that all of those contributions will enable
Guinea-Bissau to hold credible elections.

It is therefore crucial in our view that joint work be
carried out, starting now, to develop a detailed road map
for security sector andjustice reform so as to ensure the
necessary foundations for stabilization for the medium
and long term in Guinea-Bissau.

With regard to post-election reconstruction, joint
actions planned with the African Union, the World
Bank and several other development partners should be
granted the full attention of the Security Council and
all of the States Members of the United Nations in order
to guarantee their full success.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm the
commitment of Heads of State and Government of West
Africa to strengthening the integration of the subregion
by eradicating conflict and laying the foundations
for sustainable development in subregion. The case
of Guinea-Bissau is a priority at the heart of that
commitment of the leaders of our subregion.

