The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Ukraine.

Today's formal meeting of the Security
Council- the third during the past two days to
address the dangerous crisis in the Middle East - and
the considerable number of speakers participating in
the deliberations testify not only to the gravity of the
situation but also to the active efforts by the Council to
contribute to easing tension and defusing the present
cr1s1s.

My country remains deeply concerned at the
current deterioration in the Middle East, which has
been going on for more than five months. We are
alarmed by daily reports of continued clashes between
Israelis and Palestinians, which have already claimed
the lives of more than 400 people, most of whom are
Palestinians, with thousands wounded. We mourn the
victims of this bloodshed and express our sincere
condolences to their bereaved families.

As has been stated by my delegation on many
previous occasions, Ukraine condemns the excessive
and indiscriminate use of force against Palestinian
civilians. Any attacks or reprisals against the civilian
population are legally prohibited and inadmissible. Full
respect for the Fourth Geneva Convention should be
ensured.

We are of the firm view that Israel has to lift its
economic blockade against Palestinians as soon as
possible, since it has placed the Palestinian Authority
on the verge of economic collapse and has simply
doubled, if not tripled, the number of the Palestinian
protesters. Evidently, the continuation of the settlement
activities on Palestinian territory is not helping to
remedy the situation either.

Proceeding from this stand, we are encouraged by
the recent decision of the new Government of Israel to
start lifting the economic closure of the Palestinian
territory, as well as its intentions to stop the settlement
activities in it.

Likewise, my country recognizes the legitimate
right of Israel to live within secure and internationally
recognized borders. Ukraine absolutely rejects any acts
of terrorism, by whomsoever committed, by anyone as
a means of reaching any political goal. In our view, any
violent or provocative actions by radical elements
should be halted resolutely since they lead only to a
further escalation of violence. In this context, the acts
of violence against the Israelis are equally condemned
in my country.

It is our belief that under the current
circumstances there is no alternative for the parties but
to end any acts of violence against each other
immediately and unconditionally, to overcome their
animosity and, for the sake of peace, to come back to
the negotiating table. At this juncture, we reiterate our
appeal to the Israelis and the Palestinians to show
maximum restraint and prudence and to refrain from
any unilateral actions which could further aggravate
the situation or pre-empt the outcome of the final status
talks.

It is our conviction that both parties should
resume their negotiations as soon as possible on the
basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), including the principle of land for peace,
as well as the principles laid down at the Madrid
Conference and in the Oslo Agreement. Undoubtedly,
the understandings reached at Sharm el-Sheikh last
year should be implemented in full; the measures to
restore effective cooperation between the sides in the
field of security should be undertaken. We stress the
importance of maintaining the direct Israeli-Palestinian
contacts, including at the highest level.

In this regard, we took note with satisfaction of
the news about the recent exchange of messages
between the Palestinian leader and the new Prime
Minister of Israel being done in a fairly constructive
manner. What is important is that in their messages
both leaders affirmed a mutual desire to achieve peace.
It is our hope that these positive signals will undergo
further development.

We also regard positively the new Government of
Israel's seeking the establishment of closer dialogue
with the Security Council, as was confirmed yesterday
during the meeting with the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel Mr. Shimon
Peres.

We continue to believe that in the current
circumstances the international presence in the
Palestinian territory may become an important factor
contributing to the speedy restoration of security
conditions and the resumption of talks. In our view, the
idea of the establishment of the United Nations
observer mission, as put forward by France, the United
Kingdom and some others, responds to the interests of
both Palestinians and Israelis and deserves to be
seriously considered by the Council. At the same time,
it is understandable that in practical terms this idea
cannot be implemented without the cooperation of
Israel, which should be encouraged to reconsider its
current negative attitude to it.

Ukraine upholds the position that the Security
Council should maintain its active involvement in the
search for ways to halt the current crisis in the Middle
East. My country will welcome the continuation of the
constructive engagement of the Secretary-General in
the efforts aimed at bringing peace and security to the
region. In particular, we encourage the Secretary-
General to pursue his mandate, conferred upon him by
the Council last fall, to negotiate with the parties on the
acceptable modalities of the United Nations observer
mission.

It is also our hope that further activities of the
fact-finding commission, as outlined in Security
Council resolution 1322 (2000), and agreed upon at the
summit meeting at Sharm el-Sheikh, will continue to
play a positive role in bringing the level of violence
down. We welcome the visit by the commission to the
region next week, and we look forward to hearing the
reports on the results of its findings in Israel and
Palestine.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Ukraine's
determination to contribute further to the process of
restoring a comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
which, in our view, will come about only with the
realization of the legitimate right of the Palestinian
people to their self-determination and statehood.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Mauritania and Morocco, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Najaa1
Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Ould
Deddach (Mauritania) and Mr. Snoussi
(Morocco) took the seats reservedfor them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.


