Ms. Araf Maroof: I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for providing me with this opportunity
to represent the Iraq Cross Sector Task Force for
the implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) as its coordinator at this very important
meeting. We are a cross-sector body that developed
the first national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) between 2012-2014, and that has
been responsible for its implementation, monitoring,
evaluation and reporting. I would also like to thank
the Netherlands and Euromed Feminist Initiative for
supporting my presence here.

Today, Iwould like to draw the attention of members
ofthe Security Council to how several crises experienced
in Iraq have impacted women, how we have addressed
the situation by mobilizing State and non-State actors
in the national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) process and, finally, emphasize
how much remains to be done and highlight the need for
international support and coordination.

From internally displaced people to returnees
and Syrian refugees, figures indicate that up to
8.2 million Iraqis require immediate protection and
assistance - most of them are women who are denied
access to their basic rights and security and lack
protection and access to facilities, clean water and
sanitation. Ninety one per cent of the camps across
Iraq sill include no women in their management, which
prevents their needs from being addressed adequately.

Sexual and gender-based violence continues at
alarming rates. Women and girls living in areas under
the control of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
have been exposed to the most extreme forms of
violence as a way to subjugate the whole community,
namely, kidnapping for sexual slavery and exploitation,
rape and forced marriages. Due to the strong patriarchal
culture and tradition, victims are forced to bear social
stigma and shame, in addition to the assault itself,
and continue to be marginalized by their families and
communities upon their return.

Furthermore, even if a great amount of work has
been done by the women's movement, there are still
discriminatory laws in place that impact women's
security and the full enjoyment of their rights.
Protection services are offered to women, including in
refugee camps, mostly through local and international
organizations. While organizations do their best with
few resources, there is still a huge need for protection
and psychosocial services to reach the most vulnerable,
in particular women and girls.

The collapse of the social security network has
further impacted the social and economic status of
women, and made the face of poverty predominantly
female. Female heads of households, the poor, the
unemployed, widows and the internally displaced lack
access to financial resources and public social benefits,
such as social security, pensions and food programming.

Women's security and rights are closely linked
to their participation and role in decision-making. In
spite of a 25 per cent quota in the Parliament and public
institutions, women remain underrepresented or absent
in decision-making, including in political parties, as
there is a general lack of acceptance of the importance
of women's role in decision-making. That is due to the
weight of tradition, the economic dependence of women
on men, the unequal sharing of family responsibilities
and the influence of religious extremism on society.

To address the security needs of the most
vulnerable women and girls, in 2012 women's civil
society organizations and representatives from 23
ministries and institutions - 15 in federal Iraq and 8
in Kurdistan - as well as legal experts and members
of Parliament, formed the Iraqi Cross Sector Task
Force, which developed the national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In 2014, Iraq
became the first country in the Middle East and North
Africa to have adopted a national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and now it
is the first country in the region to have reported on its
implementation of the national action plan.

Iraq is also probably the first country where civil
society has been structurally included in the whole
process, enabling the voices of diverse women's civil-
society organizations from across Iraq and the Kurdistan
region to be heard through the Cross Sector Task Force.
That broad involvement of authorities, together with
civil society, in work on the women's security agenda
serves as an example of collaboration and demonstrates
their understanding that women cannot be left aside
and considered as only victims and that women's needs
should be addressed in a comprehensive manner, which
is an approach that the national action plan has adopted.

What are the urgent security priorities today that
we need the Security Council to work on with the
Iraqi Government?

The first is social protection. We need to establish
a system to widen women's access to comprehensive
specialized services - services related to gender-
based violence and free psychosocial and legal
support services.

The second is legislation. To ensure protection
and enable participation, active work is required to
change and annul all laws that discriminate against
women. A comprehensive law on violence against
women is a priority in order to criminalize all forms of
violence against women and girls and end the impunity
of perpetrators.

The third is stabilization. Despite huge efforts,
the stabilization of Iraq cannot be achieved without
drawing attention to and linking it with the women and
peace and security agenda, including by allocating a
budget for stabilization and resources to that goal.

The fourth is livelihoods. Women, including those
who are refugees, internally displaced persons and
residing in host communities, must have access to
empowerment programmes and work opportunities,
such as vocational training and literacy programmes to
end illiteracy, while bearing in mind the double burden
and social stigma they carry.

Fifthly, the participation of women must be
supported - from high-level political decision-making
to local governance - in reconciliation and
peacebuilding. Opportunities must be provided for
national and local women leaders to participate in
peacebuilding and facilitate community cohesion.

Sixthly, last but not least, this year the Task Force
is developing the second national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) to address
those gaps and priorities.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that Iraq has made
tremendous and unique efforts on the women and peace
and security agenda through the Cross Sector Task
Force on its national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). However, in this challenging
context, in order to efficiently respond to the multiple
needs of women and support their equal participation
in peacebuilding and society at large, the Security
Council, as well as the broader international community,
must ensure greater coordination, demonstrate greater
commitment to women's rights, and provide financial
and technical support to the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq. We look to the Security Council to
strengthen its work and coordination on the women and
peace and security agenda in Iraq.

