Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for the generous words
you addressed to Canada and the other countries that
have just left the Council. I would also like to say how
pleased I am to see former colleagues on the Council
and to welcome the new members.

I would also like to thank you for having taken
this important initiative to improve the consultative
arrangements with troop-contributing countries. My
Government would also like to say how satisfied it is
that the Council has responded so quickly and
thoroughly to the Brahimi report, by adopting
resolution 1327 (2000), which clearly underscores
many of the concerns of troop-contributing countries.

(spoke in English)

In addition, in the course of the past decade the
Security Council also issued two presidential
statements on how consultations with troop-
contributing countries were to be conducted.
Regrettably, the principles inherent in these statements
have not been fully respected in the intervening years.
But even if they had been respected, the
communication of information to troop contributors
would not have proved adequate in practice. The issue
is not communications or consultations, although even
here improvements are possible; the issue is
cooperation and participation.

We collectively have not found a way for troop-
contributing countries to be part of the Organization's
peace operation decision-making process, from the
start of a mission to its conclusion. It is time for us all
to take stock of our collective experience. There is
plenty of evidence to show that consultations by the
Council with troop-contributing countries are
necessary, but not sufficient. Troop contributors' views
are not simple inputs to a decision of the Council; they
are integral to effective decisions and must carry their
full weight.

Any decision-making process that merely takes or
leaves troop contributors' views risks alienating those
Governments and exposing a mission to failure. In the
course of last autumn, two major troop-contributing
countries withdrew from the United Nations largest
peace operation, at least in part, they have said,
because they did not feel their views were heard and
heeded.

The Security Council and the Secretariat must be
able to win the confidence of troop-contributing
Governments Governments that put their soldier-
citizens in harm's way - that the strategy and concept
of operations for a new mission, and their
implementation, are sound. Troop-contributing
Governments must also be confident that they will be
sending troops or police to serve within a competent

 
mission with effective leadership. That confidence
comes from cooperation and participation, not
notification and not even just consultations.

We need to think corporately about the
relationship between the Council and troop
contributors. We need to find a way to bring the latter
into the decision-making processes of the former. We
are all on the same side on this issue: the side of United
Nations effectiveness.

Under Article 23 of the Charter, the Council bears
the primary constitutional responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, and it has
often been observed that it does not bear the exclusive
responsibility. Strengthening peace operations is a
challenge we all face. It should not be beyond the
ingenuity of United Nations Members to find an
effective way forward. If Council members are
unwilling to share power, they then should take upon
themselves the responsibility of providing the troops
required. If, on the other hand, potential or actual
troop-contributing countries are unable to rally to a
consensus, then they should draw the appropriate
conclusion.

During the fiftieth session of the General
Assembly, Canada tabled a study that offered concrete
recommendations on rapid reaction to crisis situations.
The study recognized the need for a partnership
between the Security Council and troop contributors
and the Secretariat. Specifically, we suggested that the
Security Council and troop contributors establish a
joint committee for each peace operation. This idea, we
believe, remains valid. I am mindful that in 1996 f for
the abortive Zaire operation, which was led by
Canada - we did collectively create such a committee.
There was a nucleus established to manage and give
direction to the mission, and it was, as long as the
operation lasted, a successful initiative.

The Council and troop contributors, supported by
the Secretariat, must work in partnership in a spirit of
cooperation within an integrated management
framework, rather than simply meet on occasion for
what has largely become a pro forma bit of theatre.

We have heard many good ideas this morning,
including those discussed in considerable detail by the
Permanent Representative of India. In the next few
days, we, Canada, will be circulating a paper that
expands on some of our ideas about the next steps that
the Council might consider taking in order to enhance
cooperative arrangements. There is much that it is the
same in the Indian and Canadian approaches.
We hope that the Council and troop contributors
will find that these proposals are worth serious
consideration. Six years after the adoption of the
presidential statement I mentioned at the beginning, we
endorse the Council's implicit conclusion today: that it
is time to address today's needs. Failure to do so will
only make it more difficult for the United Nations to
respond in a timely and effective fashion when peace
missions are needed. Success in doing so would help us
all establish a decision-making process that integrates
authority and risk. More fundamentally, doing so will
help the United Nations meet the great expectations of
so many people around the world who, now and in the
future, depend on the United Nations that is to say,
depend on us.

 

