Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome you warmly to the Council, Madam President,
and to thank you for scheduling this important debate
today. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
High Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay, Under-
Secretary-General Amos and the Director from the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
Mr. Spoerri, for their compelling - although of course
very worrying - briefings. We should reflect carefully
on their advice, both on tackling specific current
conflicts and on our approach to the broader protection
of civilians.

We applaud the commitment and energy that the
Argentine delegation has brought to the protection of
civilians and related issues since it joined the Council
in January. We are also proud of the contribution that
Argentina, Australia, we and the other co-authors of
the Arms Trade Treaty have made to the issue of the
protection of civilians through that Treaty. Like others,
we look forward to its ratification and implementation.
I will focus on two of the dimensions of the issue of
the protection of civilians highlighted in the President's
concept note (S/2013/447, annex), that is, strengthening
accountability and ensuring humanitarian access.

History demonstrates all too clearly that the worst
crimes against civilians have been committed by
perpetrators who believed that they did not have to fear
being held responsible. That is why tackling impunity
and strengthening accountability for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human-rights
law must be a central element of international efforts to
protect civilians. We should acknowledge the important
progress that has been made in the past two decades. The
establishment of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, in 1993, and, subsequently, the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda signalled

a marked change in the reach and effectiveness of
international justice that was then consolidated by the
creation of the International Criminal Court. Twenty
years after their establishment, it is sometimes easy to
forget or underestimate their impact. Let us therefore
recall that we now live in a world in which no one can
count on being shielded by State sovereignty. Heads
of State, military leaders and politicians have all had
to account for their actions before mechanisms of
international justice, actions that have inflicted untold
suffering, including often the systematic use of sexual
violence against civilians.

But much remains to be done. We must do more
to support and uphold existing mechanisms of justice.
We must hold States to their obligations to cooperate
fully with those mechanisms, as we did successfully
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, all of whose indictees were eventually
apprehended. The United Kingdom urges all United
Nations Members that have not yet done so to become
parties to the Rome Statute, and we urge all those that
are already States parties to uphold their responsibilities
in that regard. It is deeply disappointing, for example,
that in recent months we have seen high-profile
indictees who refuse to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court visit or travel unchecked through the
territory of States parties. The Council should be ready
to make use of its authority to make referrals to the
International Criminal Court in order to enhance the
protection of civilians. Our failure to refer the situation
in Syria to the Court is a matter of great regret. We have
seen there no let-up - rather the opposite - in the
disproportionate use of weaponry, including ballistic
missiles and aerial bombardment, against civilian
centres. We have seen murder, torture, sexual violence
and forcible displacement used as tools of conflict.

The Council's responsibility with regard to the
protection of civilians in Syria is clear. We have to
impress upon all sides in Syria that there is no impunity.
We should delay no further in referring the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court. We should
ensure that mechanisms of international justice are
applied and that all those responsible for planning and
perpetrating war crimes in Syria and associated civilian
suffering are made to answer for them.

Let me now turn to another theme highlighted in
the concept note, namely, the importance of ensuring
humanitarian access to those in need. That is a
fundamental aspect of protecting civilians. I would like
to highlight two such situations of particular relevance
in that regard: Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states
in the Sudan, and Syria.

In Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan, hundreds
of thousands of civilians have been displaced and are
vulnerable to continuing conflict. They remain largely
cut off from humanitarian access. That situation has
persisted for months, indeed for years. In Syria, as
the Emergency Relief Coordinator has repeatedly
stated in briefings to the Council, it has proved
extremely difficult to secure humanitarian access to
those affected by the fighting. Those two situations,
although on different continents, have several features
in common: the tragic impact of unchecked conflict
on civilians; a tendency on the part of the host
authorities to see external humanitarian assistance as
interference in domestic affairs; the arbitrary denial
of the delivery of humanitarian support to those in
need; and the prevention of cross-border humanitarian
access, impeding the speed and reach of humanitarian
assistance to vulnerable civilians.

On Syria, I welcome the efforts of Valerie Amos to
develop a consensus around a set of key humanitarian
requirements that offer practical recommendations on
what can be done to improve humanitarian access. I hope
the Council will work intensively and constructively
in the coming days to find ways to come together in
support of those recommendations. With regard to
Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan, we should apply our
influence as a Council to ensure humanitarian access to
civilians. We urge the warring parties to immediately
reach a negotiated settlement that will end the fighting
and alleviate civilians' suffering. Again, I hope that
the Council will be able in the near future to renew its
commitment to such an approach.

While on the subject of humanitarian access,
and on this day, World Humanitarian Day, I would
like to pay tribute to the dedication and bravery of
humanitarian aid workers and to acknowledge the
risks they face in helping those in need. They too are
civilians, and we need to focus on their protection and
on the accountability of the criminals who attack them.

The international community has made important
strides forward in respect to the protection of civilians.
We have established effective and far-reaching
mechanisms of international justice. We have extended
international normative commitments through a series
of comprehensive Council documents on the protection
of civilians, most recently the presidential statement

of 12 February 2013 (S/PRST/2013/2). But as the
presidency's concept note highlights, those important
steps have yet to be translated into reversing the
increasing suffering of civilians on the ground. For all
the efforts that have been made, the Secretary-General,
in his most recent report (S/2012/376), still correctly
characterizes the current situation in respect of
protection of civilians as abysmal. We must therefore,
as a Council, continue to focus intensively on that
challenge - to uphold and, where necessary, extend
the authority of international justice mechanisms,
while helping to strengthen domestic justice systems;
exercise our responsibility to refer to the International
Criminal Court those situations that warrant it; support
the need for effective humanitarian access in situations
where that is hindered; and demand that all parties
meet their obligations to protect civilians and apply
maximum pressure to those that fail to do so.

The protection of civilians is central to the
Council's role. It should be uppermost in our minds,
not just during thematic debates but throughout all of
our work.

