Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): At the outset, Sir, I wish to
congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We are confident
of your skills and experience; there is no doubt that the
Council is in good hands. We also wish to express our deep
gratitude to Ambassador Tono Eitel of Germany for having
successfully and capably guided the work of the Council
last month.

We are witnessing the calculated implementation of a
deliberately provocative policy by the new Israeli
Government, a policy designed to reverse the fruits of years
of hard work, sacrifice and good faith on the part of the
previous Government, the Palestinians, the Arabs and the
international community. The obvious and precipitous
decline in trust and in mood throughout the region has been
recognized by all, to the extent that it was no surprise that
the act by the Israeli authorities of opening a tunnel under
one of Islam's holiest shrines, the Al-Aqsa Mosque in East
Jerusalem, provoked a fierce and justified reaction by the
people of Palestine. The resulting shooting of civilian
demonstrators, which has left hundreds dead and wounded,
justly deserves a unanimous universal outcry of
condemnation. One is hard put to argue with those who say
the Israeli rule is that "Arabs only know the language of
force".

So Likud's first 100 days have seen a litany of
dithering, vagueness and ambiguity regarding agreements
already reached and signed, and a reneging on the final
status negotiations embracing critical issues such as
Jerusalem, an independent Palestinian State, borders, and
full and total Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Arab
lands. Further, confusion and distress have been sown by
the decision of the Likud Government to approve the
construction of new settlements and highways on
confiscated Arab land, all in total defiance of commitments
and agreements made, and in contravention of resolutions
and conventions. Without question, these moves violate the
spirit that prevailed only recently.

We are all aware of the hardships inflicted upon the
Palestinian people by the border closures, which have led
to deteriorating living conditions, unprecedented levels of
unemployment and an economy which may technically, if
not in fact, be in bankruptcy. It is against this overall
tapestry, woven to create a reversal of commitments already
undertaken and leading to a state of hopelessness and
despair, that the opening of the tunnel provided the straw
that broke the camel's back. The reaction by the
Palestinian people appears to have been one that crossed
all lines of class, age and gender: to confront an army
with a bold disregard of loss and sacrifice.

What can be done to bring calm and a return to the
peace process? We believe that construction work in old
Jerusalem must cease forthwith, that Israeli troops must
withdraw from Hebron as stipulated in the peace accords,
and that plans to expand Jewish settlements in the West
Bank must be terminated. Border closures must be
reversed as well, and there must be an unambiguous
reaffirmation of the principle of land for peace as
envisioned in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

It may be well to recall that the issue of Palestine
has been before the Council virtually since the inception
of the United Nations, and that of the occupied territories
for nearly 30 years. While in that time other seemingly
intractable issues around the world have received full
consideration and achieved finality, the Palestinian issues
continue to languish in the archives of the Council. This
unprecedented indecisiveness on the part of the
international community has been an embarrassment to
the Council, creating a situation of unrelieved tribulation
and humiliation. Yet outside the Council, the combined
efforts of many appeared to have finally broken the
chains of futility. With the negotiations in Oslo and in
Madrid, and with the momentous signing in Washington
in 1993, a framework for resolution, peace and progress
was developed. Unfortunately, the promise and hope
raised by those valiant efforts seem to be slowly receding
from our grasp, and the questions now validly posed by
all are, "What peace? What process?".

We are witnessing a dangerous fall into past patterns
of confrontation and hopelessness, of old attitudes. But as
long as there are many who tenaciously believe that peace
is possible in the Middle East if we only give it a chance,
there is hope. Let us give peace a chance.

