Ms. Murnaghan (Ireland): Mr. President, like
others, I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
scheduling this open debate during the Netherlands
presidency. This is an imaginative, and as many people
have underlined, a very timely initiative.

We have listened carefully to previous
interventions and we share many of the points made
about the need for better conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peace-building strategies, clear
mandates, precise objectives, the need for a multi-
disciplinary approach to the kind of conflicts which
have arisen in recent years and strengthening of the
Secretariat's capacity, in particular, to assist the
Council in its decision-making.

The title which you have chosen for your paper,
Mr. President, forces us to look carefully at how we use
the words in question, and you are quite right to draw
attention to the overtones of the term "exit strategy". A
good exit strategy for a peacekeeping operation, it
seems to us, should be notjust one which offers a clear
prospect of sustained peace, but one in which the
causes of the original problem have been addressed in
such a way as to give reasonable promise that the
problem will not recur. This implies that a good exit
strategy is also a good entry strategy where the
problem has been thoroughly analysed, the parties are
ready to accept international intervention, the causes of
the problem are addressed - to use the formula of the
Brahimi report - in the context of a clear, credible and
achievable mandate and appropriate peace-building
measures are put in place so that the peacekeeping
operation can withdraw, leaving behind a process
which, with the continued assistance of the
international community, through other means perhaps,
will sustain peace.

However, we are talking, particularly in the post-
cold-war period, of very complex conflicts which are
multifaceted and have their roots as much in economic,
political and social conditions as in purely military
rivalries. Each problem has its own characteristics, and
in the real world it is often difficult to see one's way
clear to the desired outcome.

The very notion of rapid response, where the
international community would intervene at short
notice in critical situations, implies that the conditions
necessary for bringing the interventions to an end may
not be very clear at the outset. The immediate
imperative to save lives, when the window of
opportunity to do so exists, may well have to take
precedence at a given moment over careful analysis.
The analysis must, of course, be done, but we may not
have the luxury of waiting for its completion before we
must take action.

Security Council missions to areas of operation,
therefore, will not only provide first-hand information,
but will allow the Council to round out its assessment
of conditions on the ground and the needs of the
situation, including potential revision of mandates. So,
in this regard, we welcome very much, as some other
speakers have done, the sending of Security Council
missions to areas of operation.

Again, in an ideal world, the members of the
Security Council and the international community in
general would share an analysis of the origins and
nature of the threat to international peace and security
in any particular situation. But it is inevitable that
individual members of the international community
will look at specific problems from their own
perspectives. But despite any differing interests or
perspectives which they may hold, which may well
cause them to grade threats to peace and security in
accordance with different scales, they nonetheless must
do all in their power to respond to the needs of specific
situations on the basis of a common understanding. The
Council therefore should draw up mandates based
primarily on analysis and not other considerations.

The issue of costs may sometimes give rise to a
desire to bring a peacekeeping operation to a possibly
premature end. This is always unfortunate, in our view.
The international community must always be prepared
to contribute the necessary resources that will allow a
peacekeeping operation to be brought, where possible,
to a successful conclusion. This, however, does not
mean- and we would be naive to propose such a
thing - that cost considerations are not relevant. It is
painful to Member States, whose taxpayers are
contributing to a peacekeeping operation and are
contributing, in many cases, large amounts of funding
for development cooperation, to see parties refusing to
engage meaningfully in negotiations for peace or
resisting the effective implementation of a peace
process. It is particularly painful to see parties and
leaders exploiting a troubled situation in order to
benefit personally from resources which should
properly be used for the benefit of the people who are
suffering from war and civil strife.

So, in summary, an approach purely motivated by
cost is not an appropriate one. But this is not to say, of
course, that an appropriate regard for cost should not
be part of a solution to a problem.

The world is not perfect. If it were we would not
need peacekeeping. Our approach to individual
situations will always have to take this into account.

We agree fully with others who spoke earlier that
we need a more fully articulated analysis of situations
and, on occasion perhaps, a greater sharing of that
analysis by the members of the Security Council and
the international community in general. However, not
all situations will be amenable to such an approach,
and to be practical, therefore, we have to take account
of the problems which arise in a world of differing
interests and perceptions; but equally we should be on
our guard against allowing ourselves to be paralysed by
them.

These are just some reflections that have arisen
out of our consideration of some of the points which
were made earlier in the debate.

