Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I congratulate you,
Sir, on the occasion of your assumption of the Security
Council presidency for this month, and in particular
assure you of the full support of the Bureau of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman for his detailed and objective briefing.

The last time I addressed the Council, in July (see S/PV.7007), shortly after the announcement of the
resumption of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, I called
for the long-term commitment of the international
community to ensuring that the parties honour promises
negotiated in good faith and refrain from any action
that could jeopardize the negotiations. We welcome
the parties' commitment to achieving an overall
agreement within nine months, and we await evidence
of real progress. We are encouraged by the recent
announcement that United States mediation efforts will
focus on accelerating the negotiations. We welcome the
long-awaited resumption of the Quartet's activities and
its willingness to convene monthly meetings to monitor
progress. We believe, however, that the Council has not
yet taken full measure of its peacebuilding capacities
with regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Alarming signs on both sides indicate that groups
with a stake in continued conflict are continuing to
mobilize. It is therefore imperative that the international
community - especially the Security Council,
pursuant to its role in the maintenance of international
peace and security - remain vigilant and act urgently
and decisively to counter provocative acts during this
sensitive time and ensure respect for international law
and protect civilians.

The ongoing announcements of Israeli settlement
activity - such as those just constructed in East
Jerusalem - remain of concern and poison the climate
of negotiations. We urge the Council to take action
towards implementation of resolution 446 (1979).
The European Union order concerning the financing
of projects in the Israeli settlements is commendable
and should be fully implemented. We encourage other
States to act in tandem.

The international community must exert real
pressure in order to force the Israeli Government
to halt its settlement activity and to compromise at
the negotiating table. We are also concerned about
provocative acts carried in the area of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in Jerusalem and the increasing number of
attacks during the olive harvest carried out by settlers
against Palestinians. The raids conducted in the
Palestinian territories further fuel tensions. Similarly,
the explosive issue of the thousands of Palestinians
detained in Israeli prisons remains a main concern of
the Committee.

We ought to have since improvements on the
ground since the policy initiatives that I have mentioned
were undertaken, which would have leant greater
credibility to the negotiating process. Paradoxically,
the Palestinians are facing an economic contraction,
increased budget deficits and mass unemployment. In
Gaza, the humanitarian situation is deteriorating.

Nevertheless, the Committee believes that
measures to stimulate the economy, including donor
support, can contribute to economic improvements.
However, they must be accompanied by an overall
lifting of the restrictions imposed by the occupying
Power. According to the World Bank, those restrictions
cost the Palestinian economy $3.4 billion a year, in the
West Bank alone. It should be noted that all estimates
of the economic damage caused by the occupation lead
to the same conclusion, namely, that the Palestinian
economy would have prospered if it was not the object
of such coercive measures.
Our Committee places high expectations on the
current round of negotiations. It will therefore remain
fully committed to tirelessly supporting the peace
initiative currently under way. We urge the Council to
make use ofits political and moral authority in seeking a
definitive and durable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

