Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I would
like first of all to thank you, Mr. President, on behalf of
my delegation, for having convened this meeting. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
most recent report on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno for his very detailed and useful briefing. My
delegation unreservedly concurs with his assessment.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully associates itself with the statement to be
made later by the representative of Denmark on behalf
of the Union. I shall therefore confine myself to some
brief comments in my national capacity.

Bulgaria welcomes the holding in Kosovo, in a
peaceful and unhindered manner and under the
auspices of the international community, of municipal
elections. That represents an important step towards the
promotion of democracy, the rule of law and the
establishment of functional local-authority institutions.

The local-authority bodies that will be formed in
the future on the basis of the election should help to
provide solutions to the main problems of the province
and its population, namely strengthening the process of
creating democratic institutions, establishing the
primacy of law, combating organized crime and
corruption, and ensuring economic development and
respect for human rights.

Bulgaria will continue actively to support the
efforts of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, the Kosovo Force, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Council of Europe and other international
organizations working in Kosovo with a view to re-
establishing normal living conditions for all the
inhabitants of the region, whatever their ethnic origin.
We welcome the measures taken with a view to
enhancing the effectiveness of the work of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, including
the stated intention of the Assembly to consider one
bill per week, as well as the matrix that has recently
been introduced to allow better control of the
legislative process.

Bulgaria confirms its absolute support for the
policy of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Michael Steiner, and for the endeavours of
UNMIK aimed at ensuring the equitable participation
of all ethnic communities in the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government at all levels. Some progress has
already been achieved in this area, but much remains to
be done - Jean-Marie Guehenno has spoken
eloquently in that regard. Only eight of the 24
municipalities are multi-ethnic in nature and in those
municipalities the participation of minorities is
proportional to their number. We welcome that - but
eight out of 24 municipalities is insufficient.

In this context, we regret the very low turnout of
the Serb population in the elections, and we support
Jean-Marie Guehenno's appeal for greater
participation, which is the only way to improve the lot
of the Kosovo Serb community.

We call on the political leaders of Kosovo to
bring their authority and influence to bear in order to
develop a climate of human and inter-ethnic tolerance
in the province. The continuing existence of areas of
ethnic tension and of confrontational attitudes between
ethnic communities is a matter of concern. That
situation cannot be tolerated.

Bulgaria also appeals for continued intensive
dialogue between UNMIK and the Belgrade authorities
with a view to finding an acceptable solution to all the
questions relating to the lasting return of refugees and
the decentralization of Kosovo.

Bulgaria reaffirms its belief that regional
infrastructure projects, particularly in the areas of
telecommunications and transport, represent the least
costly and most effective way of investing in the
stability and security of the region as a whole.

