Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Greece welcomes the
signing on 6 April of the Pretoria Agreement on the
Peace Process in Cote d'Ivoire, the full implementation
of which carries the prospect of a sustainable peace. It
complements the Linas-Marcoussis and Accra III
Agreements.

We express our deep appreciation to South
African President Thabo Mbeki for his intense
mediation efforts, which led to the rapprochement of
the Ivorian political leaders and to the conclusion of
this important peace Agreement. Many thanks go also
to Mr. Pahad for returning to New York a second time
and presenting an informative briefing on the outcome
of the Pretoria negotiations. It is now up to the
signatory parties to show the necessary political will to
implement their commitments under the Agreement.
That is the only way to end suffering, to restore peace,
stability, democracy and national unity in all parts of
the country and to contribute to real national
reconciliation.

In Pretoria, the political leaders agreed to refrain
from all military actions and to engage in a political
dialogue that could produce tangible results and put an
end to the long-standing conflict. They also agreed on
very important issues: ensuring the implementation of
the national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) plan and proceeding immediately
with the disarmament and dismantling of the militia
throughout the territory. The meeting between the
military commanders of both sides and the agreement
reached at Bouake on a provisional timetable for
disarmament are first steps in that direction. We are
looking forward to seeing the outcome of the upcoming
May conference, scheduled to work out the details for
implementing the disarmament agreements. In
addition, the parties agreed to take measures aimed at
holding free, fair and transparent presidential elections
in October 2005. We welcome the provision relating to
the presence of the United Nations in the organization
of those elections.

As for article 35 of the Constitution of Cote
d'Ivoire, we share the concerns of President Mbeki. We
fully support the determination made by the mediator
concerning that article as well as his request that
President Gbagbo exercise his powers under article 48
in order to give legal force to that determination.

In the Agreement, the Ivorian political leaders
reaffirmed, inter alia, their commitment to all United
Nations resolutions on Cote d'Ivoire. We welcome that
commitment. We expect that, this time, the political
leaders will fully implement their obligations under
resolutions 1572 (2004) and 1584 (2005). At the same
time, it is important to remind all States concerned -
particularly those of the region - of their obligation to
report to the Committee established under paragraph
14 of resolution 1572 (2004) concerning the
implementation of the arms embargo imposed by those
resolutions.

In my capacity as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1572 (2004), I would like to inform the members of the
Council that the group of experts provided for in
paragraph 7 of resolution 1584 (2005) has already been
appointed, as of 18 April. Its members are ready to
leave for the area in order to monitor the
implementation of the arms embargo. It is important
that the parties in Cote d'Ivoire and the other countries
of the region cooperate with the experts so as to enable
them to carry out their mandate.

I would like to emphasize the important role that
the African Union is playing in trying to consolidate
peace and stability not only in cote d'Ivoire but also in
the whole area of West Africa and in Africa in general.
In that respect, we thank President Obasanjo of Nigeria
for his efforts. We would also like once again to
express our support for the ongoing efforts of
Mr. Mbeki and for his leading role in finding a
sustainable solution to the political crisis in Cote
d'Ivoire on the basis of democratic governance, respect
for human rights and commitment to the economic and
social development of the country. We hope that the
Agreement reached in Pretoria signifies the beginning
of a new era for C6te d'Ivoire. I am sure that the
Security Council will provide all the assistance
necessary to guarantee a success story.

Finally, we congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Pierre
Schori, and we trust that he will carry out his mandate
in an excellent manner.

