Mr. Serrano (European Union): Many thanks,
Madam President, for giving the floor to the European
Union (EU), allowing it to contribute to this timely and
important debate.
The candidate countries of Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, and the European Free Trade
Association country of Iceland, a member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Azerbaijan, align
themselves with this statement.

In the interest of time, I shall read out an
abridged version of the EU statement.

Let me thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes
for his presentation on the current challenges relating
to the protection of civilians. I also welcome the
participation of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Pillay, in this debate, and thank
her for the proposals aimed at strengthening human
rights protection for civilians in the most difficult
situations.

Thanks to the work conducted within the United
Nations, there is an increasing understanding of the
important concept of the protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflict. As it is a cross-cutting
issue, our strategy needs to be comprehensive. It
should encompass activities that range from ensuring
the safety and physical integrity of civilian populations
to preventing war crimes and other deliberate acts of
violence, securing humanitarian access and ensuring
full respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law by all parties to conflict.

The adoption of resolution 1894 (2009), last
November, is a landmark development. It reflects the
increased attention paid by the Security Council to
protection issues. Security Council resolutions on
women, peace and security and on children and armed
conflict also contribute to enhancing the protection
agenda. Furthermore, stronger interaction between the
Council, troop and police contributors, Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, missions and
other relevant actors in the field adds to greater
coherence and helps mainstream the issue of
protection. The European Union commends the work
of the expert group on the protection of civilians as a
valuable forum for addressing protection concerns in
the run-up to mandate renewals.

Moreover, it is crucial to highlight the importance
of developing synergies between the protection of
civilians and other fields such as transitional justice,
gender policies and development, and of ensuring good
cooperation among all actors concerned. In the same

vein, enhanced cooperation between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) will
allow the sharing of experience and expertise with
regard to protection issues, especially relating to the
four countries currently on the PBC agenda, as the EU
has repeatedly underlined in the consultations for the
2010 review of the PBC. In particular, the return,
resettlement and protection of internally displaced
persons and refugees and the specific protection needs
of women and children need to be addressed in still-
volatile post-conflict environments. The PBC has been
indeed active in this field.

We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for underlining the need for better compliance
with international humanitarian law, including by
non-State actors, and we concur with the need for
greater accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law.

The European Union encourages the Council to
adopt appropriate measures in cases of widespread
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law in situations of armed conflict. In this
regard, we welcome the recently adopted presidential
statement on children and armed conflict
(S/PRST/2010/10), which provides for increased
exchange between the Security Council Working Group
on children and armed conflict and sanctions
committees.

Moreover, as Under-Secretary-General Holmes
underlined in his briefing today, it is essential to ensure
safe access to the civilian population - particularly to
vulnerable groups, such as detainees, IDPs, women and
children - for humanitarian assistance. We look
forward to more comprehensive reporting by the
Secretary-General on challenges to humanitarian
access in situations on the agenda of the Council.

As the world's largest provider of humanitarian
aid and through its contributions to crisis management,
the European Union is an important partner in United
Nations engagements in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Over the course of the past year alone, the
United Nations and the European Union have worked
together in more than 60 countries that were either in
emergency or protracted crises to provide assistance
and offer protection to vulnerable groups.

While the protection of civilians and the
responsibility to protect are two different concepts that
must not be confused with one another, there is a clear
linkage between them because, when populations are
properly protected, they will not fall victim to
genocide, war crimes, crime against humanity and
ethnic cleansing.

As many speakers have stressed today, the
implementation and operationalization of the
protection mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
and other missions are key to protecting civilians. The
European Union recognizes and welcomes important
implementation steps taken since the adoption of
resolution 1894 (2009). These include the independent
study commissioned by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs; the
operational concept and the lessons learned note
circulated by DPKO; and the regular inclusion of
protection of civilians tasks in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations; the more consistent
and systemic consideration of protection of civilians
issues in the Secretary-General's reports; the
significant inclusion of several paragraphs on the
protection of civilians in the 2010 recommendations of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(see A/64/ 19), including the development of a strategic
framework for mission-wide protection strategies; the
elaboration of protection of civilians training modules;
and an assessment of the resource requirements for
implementing protection mandates.

We look forward to the next report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians and to
the first progress report on New Horizons, and trust
that the issue of improving the protection of civilians
will be addressed therein. All these measures will
contribute to the development of a culture of
protection.

The European Union, for its part, is currently
studying the United Nations implementation tools
closely, not least in view of our own efforts to further
develop the guidelines on the protection of civilians in
European Union crisis-management missions and
operations. We are very eager to exchange experiences
with the United Nations on this issue. In our view,
cooperation in this field could be extended to other
international actors engaged in crisis management,
such as NATO, the African Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council of
Europe, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
civil society groups and others.

I would like to close by thanking Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his excellent and tireless
work for the United Nations humanitarian cause, and
wish him all the best for his future.

