Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg warmly welcomes the organization of
today's open debate on the fate of children in armed
conflicts, which allows the Council to renew its
commitment to an issue that deserves our undivided
and continuing attention.

I fully align myself with the statement made by the
representative of the European Union. In my national
capacity, allow me to support those who have hailed
the tireless efforts of Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy in
her capacity as Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General. Under her leadership, important progress was
made in the protection of children in armed conflict. My
delegation would also like to take this opportunity to
wish her successor, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, all the best in
her new position. We are convinced that Ms. Zerrougui's
long-standing experience in the field of human rights
and her advocacy in favour of strengthening the rule of
law and the protection of vulnerable groups will make
her a committed Special Representative who will aptly
promote the protection of children in armed conflicts.
Finally, I would like to thank Germany for the important
work it has accomplished at the helm of the Council's
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Since the last open debate (S/PV.6581), the issue of
children in armed conflicts has made significant strides
forward. First of all, we would welcome successes in
combating impunity. Since the verdicts issued by the
International Criminal Court and the Special Court
for Sierra Leone earlier this year, those responsible for
the recruitment of children under the age of 15 - be
they Heads of State or warlords - know now that their
crime will not go unpunished. As a matter of fact,
it is not only the judgments that matter, but also the
case law derived from them; by rebutting the dividing
line between voluntary and forced recruitment and by
giving a broad interpretation to the concept of "active
participation in hostilities", the International Criminal
Court has put a stop to all the deceptive tricks that those
who are guilty of those crimes have tried to invoke in
order to deny their responsibility.

Among other positive developments, I would also
like to stress progress made in the conclusion of action
plans. In 2011 and 2012, action plans were signed with
eight parties and a ninth is about to be signed with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Following the full implementation of their action
plans, two parties to the conflicts in Nepal and in Sri
Lanka have been removed from the so-called lists of
shame, which in our mind proves the usefulness and
effectiveness of the system of annexes to the reports
of the Secretary-General. With its resolution 1998
(2011) of 12 July 2011, the Council widened the criteria
for inclusion in the annexes, which now must take
into account attacks perpetrated against schools and
hospitals. We welcome that development in particular,
given the scale of such attacks in recent years.

The progress in the protection of children in armed
conflicts should not, however, lead us to lose our focus
on the matter. While much has been done in the area
over the past few years, much remains to be done over
the next few years. A worrisome increase in the number
ofperpetrators that persist in committing serious human
rights Violations against children reminds us that there
are too many parties that still consider themselves to be
out of the reach of international justice.

Reports, including that of Mr. De La Sabliere, have
noted specific measures to be applied. I shall cite just
a few of them. Additional resources are needed for
monitoring the application of action plans as well as for
the socioeconomic reinsertion of children associated
with armed forces and groups. In that regard, increased
synergy with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
would be useful, given the efforts undertaken by the
PBC in the areas of security sector reform and youth
employment. Furthermore, we understand closer
cooperation with national and international courts to
imply tackling persistent perpetrators in an effective
manner. Finally, to ensure that those measures have
the greatest possible effectiveness, the possibility
of imposing sanctions on responsible parties is an
important tool.

Nevertheless, none of the aforementioned
measures will be effective without the strong political
commitment of the Security Council. We trust that the
Council will continue along the path it began 10 years
ago, putting an end to the violations of children's basic
rights. Luxembourg stands ready to do its part. Our
co-sponsoring of the resolution adopted this morning
is proof of that.

