Mr. Dauth (Australia): I learned a long time ago
that it was a very dangerous thing to come between
Security Council members and their lunch, so I will be
very brief.

This meeting gives us a valuable opportunity to
highlight the importance of the three Committees
operating in a coordinated manner, given the
interconnected and complementary nature of their
work.

The tasks facing the Committees reflect the
serious challenge that the international community
faces in addressing the threat to our peace and security
from both terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, as well as the very real danger of a
terrorist attack involving chemical, biological, nuclear
or radiological devices. The General Assembly's
adoption earlier this month of the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism (General Assembly resolution 59/290) is a
welcome and concrete response to one aspect of that
threat. It is a further example of the important role that
multilateral instruments and regimes play in
underpinning global counter-terrorism and counter-
proliferation efforts.

In the face of a persistent and evolving - and I
stress "evolving" - terrorist threat, it is absolutely
vital that Member States, United Nations bodies and
other international institutions work together to meet
the challenge. Australia welcomes, in this context, the
Secretary-General's comprehensive strategy on
fighting terrorism and its recognition of the need to
harness various elements of the United Nations
machinery to address terrorism, including its chemical,
biological, nuclear and radiological dimensions, in a
coordinated and strategic way. Australia encourages
ongoing efforts to ensure that the relevant United
Nations mechanisms are best configured and equipped
to meet this challenge, and to maximize the
contribution that Member States can make nationally
and regionally to countering terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Cooperation and capacity-building at the regional
and bilateral levels are crucial to international counter-
terrorism efforts. Australia is active in its own region,
including in taking forward the outcomes of the
February 2004 Bali Regional Ministerial Meeting on
Counter-Terrorism. Co-chaired by Australia and
Indonesia, the meeting established working groups on
law enforcement and legal issues to promote practical
counter-terrorism cooperation among Governments of
Asia and the Pacific. It is a model. The legal issues
working group is doing important work to promote and
assist implementation of United Nations counter-
terrorism instruments and more effective international
legal cooperation. The Jakarta Centre for Law
Enforcement - another Australia-Indonesia
initiative - was opened in July 2004 and is already
proving to be a valuable resource, developing regional
capacities to fight terrorism and transnational crime.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) can be assured of Australia's
continuing strong support in their coordinated efforts to
confront terrorism and address the threats posed by the
spread of weapons of mass destruction.

