Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset, Mr. President, to echo the sentiments of
those who congratulated you this morning on having
organized this open meeting of the Security Council,
which shows your concern for transparency. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Chowdhury and the
Panel of Experts, who have done a tremendous job on
this question.

Canada welcomes the report of the Panel of
Experts on Sierra Leone and expresses its gratitude to
the members of the Panel for their detailed analysis of
the role of diamond- and arms-smuggling in this brutal
war.

The economic sources of conflict must first be
exposed if they are to be addressed properly. This
report is part of an important trend of examining in
depth the economic causes of certain conflicts,
including in Angola and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, of "naming and shaming" those who profit
from and sustain these wars and of taking meaningful
action where necessary, including, in the most
egregious situations, the imposition of sanctions and
embargo measures. Why should this not be done
upstream, at the source of the problem, as well as
further down the line?

During our time on the Security Council, Canada
argued that the Council should consider a range of
measures, both coercive and collaborative, to ensure
compliance with United Nations resolutions aimed at
ending the wars in Sierra Leone and Angola. We
believe that this report provides sufficient basis for the
adoption of sanctions targeting those identified by the
Panel, bearing in mind the need for such sanctions to
be both effective and sustainable, while safeguarding
civilian populations and the legitimate diamond
industry.

In light of the unambiguous conclusions drawn in
this report, Canada supports the immediate imposition
of an embargo on diamond exports from Liberia, as
well as other measures recommended in the report,
given that country's clear role as a transit point for
gems mined illegally in Sierra Leone. We also support
the development, with the Council's support, of
stringent control measures in neighbouring countries.
Should these collaborative efforts prove inadequate, the
Council ought not to hesitate to extend the embargo to
other States if and as needed.

We also encourage members to examine carefully
the numerous other recommendations in this report
with a view to reaching agreement on a comprehensive
package of measures that are both effective and
pragmatic. We encourage the Security Council to
engage relevant bodies in the development of those
measures and of criteria for measuring compliance by
the States targeted in the report. Any such measure
should be tied to explicit criteria, as the Council, we
believe, must avoid measures that are ambiguous or
open-ended.

(spoke in English)

Sanctions are becoming an increasingly effective
tool for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The various panels of experts established by
the Council have helped to bring this situation about. It
is essential that this trend continue. The Council's
credibility is at issue. More to the point, the Council
must have at its disposal viable options between
deploying force on the one hand and merely uttering
words on the other.

However substantial the contribution made by the
ad hoc investigative panels established for Sierra
Leone and Angola, we believe that sanctions
monitoring would be still more effective if the United
Nations were to approach monitoring and enforcement
on a less provisional and more systematic basis. Quite
simply, targeted sanctions will not work if the Council
does not put in place the necessary arrangements to
detect violations and to determine the sources and
methods of violations. Monitoring arrangements should
remain in place for the duration of each targeted
sanctions regime, not for finite periods of three, six or
nine months' duration.

We urge the Council to consider putting in place a
standing, integrated monitoring arrangement, not least
to improve efficiency and reduce overlap in the
Security Council's efforts to detect violations of
Council measures. Instead of having three separate
panels looking at similar issues in Angola, the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and Sierra Leone -
and often visiting the same capitals in close succession
speak to or about the same individuals - why not have
a single monitoring office operating with reference to
these and other sanctions regimes, as well to related
issues such as illegal trafficking in high-value
commodities? Such an office would function on an
ongoing basis, submitting reports through the various
sanctions Committees at their requests.
We encourage Council members to reflect on how
much more effective sanctions would be if such an
arrangement were in place and how much greater a
deterrent value such sanctions would have. The cost
would not be significantly greater than it is at present.
The effect would be greater, with the result that the
objectives for which the various sanctions regimes
were established would stand a far greater chance of
being achieved. We are delighted to note that a
significant number of members of the Council support
this idea.

Finally, we note that there has been an increase in
the level of the legitimate, Government-controlled
diamond trade in Sierra Leone as a consequence of
both the diamond certification scheme supported by the
Security Council and of the extensive attention paid to
the issue of conflict diamonds recently by industry,
Governments and the public. We reiterate our support
for international efforts to devise effective and
pragmatic measures to eliminate conflict diamonds,
with a particular focus on proposals for an international
certification scheme for rough diamonds. We call for a
concerted approach among diamond-producing and
diamond-trading States and believe that today's
discussion will underscore the merits of and the need
for effective action by both.

