Mr. Reinart (Estonia): I would like to thank the
Peruvian presidency of the Security Council this month
for organizing this timely debate, ahead of the General
Assembly's high-level meeting on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The issue of the participation and
engagement of youth in achieving and sustaining peace
truly deserves our attention at every step of the way.
In that regard, we very much welcome the Security
Council concept note (S/2018,324, annex) on this topic.

Estonia also aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Let me start by emphasizing the importance
of resolution 2250 (2015), which for the first time
addressed the need to engage young people in peace and
security discussions and recognized that young people
play a crucial role in the maintenance and promotion of
international peace and security.

Estonia welcomes the independent progress study
on youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86), and we
highly appreciate that a number of young people were
involved in its preparation. We hope that the study will
be followed by action based on its recommendations and
that it will help to start truly meaningful engagement
of youth on matters related to peace and security. I
would like to highlight some aspects in particular
concerning why the meaningful engagement of youth is
of paramount importance.

First, encouraging the youth to be active participants
in society contributes directly to the prevention of
violence, including violent extremism and conflict. If
we are to succeed in our prevention efforts globally, it is
essential that we put inclusion at the heart of prevention
strategies. The progress study noted that structural
inequalities and social, political and economic
exclusion contribute to youth poverty, violence and
powerlessness. Therefore, in order to develop more
inclusive societies, we need to support equal access
for all young people to education and labour markets,
advance their human rights and fundamental freedoms,
promote the rule of law and gender equality and reach
out proactively to the most marginalized young people.

Secondly, broad-based and people-centred
peacebuilding partnerships that meaningfully include
youth, women, civil society organizations and other
social actors are essential in peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The youth are key actors of social
transformation, and allowing them to contribute with
their enthusiasm, idealism, energy and innovative
solutions will benefit peacebuilding efforts. Therefore,
once conflict has ended, it is important that young
people have the opportunity to participate in post-
conflict activities and decision-making processes.

It is important to allow the empowerment of the
voice of young people. To make that voice better heard,
Estonia lowered the voting age from 18 to 16 in local
elections, in response to the initiative of young people
who wished to be more involved in the decision-making
process at the local level. Thee outcome has
been positive.

It is high time for the contribution of young
people to sustaining peace to be further recognized
and supported by Member States and the United
Nations system. In that connection, we also welcome
the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace (S/2018/43), and we are looking
forward to further discussion on that during the high-
level meeting this week.

