Mr. Hunter (United States ofAmerica): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
for his briefing today and welcome President Vucie and
President Thaci to the Council. We thank them for their
remarks and forjoining us here today.
The United States reaffirms its support for a
gradual, transparent transition to a professional,
multi-ethic NATO interoperable force that serves and
reflects all of Kosovo's communities. The legislation
passed by Kosovo's Assembly last week is fully in line
with resolution 1244 (1999). It is Kosovo's sovereign
right to establish and maintain an armed force.
Resolution 1244 (1999) authorized the establishment
of an international security presence in Kosovo and
charged it with demilitarizing the Kosovo Liberation
Army and other armed Kosovo-Albanian groups.
Those provisions do not apply to the Kosovo Security
Force. The Force is neither the Kosovo Liberation
Army nor an armed Kosovo-Albanian group. It is
a separate, multi-ethnic force that was established
following Kosovo's 2008 independence, and which the
International Court of Justice clearly ruled in 2010 does
not violate international law or resolution 1244 (1999).

The vote on Kosovo on 14 December brings
no immediate change to the structure, mission or
operations of the Force. Rather, it was a first step,
representing the beginning of the practical, ongoing
work of building a multi-ethnic force, in accordance
with the Government of Kosovo's 10-year transition
plan. We call on the Government of Kosovo to continue
its close coordination with NATO allies and partners
in engaging in outreach to its minority communities
now and throughout the years-long process ahead. We
expect the Government of Kosovo to adhere reliably to
all existing arrangements and commitments regarding
troop movements and the operation of forces in Kosovo,
particularly its 2013 commitment to the NATO Secretary
General that any operations in northern Kosovo require
consultation with the Commander of the Kosovo Force.
Ultimately, however, Kosovo's security is best served
by normalizing relations with Serbia. Dialogue should
be both countries' overarching priority, and we urge
both to remove any barriers and not to take provocative
actions that prevent a return to the negotiating table and
reaching a comprehensive normalization agreement.

We encourage both Kosovo and Serbia to take
immediate steps to lower tensions and create the
conditions for rapid progress on the normalization
dialogue. We urge them to recognize the value of fully
committing to normalization, which will bring great
benefits to the people, the economies and the peace
and security of both countries. Mutual recognition and
normalized relations between Serbia and Kosovo are
the future, and all sides will benefit from recognizing
and embracing that reality.
