Mr. Aleman (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): As a
member of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, I have first-hand knowledge, Madam President,
of your indisputable talent and diplomatic skill. For
that reason, I am pleased to see you presiding over the
work of the Security Council, the United Nations body
that bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

I also wish to express my gratitude for the
valuable and important work on the issue before the
Council today by the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol
Bellamy, and by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu.

Over the past decade, more than ever before,
children have deliberately been made the innocent
victims of wars and armed aggression. They have been
forced or persuaded to join armies or armed groups.

On the first point, the Security Council has
adopted a series of resolutions and measures on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, highlighting
the need to pay special attention to the sectors of the
population that are most in need: women, children and
the elderly. The international community at large has
also reacted positively, adopting a set of international
instruments that constitute a binding legal framework,
especially for safeguarding and protecting the rights of
boys and girls against the reprehensible acts of
violence that arise out of armed confrontation.

On the second point, the Security Council has
progressed from a presidential statement to an
important resolution, while the international
community has adopted the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and
International Labour Organization Convention 182,
concerning the prohibition and immediate action for
the elimination of the worst forms of child labour.

Minors under 18 years of age are neither mentally
nor physically equipped to take part in armed conflict.
Forcing them to wear a combatant's uniform harms
their development and uproots them from their families
and their social environment. Furthermore, it may have
grave consequences for their physical and
psychological health, requiring in some circumstances
lengthy and costly rehabilitation processes.
Adolescents enrolled in armed forces or groups cease
their studies and many do not complete their secondary
education. This may have a negative impact on their
personal development and, indeed, on the national
development of the country.

The use of child soldiers thus undermines the
principles established in international law and in
Ecuadorian legislation, which sets 18 as the minimum
age for obtaining citizenship and for mandatory
military service. There is no doubt that States, in their
domestic legislation, and the Council itself, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter, must take
the appropriate measures, including imposing sanctions
as necessary, in order to prevent businesses or
individuals from taking advantage of armed conflicts to
obtain economic advantages by trafficking in natural
resources and small arms, which fuel conflicts, in
which children are the first to be harmed.

I am certain that this discussion will prompt the
Council to take a further major step forward in the
ongoing humane task of preventing the participation of
children in armed conflict, always taking into account
the fact that their interests must take pride of place in
all the decisions that relate to them. Children need to
be trained to tackle the great adventure of life and not
be driven into premature acquaintance with the mystery
of death.

