I would like to thank the Council for this opportunity to brief it by video- teleconference on the situation in Central Africa and the activities of the United Nations Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). This meeting is being held against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has disrupted the lives of citizens as well as the functioning of States and regional institutions in Central Africa. The subregion recorded its first case of COVID-19 on 6 March. To date, all 11 countries members of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) have been affected. As of 11 June, a total of 21,929 laboratory-confirmed cases and 462 deaths had been reported, according to the World Health Organization. A major consequence of the pandemic is the economic crisis. According to projections made by ECCAS experts, a 2.3 per cent contraction in growth is to be expected in Central Africa owing to the pandemic. This situation disproportionately affects the subregion of Central Africa, where many countries are oil producers. The slowdown in economic activities due to COVID-19 deprives States of the resources that they need to address the socioeconomic impact of the pandemic, with the risk of creating social unrest. As Governments are forced to choose between urgent public- health expenditures and other priorities, they risk lacking the resources needed for the smooth functioning of national institutions and the financing of crucial reforms. I am pleased to note, however, that Central Africa's Governments and regional institutions have been able to adapt to the new crisis context. They ensure the continuity of certain crucial activities. Thus, following the adoption in December 2019 of an ambitious reform aimed at strengthening its effectiveness and modernizing its structures, ECCAS is currently setting up its new structures. The extraordinary ministerial meeting held on 3 and 4 June provided an opportunity to discuss the progress made in the implementation of the institutional reform as well as the situation in the Central African Republic and regional efforts to counter COVID-19. The meeting adopted the four axes of a regional response strategy to combat COVID-19 and its implications in Central Africa. The four axes include, first, preventing the spread of the virus; secondly, limiting the death rate and managing positive cases; thirdly, addressing the socioeconomic and security impact of COVID-19; and, fourthly, responding to the cross-border security issues created by the pandemic. An extraordinary summit of Heads of State and Government is expected to be held in July via video-teleconference. UNOCA remains operational despite the pandemic and continues to mobilize the relevant United Nations entities to support the subregional organization during this crucial period of its evolution. To that end, a UNOCA-ECCAS working group has been set up. I also held two successive virtual meetings with the United Nations Resident Coordinators in the subregion recently to ensure the proper coordination of their efforts at the country level with regional initiatives, notably those taken by ECCAS. In addition, UNOCA has maintained regular contact with United Nations missions and regional offices, including the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Office of the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and the Office of the Special Envoy for Burundi to promote coherence in United Nations efforts to promote peace and security in Central Africa. The persistence of armed conflicts in some parts of Central Africa undermines our efforts to respond to the challenges posed by COVID-19. A number of conflicts in the subregion continue despite the call launched by the Secretary-General on 23 March for a global ceasefire. As far as human rights are concerned, I commend States for their efforts to limit the impact of the pandemic on economic and social rights, including by adopting financial measures to preserve employment and providing assistance to businesses and the most vulnerable segments of their populations. I also welcome the measures taken by some States in favour of prisoners, thus responding to the appeal by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for the decongestion of prisons in order to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in detention centres. In some instances, restrictive measures have been adopted by Governments to prevent the spread of the virus that were perceived as affecting the exercise of certain fundamental freedoms. While acknowledging the need for such measures, it is also important for Governments to ensure that law-enforcement agents apply them carefully and proportionately and continue to abide by human rights principles and standards. Unfortunately, in these trying times for the Governments and the peoples of Central Africa, terrorist and armed groups have continued to destabilize the subregion. I strongly condemn deliberate attacks on civilians and the destruction of private property and public infrastructure, including hospitals. I welcome the mobilization of the armies of Cameroon and Chad, including within the framework of the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF), to fight terrorism in the Lake Chad basin. Operation Wrath of Boma, launched by the Chadian army between late March and early April, seems to have considerably weakened Boko Haram. However, experience has shown that the countries of the region will be able to eradicate the group only through a well-coordinated strategy combining both military and non- military approaches, through the strengthening of the MNJTF and through initiatives aimed at addressing the root causes of the crisis, respectively. I would therefore like to call for greater international support for the implementation of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region. The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), although weakened, continues to kill and loot and to abduct civilians and children. During the reporting period, the Democratic Republic of the Congo was particularly affected. The fight against the LRA must be pursued to ensure that the gains made are not undermined. I therefore call on regional actors, including the African Union and ECCAS, as well as international partners, to strengthen their cooperation and mobilize the resources necessary to defeat the LRA, within the framework of the United Nations Regional Strategy to Address the Threat and Impact of the Activities of the Lord's Resistance Army. The pressing question of the impact of climate change on peace and security in Central Africa remains a major priority in our efforts to prevent conflict and sustain peace in this subregion. UNOCA has taken steps to better understand that impact in order to systematically improve its analysis and conflict prevention activities and to develop partnerships in that regard. The mounting threat of maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, where an increasing number of acts of piracy has been recorded in recent months, is also a top priority on our agenda. The fourth annual meeting of the senior officials of the Economic Community of West African States, ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission, in charge of the Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, originally scheduled for 27 March, had to be postponed due to coronavirus-related restrictions. The meeting will provide an opportunity for strengthening regional coordination and cooperation, including through the Centre, which should be provided with the necessary capacity and means for its functioning and the implementation of its programmes. In addition to attending to the above-mentioned regional challenges, the Central African States have also made efforts to improve good governance and respond to challenging internal situations that threaten their stability. In several countries, legal proceedings have been filed against prominent personalities over allegations of embezzlement of public resources. I would like to reaffirm UNOCA's support for the fight against corruption in Central Africa and urge States to ensure a fair trial for the accused. In Cameroon, following the release of the Government's investigations into the Ngarbuh attack, the army announced yesterday that three military officers were charged with murder and remanded in custody at the Yaounde military prison. This new development demonstrates the Government's commitment to bringing to justice those responsible for the killing of civilians in Ngarbuh in February. In another development, on 8 June the Cameroon Network of Human Rights Organizations recommended that the Government set up an independent commission of inquiry into the death of journalist Samuel Ajiekah Abuwe, also known as Samuel Wazizi, calling for one similar to "the one that brilliantly operated following the tragic events of Ngarbuh in the North-West region". Several other national and international non-governmental organizations have made similar calls. Additional steps taken in the implementation of the recommendations of the Major National Dialogue, held from 30 September to 4 October 2019, are included in the Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2020/463), now before the Council. The launch on 3 April of a presidential programme for the reconstruction and development of the North-West and South-West regions is another significant step forward that should be consolidated through ongoing dialogue and the cessation of hostilities. | encourage the Committee to Follow up the Implementation of the Recommendations of the Major National Dialogue to continue to promote dialogue, including among the parties to the conflict, in order to ensure the protection of civilians and human rights and to create conditions for the reconstruction and development of the two regions. I had the opportunity to discuss these issues with President Paul Biya during the audience he granted me in Yaounde on 13 May. I am concerned about the ongoing obstacles to humanitarian access in the two regions and urge the Government and the humanitarian community to improve their coordination and cooperation in order to facilitate the delivery of much-needed assistance to the populations affected by the crisis. In the Congo, I urge the authorities to take the necessary measures to build confidence in the dialogue platforms provided for by the Constitution, including the Conseil National du Dialogue, and invite other stakeholders to also participate in that platform in good faith. I also welcome the efforts of Sao Tome and Principe to achieve consensual judicial reform aimed at ensuring the independence of the judiciary, fighting corruption and protecting the country from institutional instability. The United Nations supports the Government in that process, and I do maintain close contact with relevant stakeholders. As is evident, Central Africa continues to face many challenges. We cannot yet accurately assess to what extent COVID-19 will exacerbate those challenges. However, the individual and collective measures taken by the countries of the subregion to contain the pandemic and meet the other challenges they face are encouraging and deserve the support of the international community.
