Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): As you and the
other members of the Council are aware, Mr. President,
the General Assembly will discuss the annual report of
the Security Council in early November. To give
United Nations Members enough time to study the
report before they discuss it at the General Assembly,
early submission of the report by the Council is
important. I thank you for convening this timely
meeting.

As President of the Council for the month of July
2008, Viet Nam was charged with the task of preparing
the introduction to the 2008 annual report of the
Council to the General Assembly. The draft report
covers the work of the Council during the period from
1 August 2007 to 31 July 2008. The introductory part
of the report that we prepared provides insights into
how the Council addressed a wide array of issues in
another year of its intensive work, reflecting the
2

Council's achievements and situations and
circumstances in which it was unable to take action. In
every case, we have tried to reflect the general views
expressed by Council members.

In the course of developments in conflicts and
disputes in Africa, Asia, Europe, the Middle East and
the Balkans, the introduction elaborates on regular
briefings by the Secretariat, interventions by countries
and/or parties concerned, communications with troop-
contributing countries and follow-up deliberations and
actions of the Council to respond to the situations
under review.

A large part of the introduction is devoted to
general issues, ranging from terrorism, the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, children and
armed conflict and women and peace and security to
the work of subsidiary organs of the Council, such as
the sanctions Committees, the Working Group on
Documentation and the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations. Coordination and
cooperation with other principal organs of the United
Nations, as well as the evolving role of regional and
subregional organizations, have also been highlighted,
as appropriate.

Over the past few years, the complexity and
multidimensional character of the international
situation have created ever-increasing demand for
United Nations conflict prevention, mediation and
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
Against that backdrop, the Security Council has faced
increasingly complex responsibilities in shouldering its
noble mission of maintaining international peace and
security.

In order to better reflect the increased role and
involvement of the Council under challenging
circumstances, the quality of its annual report to the
General Assembly should be further consolidated in all
related aspects. Such incremental improvements, we
believe, have the potential not only to strengthen the
perception of and contributions from the wider
membership of the United Nations and other relevant
stakeholders in the work of the Council, but also to
enhance the Council's authority and efficiency in
discharging its mandates.

Towards that end, my delegation maintains that
there is scope to develop the July presidency's
consultations with not only Council members but also
08-57729
the United Nations membership at large in the process
of outlining and finalizing the annual report.

It was based on that perception and our desire to
contribute to enhancing the openness, transparency and
efficiency of the work of the Council with a view to
enabling the Council to better perform its important
and noble mission of maintaining international peace
and security that we convened an informal meeting at
the very end of our presidency to update United
Nations Member States on the preparation of the
annual report and to seek their views and suggestions,
which did help to make the draft report that Council
members have before them today more analytical,
balanced and substantive. As a way of appreciating
their valuable contributions and further improving the
quality of the annual reports of the Council to the
General Assembly, I humbly offer this experience to
future July presidents.

In the process of preparing the draft report, my
delegation enjoyed not only effective cooperation, but
also, indeed, valuable support and assistance from all
08-57729
members and former members of the Council and from
the Secretariat. The draft report contains and otherwise
reflects many of their contributions. On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to take this opportunity to express to
them our most sincere appreciation and gratitude.

