I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency for the month of September. I also thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for her briefing and for all the work that the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) does. She has just delivered a powerful and compelling statement about the situation in Libya. She set out, I am afraid, a bleak picture, with few glimmers of light. But I want to thank her for her honesty and for her service to the people of Libya and to the United Nations. The situation in Libya is one of the biggest challenges that the Council faces. We, the international community, are collectively failing. We are failing to meet the obligations and commitments that we have freely entered into. We are failing to enforce the obligations and commitments laid out by the Council. The humanitarian backdrop is particularly concerning, as is the rise in coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases. The people of Libya have had enough, as they demonstrated once again in recent days. But let us try to pick up on one of the glimmers of light in her statement. The United Kingdom welcomes the 21 August statement from the President of the Presidency Council, Faiez Serraj, and the President of the House of Representatives, Aguila Saleh, calling for a ceasefire. The Libyan people have been clear about their desire for peace. And as the events since April 2019 have demonstrated, there is no military solution. These announcements mark a significant step on the road towards sustained peace, security and stability. We commend both sides for their commitment to the political process and thank UNSMIL for its leadership in engaging with and facilitating dialogue between the Libyan parties. These statements alone are not enough. This opportunity must be seized by all involved in the conflict and the Libyan people if we are to make progress in achieving sustainable peace. Now is the time for restraint from those on all sides of the conflict and for all Libyan parties to take their cue from these statements and engage constructively to implement them. We also need a reinvigorated UNSMIL that can take advantage of this and any other opportunities. We are concerned about the rapidly shrinking space for Libyan women to voice their opinions and participate in political life and post-conflict reconstruction, with some women subjected to physical threats and attacks seemingly linked to their public roles. In the twentieth anniversary year of resolution 1325 (2000), we welcome the Acting Special Representative's commitment to the full and effective participation of women in political and public life, including all political processes and peacebuilding initiatives. Remember, colleagues, this is about not only what is right, but also what is effective. I said that the international community, including members of the Council, were not honouring commitments freely entered into or honouring the obligations laid down by the Council. International backers must commit to the departure from Libya of all foreign forces and mercenaries, and must provide Libyan parties with the space and support needed to achieve a ceasefire, engage meaningfully in the United Nations-led political process and secure an inclusive political agreement that places the people of Libya at its centre. We welcome the continued engagement of the parties in the United Nations-led 5+5 dialogue, which the United Kingdom supports as co-chair of the Security Working Group, and we urge the parties to have the courage to make the necessary compromises. We fully support UNSMIL's efforts to de-escalate the situation around Sirte. A demilitarized solution in Sirte could serve as a foundation for a broader ceasefire, but we remain highly concerned about the ongoing conflict, which is fuelled by reckless international intervention and violations of the arms embargo through the provision of arms and supplies to the parties, as well as the activities of the Wagner Group and other foreign mercenaries. We fully support the work of the Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya and call for the external backers of the parties to comply with the embargo and the commitments they made at the Berlin Conference. That applies to all external backers. We are troubled by the ongoing humanitarian impact of the conflict and its effect on human rights, compounded by the worsening COVID-19 situation, as set out by Ms. Williams. The increase in civilian casualties from April to June, documented by UNSMIL, is unacceptable, as are the continued attacks on medical facilities, ambulances, medical personnel and schools. We reiterate our concern about casualties resulting from mines, booby traps and improvised explosive devices left by withdrawing forces aligned with the Libyan National Army. We continue to call for the mass grave sites at Tarhouna to be secured until a proper investigation can be conducted. We reiterate our condemnation of all human rights violations and abuses, as well as violations of international humanitarian law, including indiscriminate attacks; unlawful killings; sexual and gender-based violence, the silencing of journalists, activists and human rights defenders; and the mistreatment of vulnerable people, particularly migrants. We are concerned about reports that civilians were fired upon and abducted during recent protests. It is vital that the right to peaceful assembly, protest and freedom of expression are upheld. In that regard, we welcome the appointment of the members of the Independent Fact Finding Mission on Libya to investigate human rights violations and abuses, and we reiterate our call for all parties to allow the Mission access to the whole country. We support the calls to resume oil production in the recent statements from the Government of National Accord and the House of Representatives. We welcome the independent audit of the two Central Bank branches as a vital step towards improved transparency and reunification. The oil blockade only serves to harm the Libyan people. We must move forward with resuming production for the benefit of all Libyans and the Libyan economy. I want to echo the concluding remarks of Acting Special Representative Williams. There is no military solution in Libya. Those who deliberately undermined the peace process in April 2019 thought that a military campaign could work. Fifteen months later, it has been proved time and again that it cannot. All that has been achieved in the meantime is death and misery amid a huge increase in weaponry into Libya. So let me once again urge the Libyan parties and their international backers to listen to the cries of the Libyan people for peace and to put the interests of the Libyan people above their own narrow, selfish interests. Let all commit to a lasting ceasefire and let us empower a strong UNSMIL to take forward negotiations on peace and lasting security.
