Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to join the rest of my
colleagues in congratulating you, Mr. President, and
your delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. I wish you every success
and reiterate the full support of my entire delegation
to ensure to that end. I would also like to thank all
members of the Security Council for their cooperation
last month. We thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her report,
and we express to her and to her entire team our firm
support in their important work.

At the end of its first 15 years of existence and
20 years after the signing of the Rome Statute, the
International Criminal Court has demonstrated its
capacity to resolve complex cases in sensitive scenarios.
Therefore, without prejudice to our observations
on the progress in the cases that we are considering
today, we express our appreciation for the work that
the International Criminal Court has been carrying
out since 2011 in compliance with the referral made
through resolution 1970 (2011).

In that regard, so that the Court is able to fulfil
its mandate and avoid impunity, it is crucial that the
competent authorities in Libya, the countries of the
region, regional organizations and the international
community in general make every effort to cooperate.
We reiterate that all States, regardless of whether or
not they are party to the Rome Statute, are primarily
responsible for taking action and helping to facilitate
the work of the Court.

We take due note of the report presented and
of the activities conducted by the Office of the
Prosecutor during the reporting period. We express our
grave concern about the incidents and irregularities
surrounding the case of Mr. Al-Werfalli, who is
now the subject of two arrest warrants issued by the
International Criminal Court, on 15 August 2017 and
4 July 2018, respectively, on charges related to the
summary execution of at least 43 people in the city
of Benghazi, We note that, according to reports of the
Libyan National Army, Mr. Al-Werfalli is said to have
been arrested and subjected to an investigation by a
military prosecutor. However, the Prosecutor's report
states that Mr. Al-Werfalli is alleged to be at large and
serving as a member of the Libyan National Army.

Furthermore, we note with great concern that,
although arrest warrants remain in force, they have not
been fulfilled. In that regard, we reiterate the urgent
need for all pending arrest warrants to be executed so
that the Court is able to comply with its mandate and
carry out its work effectively. It is precisely in these
scenarios that the idea of universal criminal justice
becomes relevant and the need to ensure the universality
of the Rome Statute becomes apparent.

Moreover, the intensification of violence, extrajudicial
executions, killings, kidnappings, arbitrary detentions
and armed clashes described in the Prosecutor's report
bear witness to the sensitive situation that the Libyan
people continue to experience. That is even more so
given that, since the beginning of the year, there have
been more than 400 deaths from crossfire, bombing and
the detonation of improvised explosive devices, which
have also led to the displacement of approximately 3,600
people from the areas in which clashes have intensified.
We are also deeply concerned about repeated reports
of violations of the rights of migrants who are subject
to rape, torture, degrading and humiliating treatment,
denial of medical assistance and arbitrary detention.
As has been rightly noted, that is a complex situation
that requires a multidimensional strategic approach to
cooperating with the Libyan State.

We are certain that the investigations regarding those
violations carried out by the Office of the Prosecutor
in the context of the principle of complementarity
will not only help to identify the perpetrators but, if
they constitute crimes against humanity, activate the
Court's jurisdiction for their trial. In order to achieve
that goal, my delegation highlights and praises the
collaboration and constant assistance that the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya provides to the
Office of the Prosecutor. We take this opportunity to
encourage them to continue cooperating so effectively.

In addition to receiving periodic reports on the
cases I mentioned, financial contingencies must also be
guaranteed to ensure their continuity and effectiveness.
The Organization and the membership in general should
appreciate the costs incurred by the International
Criminal Court to sustain the investigations and
trials within its jurisdiction, especially when we
notice that several States - including members of
the Council - are still not party to the Statute and do
not contribute to the investigations. To that end, we
recommend that the Office of the Prosecutor include in
its next semi-annual report a list of the costs borne by
the International Criminal Court - and its Office in
particular - to conduct its activities in Libya.

The International Criminal Court is a global
undertaking of interest to all States. Its mission is
intrinsic to the strengthening of international criminal
justice, peace and security, respect for human rights
and guarantees of due process. In that understanding,
as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the Rome
Statute this year, we take the opportunity to reflect on
the effectiveness of the Court and whether the model
conceived covers our expectations with regard to
cooperation and universality. That aim is to reinforce
and improve the capacities and organization of the Court
in order to strengthen accountability and international
justice at a time when the responsibility of all States to
comply with their obligations under international law
specifically, as well as international humanitarian law,
are being called into question.

Finally, my delegation reiterates its concern about
the public complaints regarding the actions of former
authorities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court that are specifically related
to the investigations under way in Libya. With that in
mind, and in view of the integrity and transparency that
are paramount for international tribunals, we consider
it appropriate for the Office of the Prosecutor to give
a public accounting of the scope and veracity of those
statements in its next report, given that the integrity of
the Court is essential to guarantee its credibility and
effectiveness before the international community.

