Ms. Amos: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to brief the Council this
morning. I am delivering these remarks from Brazil
where I am participating in ceremonies marking the
tenth anniversary of the Canal Hotel bombing, which
killed Sergio Vieira de Mello, one of my predecessors,
and 21 other colleagues. Ijoin the Secretary-General
and the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
remembering our colleagues who have given their lives
in support of the global humanitarian effort.

You have proposed, Madam President, that today's
debate be focused on three ofthe five core challenges to
ensuring the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
namely, compliance with international law, access
to people in need and accountability for violations.
Since the Secretary-General first indentified those
challenges, in 2009, the Security Council has taken
some important steps to implement its commitment to
protect civilians. Peacekeeping operations have been
given more consistent mandates. Situations have been
referred to the International Criminal Court, which
has secured its first conviction. Sanctions have been
applied for serious violations, including the delberate
obstruction of humanitarian access. However, there
remains a need for the Council to use more consistently
all the tools at its disposal to close the gap between
commitments made in the Chamber and the devastating
impact of conflict on the lives of civilians.

Humanitarian workers operate in very complex and
insecure situations. They do all they can to reach and
bring assistance to people in need. But despite their
dedication and commitment and the unprecedented
array of resources at the national, regional and
international levels, millions of people around the
world are not receiving the life-saving assistance and
protection they need. Active hostilities, violence against
humanitarian workers, restrictions on the movement of
goods and interference in humanitarian activities all
restrict access.

I will give two brief examples. There is a human

tragedy unfolding before our eyes in Syria, where
huge and urgent needs remain unmet. I am extremely
concerned by the failure to protect civilians, which is in
flagrant violation of the most basic rules of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Insecurity and
bureaucratic constraints and limitations on the number
of non-governmental humanitarian organizations
allowed to operate in Syria continue to prevent aid from
reaching all those in need. We need more capacity, and
humanitarian access must be granted to people trapped
in areas under the control of Government forces or
opposition groups.

In the Sudan, an estimated 900,000 people remain
out of reach in areas controlled by armed groups in
Jebel Marra, South Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The
safety and living conditions of civilians caught in the
midst of the fighting in those areas is reportedly rapidly
deteriorating. Without access, we cannot do more for
them.

There are other factors that limit access and raise
protection concerns. People in areas controlled by
non-State armed groups designated as terrorists may
have no or only diminished access to humanitarian
assistance and protection because of restrictions
imposed by counter-terrorism laws and policies. An
independent study on the impact of donor countries'
counter-terrorism measures on principled humanitarian
action was launched earlier this year. It contains
recommendations addressed to the humanitarian
community, donors and inter-governmental bodies,
including that all the relevant actors discuss how to better
reconcile counter-terrorism measures and humanitarian
action. It also recommends that counter-terrorism
laws and measures include appropriate exemptions for
humanitarian action and that humanitarian actors be
able to engage with groups designated as terrorists in
order to negotiate safe and sustained access to civilian
populations in need.

We must consider measures to prevent and mitigate
the humanitarian impact of the use in populated
areas of explosive weapons, which are by their
nature indiscriminate within their areas of blast and
fragmentation. We need to strengthen the protection
of civilians from their effects. Discussions on the topic
will take place next month.

Ensuring accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
remains a serious challenge. The primary obligation to
investigate and prosecute serious violations lies with
national authorities, with international mechanisms
playing a subsidiary role. However, the relatively small
number of prosecutions at the national level underlines
the need for the United Nations and Member States to
provide increased financial and technical support to
national authorities in conducting investigations and
prosecutions. National accountability mechanisms
can also be complemented by the more regular and
systematic use of commissions of inquiry and fact-
finding missions by the Security Council.

There is an important list of basic obligations
imposed by international law that must be respected by
all parties to conflict. 1 shall repeat them here.

First, parties must not conduct attacks against
civilians or civilian objects. Secondly, the relevant
authorities must protect and meet the basic needs
of persons within their control and ensure that the
necessary conditions, security or otherwise, are in
place to allow humanitarian access. Thirdly, when
unable or unwilling to provide adequate assistance,
the authorities must allow and facilitate rapid, safe
and unimpeded access to people in need, including
the immediate free passage of all medical supplies.
Fourthly, consent for relief operations should never be
withheld on arbitrary grounds.
As we have seen in the evolution of situations
requiring humanitarian response around the world, it is
clear that the concept of the arbitrary denial of consent
for humanitarian operations requires greater legal
development and policy attention, including from the
Council.

Parties should avoid the use of explosive weapons
and the establishment of military positions in populated
areas.

On World Humanitarian Day today, as we
remember our colleagues who have lost their lives in
the humanitarian effort, we must do everything in our
power to ensure that those who carry on their work can
do so in safety. That is why there is a need for greater
accountability at the national and international levels
for those who perpetrate attacks against aid workers
and in instances of the deliberate delay or denial of
access for humanitarian purposes.

