Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of August, and to thank
Ambassador Joy ngu and the Nigerian delegation for
their excellent work during the course of the last
month. I would also like to take this opportunity to
assure you of Gabon's support throughout your term.

I would also like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Foreign Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, and thank him for his statement. Lastly, my
delegation thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his
briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/401) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

The Council is debating the matter of Kosovo
today, only weeks after the International Court of
Justice issued its advisory opinion on the legality of its
unilateral declaration of independence of 17 February
2008. This ruling has been commented upon
extensively in the statements made this afternoon.
Taking that into account and in light of the report of
the Secretary-General, I would like to base my brief
statement on two aspects of the matter before us,
namely, the general situation in Kosovo on the political
and security fronts and the important work of UNMIK,
on the one hand, and the question of the status of
Kosovo, on the other.

The development of the general situation in
Kosovo, particularly during the period covered by the
report, reveals numerous positive signs. Gabon is
pleased that, in accordance with its mandate, UNMIK
has been able to continue promoting security, stability
and respect for human rights while maintaining the
ongoing involvement, certainly not without difficulties,
of all the communities in Kosovo.

My delegation also welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General and the European Union - whose
offer to facilitate the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina we support - have decided to cooperate more
effectively in seeking solutions to matters of mutual
interest to both parties. We endorse this consensus-
based approach and believe that it should be supported
by the international community. However, we are
aware that the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) has encountered problems that must be
resolved.

Energetic action must therefore be taken to find a
solution to the matter of missing persons, particularly
as it poses a major challenge to the reconciliation
process between the various communities. Moreover,
attention should be drawn to the level of returns of
displaced persons and refugees, and an end must be put
to inter-community tensions and conflicts and the
recurrent acts of vandalism against religious and ethnic
symbols.

In addition, the political situation in northern
Kosovo remains fragile and no less cause for concern.
Indeed, the events of early July, which were
unanimously condemned by the members of the
Council, have shown that the security situation in that
part of Kosovo can deteriorate at any moment. We
reiterate our confidence in the ability of UNMIK and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo to
control the situation and prevent any violence that
might jeopardize further a resumption of dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina.

On the central matter of the status of Kosovo, the
position of Gabon remains unchanged. The
International Court of Justice, which itself has said that
it has not ruled on the merits, has offered an opinion
that recognizes, rather, the international legality of the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo.

We reiterate our appeal for respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia, which
must be upheld through international law. I recall that
our principled position prioritizes dialogue and
cooperation in the peaceful settlement of crises and
conflicts and rejects any unilateral declaration of
independence. In this specific case, we support a
settlement of the question of Kosovo on the basis of
the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
My delegation would therefore like to reiterate
the appeal recently made by the Secretary-General to
all parties to support the implementation of a
constructive dialogue and the settlement of all
outstanding issues.

