Mr. Thanarajasingam (Malaysia): Mr. President, at
the outset let me congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and also
convey our appreciation to your predecessor.

The recent action by the Israeli Government to
confiscate 53 hectares of Palestinian land within the area of
illegally annexed East Jerusalem is not only provocative but
highly dangerous: it will exacerbate the volatile situation
and play into the hands of the extremists and bigots
determined to wreck the nascent and fragile peace process
in the region.

The action to confiscate 53 hectares and the projected
plans to confiscate yet another 440 hectares are in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law, the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Declaration of
Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements
signed on 13 September 1993 by the Government of Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization. It begs the
question of the motivation behind such actions, of whether
there is a grand design based on quasi-religious claims to
bring about a fait accompli and pre-empt the outcome of
the negotiations on the final status of Jerusalem.

The status of Jerusalem is arguably the most
intractable issue in the peace process. Attempts at the
Judaization of the city must be strongly resisted by the
international community. The Malaysian delegation does
not accept the spurious contention that this issue should be
resolved between the two parties under the existing
agreement as the Israeli side is in effect promoting a fait
accompli and as the Security Council continues to have
responsibility for and a role in the all-embracing subject
of the Middle East and the prospects for peace.

Malaysia is also deeply disturbed by various
practices perpetrated by Israeli settlers against Islamic
holy places in the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. These
activities have created great consternation and deep
apprehension within the Ummah.

Nor will peace be served by the continued illegal
practices and policies of the Israeli Government in
pursuing its settlement policy in the occupied territories.
Recent statistics indicate that the settler population of the
West Bank and Gaza Strip has increased by 28,000, from
112,000 to 140,000, while that of Jerusalem has grown by
22,000, from 148,000 to 170,000. This represents an
overall increase in the number of settles of 50,000, or
about 20 per cent since July 1992. It is alarming to note
that the settler population has increased at a faster rate
than the population of Israel itself.
The Security Council should take urgent steps to
deal with this extremely serious situation, to put an end
to the numerous Israeli violations, particularly in East
Jerusalem, and to take the necessary measures for
revocation of the Israeli confiscation orders.

At the same time, my delegation calls on the
sponsors of the peace process to shoulder their
responsibilities and exercise pressure on Israel to
immediately discontinue its confiscation of Palestinian
land and to put an end to the serious violations
perpetrated by groups of Israeli settlers in the form of
daily acts of violation against Islamic and Christian
shrines.

The Malaysian delegation recalls that the
Government of the United States of America, in its
capacity as a sponsor of the peace process, also gave the
Palestinians, assurances on Jerusalem. In this regard, the
United States letter of assurances, dated 24 October 1991,
stated the following:

"The United States is opposed to the Israeli
annexation of East Jerusalem and the extension of
Israeli law on it and the extension of Jerusalem's
municipal boundaries. We encourage all sides to
avoid unilateral acts that would exacerbate local
tensions or make negotiations more difficult or pre-
empt their final outcome."

 

The United States should do all it can to honour the spirit
and substance of its own letter.

The Malaysian delegation is also concerned over
efforts that could undermine the status of Jerusalem through
action to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.

The successful continuation of the peace process will
very much depend on the commitment and willingness of
both parties with respect to the implementation of all the
provisions on which they have agreed. At this critical if not
explosive juncture, every effort must be made to eliminate
the climate of distrust and suspicion; this is vital for the
success of the peace process. Unilateral acts such as the one
being committed in Jerusalem push tension to a critical
level and make negotiations even more difficult.

Throughout the Islamic world, any attempt to
undermine the status of Jerusalem, one of the most revered
spiritual abodes of Islam, will be totally resisted in every
way by Governments and peoples.

