Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to offer the
condolences and solidarity of Mexico to the people of
Haiti for the tragic loss of life and the damage caused
by Hurricane Matthew. Mexico joins the international
community in offering humanitarian assistance to
prevent the spread of the cholera epidemic and restore
the supply of urgent basic services as soon as possible.
On instructions from President Enrique Perla Nieto,
my Government will provide resources, through
the Mexican Agency for International Development
Cooperation, to support Haiti in meeting those
basic needs.

The Government of Mexico would also like to
thank Ms. Sandra Honore for her work and dedication
and the Secretary-General for his report on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2016/753).

In spite of the delays in the electoral process in
Haiti, it is important to acknowledge that the political
players have made considerable progress, such as the
re-establishment of the Provisional Electoral Council
and the drafting of an electoral timetable. We are well
aware that the hurricane's impact affected the elections
scheduled for 9 October, but we believe that Haiti
cannot allow itself to be brought to a standstill yet
again. That is why we eagerly await the announcement
of a new election date and call on the political
stakeholders to pool their efforts to prioritize stability,
institution-building and the restoration of constitutional
order. Mexico shares the Secretary-General's concern
with regard to the rise in the level of food insecurity
among a significant segment of the Haitian population,
as well as the increase in the number of cholera cases
in that sisterly nation. We believe that it is essential
to strengthen efforts to prevent those challenges from
jeopardizing Haiti's present and future.

It is at critical moments like these, as Haiti seeks to
grapple with the impact of Hurricane Matthew, that we
recognize and value the vital role played by the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Mexico reiterates the importance of ensuring that the
possible drawdown of MINUSTAH is gradual and
cautious and takes into account the progress made
in overcoming the humanitarian emergency and
strengthening political stability in the country. The plan
for Haiti's transition should be based on coordination
between MINUSTAH, the States Members of the United
Nations - in particular troop- and police-contributing
countries - and, above all, the Haitian Government.

We note the recommendations of the Secretary-
General on extending the MINUSTAH mandate by six
months. We hope that the strategic assessment to be made
on the situation in Haiti will take into consideration,
first, the situation on the ground; secondly, adjustments
made to the election timetable and the restoration of
constitutional order; thirdly, the security situation in the
country; and fourthly, the progress made in enhancing
the professionalism and the operational capabilities of
the Haitian National Police.

We believe that such an assessment should
be conducted once the electoral process has been
completed. In that way, the Secretary-General
would have a comprehensive understanding of the
situation so as to be able to offer recommendations
on the future of MINUSTAH. Mexico hopes that the
strengthening of institutions, and in particular of the
Haitian National Police, will remain the cornerstone
of efforts to restructure the United Nations presence
in Haiti. Cooperation with MINUSTAH will remain
vital to addressing issues of public order and to
combating crime, as well as to ensuring that the Haitian
National Police is better trained and able to shoulder
greater responsibility.

In conclusion, I would like to make it clear that
Mexico, as a troop-contributing country, is grateful to
other States that provide troops and police, to the Group
of Friends of Haiti and to all of those who take part in
MINUSTAH. Mexico is committed to continuing to
work to lay the foundations of lasting peace in Haiti.

