Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): Let me
first of all thank Mr. Jeremie, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Hyseni, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, for their presence. We have listened
carefully to their statements. I would like to tell
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, how very much we appreciate the
efforts he made under the guidance of the Secretary-
General to have a dialogue between the parties leading
to the emergence of a consensus on the international
presence in Kosovo.

In June, the Secretary-General launched a
reconfiguration of the international civilian presence in
the context of resolution 1244 (1999). Before and after
the decision, he maintained a permanent dialogue with
all of the parties concerned. This dialogue made it
possible to elicit a common goal over and above all
differences, a goal to preserve stability in Kosovo and
the region. We now derive from this goal something
everyone agrees on, which is that a reconfiguration of
the international presence initiated in June by the
Secretary-General is the best way to achieve this goal.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/692). It is time to accelerate the
reconfiguration of the international presence. In this
context, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) will continue to deploy throughout
Kosovo in close coordination with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in order to take over all operational rule of law
functions. As we have recalled several times, EULEX
will operate in the context of resolution 1244 (1999)

under the overall authority of the United Nations and in
a fully transparent manner.

We have just heard the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and Kosovo react to the report of the
Secretary-General. We would like to welcome, first of
all, the constructive attitude of the Serbian authorities
with respect to the reconfiguration of the international
presence and the deployment of EULEX. By
supporting the initiatives of the European Union to
contribute to peace and stability in the region, they are
participating in creating the conditions for a common
European future for the Western Balkans. We have also
taken note of Mr. Hyseni's positions, and I would like
to tell him that we have the greatest respect for the
views of the Kosovar authorities and that we will take
their concerns into consideration with great
seriousness.

What I take from his statement is a strong
affirmation of the Kosovo Government's willingness to
fully cooperate with the international community, and
that must be commended. I would like to assure him
that we want to maintain a close dialogue with Pristina
in the context of the EULEX deployment throughout
Kosovo.

In order to go beyond the divisions inherited from
the past, we are proposing to the people of the Western
Balkans a common future in the context of Europe. We
must determine how we can help Serbia to place its
future in a European context. The European Union has
also expressed its willingness to support the economic
and political development of Kosovo by offering it a
clear European future.

Allow me therefore to conclude by emphasizing
the following point. The European Union is fully
conscious of its responsibilities when it comes to going
beyond obstacles to a prosperous stable and successful
Western Balkans. It is in this spirit that we have
deployed EULEX; it is in this spirit that we hope to
move ahead in the coming months on the road to a
common future for Serbs and Kosovars within the
European Union.

