Mr. Tarasyuk (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates and
supports the Netherlands initiative in organizing this open
and serious debate, so much needed by the African
nations and the Security Council itself.

Let me also express gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his briefing on this topic of
fundamental importance for the United Nations.

The debates in the General Assembly have clearly
shown the major challenges and grievances of humankind,
which, unfortunately, have become hyper-magnified, most
of all in Africa. Extreme poverty and lack of sustainable
development, starvation and insufficient medical care are
the hidden roots of the numerous armed conflicts which
have swept across the continent, while economic recession

 

and the inadequate protection of democratic values give
birth to internal political instability, rebellious separatism,
terror and the suffering of millions of people.

Therefore, as the highest universal Organization
designed to promote global peace and security, the United
Nations, and especially its Security Council, should pay
primary attention to this most vulnerable continent. In this
connection, my delegation believes that the kind of
response provided so far by the Security Council to the real
needs of the African continent should be invigorated and
further pursued with the utmost perseverance and
consistency. It is our common responsibility to bring peace,
prosperity and sustainable development to this vast region.
As a founding member of the United Nations, Ukraine
has always followed closely developments on the African
continent and it supported the quest for independence of the
peoples of Africa. We have a long record of providing this
support in the Fourth Committee of the General Assembly,
previously called the Committee on decolonization. Ukraine
was also a very active member of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, contributing to the elimination of this
shameful phenomenon. That experience gave us a better
understanding of the deep roots of existing problems, as
well as of the complexity of their resolution.

In addition, Ukraine fully comprehends the problems
of Africa, as a nation that regained its independence only
eight years ago, and thus had to build its new State
practically from scratch; it had to create institutions,
introduce legislation and economic reforms and strengthen
national identity. Therefore, allow me to share some ideas
on what contribution we can all make to the efforts of the
African nations to cope with their challenges.

First, we should promote advanced economic
development of the region, both bilaterally and through
concerted international efforts. For decades Ukraine
maintained close traditional ties with African countries.
Tens of thousands of African specialists graduated with
higher education diplomas in Ukraine. Miles of railroads,
highways and pipelines, as well as power stations and
industrial plants, were constructed by Ukrainians in many
countries of the African continent. After a short break,
caused by our transition period, we are trying now to revive
and expand these old bonds to make our contribution to
economic growth and social stability, and to keep in touch
with Africans' needs and aspirations. That was the main
reason why Ukraine participated, for the first time, in the
July summit of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
in Algiers, where I headed the Ukrainian delegation. I am
deeply grateful to the Government of Algeria for the kind
invitation.

Secondly, we can see that many of the current
conflicts in Africa are caused by militant separatism,
inter-ethnic tensions or intolerance, or are initiated by
rebellious groups which resort to military force to meet
their dubious ends. In this context, upholding the principle
of the territorial integrity of nations within their
recognized borders, Ukraine resolutely condemns any
violent actions by rebels against populations and
legitimate Governments.

We have gained experience in how to tackle such
problems, both internally and in international relations.
Ukraine has expertise in settling inter-ethnic tensions and
promoting tolerance towards national minorities. One
example is the successful resolution of the very delicate
issues involved in bringing back, resettling and
accommodating hundreds of thousands of deported
Crimean Tartars, who enjoy all the rights of our
democratic society and live in peace alongside other
peoples of a multinational Ukraine.

Furthermore, Ukraine is making a tangible
contribution to resolving the complex security problems
in its close neighbourhood, being a guarantor of peace in
Transdniestria, Moldova; an active promoter of the
peaceful settlement in Abkhazia, Georgia, and Nagorny
Karabakh, Azerbaijan; and a negotiator and proponent of
peaceful initiatives from the very beginning of the
Kosovo conflict.

Our experience in political mediation and
peacekeeping activities can be of interest to African
nations, especially in view of the ongoing debate about
authorizing United Nations peacekeeping operations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Sierra Leone.
These first signs of increased attention by the Security
Council to the problems of Africa will not only be
important for the Lusaka and Lorne processes, but could
also be of fundamental significance for the entire African
continent.

In this connection, particular emphasis certainly has
to be placed on closer cooperation by the United Nations
with the Organization of African Unity and African
subregional organizations. All this will provide clear
testimony as to whether the ill-famed "Afro-fatigue
syndrome" and "Afro-pessimism" have definitely given
way to "Afro-enthusiasm".

 

Thirdly, many conflicts in Africa are aggravated by
illicit arms sales and mercenary activity. Ukraine was one
of the initiators of the drafting and adoption in 1989 of the
International Convention against the Recruitment, Use,
Financing and Training of Mercenaries, and it complies in
good faith with its obligations. Ukrainian legislation
envisages severe criminal penalties for such activities,
which are punishable by imprisonment for up to 12 years.

One of the acute problems often referred to is the need
to strengthen arms embargoes and combat illicit arms flows
in Africa. Ukraine commends the increased attention of the
Security Council to these problems, and it is ready to fully
cooperate in this field. We are seriously concerned about
violations of the Council-imposed sanctions against the
illegal arms trade. Such incidents indicate that international
regulation in those areas has some serious breaches.

Ukraine has always strictly followed the policy of
selling arms and military equipment to legitimate
Governments or to companies authorized by such
Governments. We have established an effective and reliable
export control regime for arms sales, and are taking further
measures to tighten it. At the same time, global practice
now shows that, no matter how strong the export control
measures that a sovereign State can establish, it cannot give
a total guarantee against subsequent violations by third
parties. Therefore, Ukraine proposes to convene without
delay, under the auspices of the United Nations, an
international meeting of experts of major arms-producing
countries. Its purpose would be to elaborate effective
measures to prevent the reselling of arms from the end
users to third parties, and to close gaps in the relevant
international instruments.

Competent authorities of Ukraine are in possession of
relevant information on illegal arms trafficking in some
countries, and would be ready to share it with the Security
Council, as well as with the Governments of concerned
States. Ukrainian experts can participate in the work of a
preparatory group to set up the agenda and work out the
procedures for such an experts' meeting.

I fully share the words of my Dutch colleague that
Africa is a land not of troubles only, but of happiness as
well; a continent not of catastrophe, but equally one of
hope. I wish to assure the Council that Ukraine was
together with Africa at the dawn of its liberation. It will be
together with Africa in its present challenges, to help it
revive and become prosperous in the future.

