Mr. Mitri: There is a continuing sense of concern
among the Libyan people regarding the prospect of a
protracted conflict. The crisis that has dominated the
political scene for the past few months poses athreat to the
country's political transition. Following a decision by the
General National Congress to endorse the new Cabinet
of Mr. Ahmed Maiteeq on 26 May, the Government
of Abdallah al-Thani, acting as caretaker, refused to
hand over power, citing procedural irregularities. This
morning, Libya's Supreme Court ruled that the election
of Mr. Maiteeq was unconstitutional, opening a way out
ofthe institutional crisis. The need to respect that ruling
should be affirmed. The initial reaction in Tripoli, half
an hour ago, to the court ruling is positive. The second
deputy president of the Congress, Salah Makhzoum,
and Maiteeq himself both announced separately that
they will comply with the decision.

Also, there were significant security developments
in the past few weeks. Foremost among those have
been the move by retired general Khalifa Haftar in
mid-May to mobilize some units of the Libyan national
army and other tribally affiliated armed groups against
groups that he has labelled as terrorists and blamed
for much of the violence and targeted assassinations
in Benghazi and other areas of eastern Libya. The
military operation, dubbed Operation Libya Dignity,
elicited some expressions of support. But there are also
those who accuse General Haftar of seeking to unseat
the legitimately elected institutions of the State and
using the threat of terrorism as a pretext to stage what
they call a coup d'e'tat.

In previous briefings to the Council, I could not
understate the risks of the growing and dangerous
security void in Libya. Hundreds of Libyan
citizens - mainly security personnel, but also judges,
journalists and other civilians - have been the victims
of a systematic and unrelenting campaign of targeted
assassinations and other acts of aggression. However,
any viable long-term strategy aimed at addressing that
phenomenon and rooting out terrorism cannot be born
out of unilateral and external initiatives, nor can it be
limited to military solutions. There should be an end
to the violence inflicted on the civilian population of
Benghazi. There is no doubt about that. That is why the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
reiterates its condemnation of attacks against civilians,
whoever their perpetrators.

In Tripoli, the crisis over the appointment of a new
Prime Minister has accentuated since February the
strong political polarization in the country. Tensions
have given way to intermittent clashes on the streets
of the capital between rival brigades and other armed
groups under the nominal control of the Libyan
authorities. On 18 May, armed groups forcibly entered
the grounds of the General National Congress in order
to prevent the Congress from pressing ahead with the
election of a new Prime Minister.

Strong political disagreement over the functioning
of institutions and their legitimacy has revealed mutual
distrust among the main political protagonists. The
radicalization of positions on both sides of the political
divide was further exacerbated by accusations of
seeking power by all means and suspicions of growing
external interference in favour of the adverse party.

Notwithstanding the political and security crisis
that has engulfed Libya, the constitutional process
has made considerable progress since my briefing to
the Council in March (see S/PV.7130). On 21 April, the
General National Congress convened the first session
of the Constitutional Drafting Assembly in Al-Bayda.
Following an opening ceremony, the members elected
their chair, deputy chair and rapporteur and adopted
rules of procedure. The Assembly is currently
developing its committee structure, work plans and
public outreach plans. UNSMIL stands ready to provide
technical assistance at the request of the Assembly and
continues its efforts to coordinate international support
for the constitutional process.

In my most recent briefing, I described how
boycotts and security problems disrupted the election
of the Constitutional Drafting Assembly in February
and left 13 seats unfilled. In the intervening period,
eight of those seats have been filled through additional
rounds of polling. Efforts by the Assembly itself are
under way to ensure that all areas of Libya and all
components - as they call them in Libya - of Libyan
society are represented in the work of the Assembly.

In joint partnership with a range of women's
organizations, UNMSIL has launched a women's
dialogue initiative to engage with the media and
religious, political and societal actors in a public debate
on constitutional issues of particular significance to
women.

The High National Election Commission of Libya
is now preparing, with United Nations technical
support, the election of the 200-member council
of representatives that will succeed the General
National Congress. The total number of registered
voters reached 1.5 million. A total of 1,714 candidates
have registered, including 152 women, contesting 32
reserved seats. Polling is expected on 25 June. We have
called on all parties to ensure that elections are held in
a peaceful atmosphere and not delayed. It is hoped that
the elections will augur, with confidence and popular
interest, a third phase of the transition process before a
new constitution is approved.

The security situation continues to impede the
proper functioning of the justice system. Courts have
stopped working for prolonged periods in Derna,
Benghazi and Sirte in protest at the continuing attacks
on prosecutors and judges, among other State officials.
Although the General National Congress extended
to 2 April the deadline for completing the judicial
screening of detainees in compliance with the law
on transitional justice, that task remains outstanding.
Figures collected by the Ministry of Justice, with
United Nations assistance, indicate that in early March
around 6,200 inmates remained held in facilities under
the authority of the judicial police, of whom only about
10 per cent had been tried.

The trial of 37 former regime officials, including
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi,

has begun at the Tripoli Court of Appeals. That trial
is a crucial test for Libya's willingness and ability to
conduct fair trials. UNSMIL has voiced concerns about
difficulties in ensuring full legal representation for all
defendants and proper access by lawyers to the case
files and to their clients. Recently, the Court appears to
be in the process of addressing such matters.

UNSMIL has visited all defendants, with various
levels of supervision, in Tripoli, as well as in Misrata and
Zintan. UNSMIL, however, has been denied access to
other detainees held in the Al-Hadba prison on grounds
that they have not been charged. I have strongly protested
the brief detention in Al-Hadba of an UNSMIL senior
staff member attending, as an observer, the trial session
of 11 May and the false accusations levelled against
him. UNSMIL received oral apologies and assurances
from the Libyan authorities of their commitments to
respecting the status-of-mission agreement between
Libya and the United Nations. However, the personal
effects of our staff have not been returned. Therefore, I
decided to suspend the attendance of our staff at other
trials in Al-Hadba until the case of our colleague is
fully resolved.

More recently, on 4 June four UNSMIL staff
members, upon their return from Al-Bayda, were
detained by the airport security authorities and ill-
treated. During their detention, which lasted more than
an hour, false accusations against them once again were
cited. Their release occurred after the intervention of
the Ministry of the Interior, at my request. I protested
and reminded the Libyan authorities, once again, of
their obligation to respect the mission agreement signed
with UNSMIL.

The current situation in Libya has inevitably slowed
the process of security sector rebuilding and reform.
Nonetheless, there has been some progress in developing
the operationalization of the Rome conference security
compact. Assistance is given to the Ministry ofDefence
committee in preparing a defence policy and strategy
and in ensuring proper management and security of
arms and ammunition. However, the Rome security
compact also included measures to establish proper
governance of the security sector, a recommendation
we have made time and again, including the difficult
issues of disarmament and reintegration of the armed
groups. So far there has not been any sustainable
progress in that regard.
Today the United Nations is called on to continue
facilitating a political dialogue among all parties. That
is more crucial than ever before. To that end, I have
redoubled my efforts to urge all parties in Libya to
resolve the present political impasse through peaceful
means, and to impress upon them that resorting to the
use of force will have disastrous consequences for the
country.

Following consultations with all concerned parties,
I will be convening, within the next 10 days, a meeting
that will bring together some 50 representatives of the
major actors - political leaders, revolutionaries, tribal
figures, civil society, personalities and women. The
aim of that political dialogue conference is to forge an
agreement on the principles of political interaction, on
national priorities during the remainder of the transition
and on ways of addressing immediate security and
otherwise divisive issues. The stakes are high, and we
will spare no effort in helping prevent Libya's descent
into greater instability and violence.

