Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Police Commissioners
for their briefings and express my deep appreciation for
the efforts and sacrifices that they and police personnel
make in peacekeeping operations with a view to
promoting peace and stabilization.

Our annual meeting is an important occasion for the
Council to avail itself of the expertise and experiences
of those operating in the field. It also helps us to better
understand the dimensions of the challenges being
faced and to develop appropriate policies to elevate
United Nations policing. In that context, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 2382 (2017) on United
Nations police operations, which strengthens the role
of United Nations police operations and appropriately
recognizes them as a key component of United Nations
missions. I commend the role played by the delegation
of Italy in drafting this resolution.

Over the past two years, the United Nations has
undertaken a comprehensive reform of its peace and
security architecture, which has been guided by the
review of United Nations peacekeeping operations
carried out by the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations and the recommendations of
the Secretary-General on the peace and security
architecture of the Secretariat.

The Organization lacks a comprehensive vision to
address conflicts while taking the needs, specificities
and priorities of host communities and States into
account. This has led us to improve the tools available
to the Organization, in particular its peacekeeping
operations, in order to effectively address the emerging
challenges and deal with the complex situations that
characterize most United Nations missions.

It goes without saying that United Nations police
operations are not excluded from these efforts. The
police component plays a key role in implementing
United Nations peacekeeping mandates and provides
a foundation for the transition from a peacekeeping
operation to a United Nations civilian presence. It
also contributes to preventing a relapse into conflict
by assuming tasks related to the capacity-building
of national institutions and enabling host countries
to extend security control throughout their territory.
Police also ensure security for the holding of elections
and they are citizens' first point of contact with the
United Nations on the ground. They also play an
important role in building trust in the United Nations
within communities.

In this respect, we reiterate our full support for the
police component, as reflected in our contributions of
police contingents to most United Nations missions
and in our status as the third-largest police contributor.
In 2016 and 2017, Egypt has contributed to three of
the most difficult United Nations missions, including
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. We have also pledged to deploy additional
United Nations police units that have been refitted
with Peacekeeping Capability Readiness Systems. In
addition, we contribute armoured vehicles to United
Nations missions.

I should like to take this opportunity to ask Police
Commissioners some questions, without prejudice to
our adoption of the highest standards of predeployment
training and modern equipment required to carry out
the critical tasks entrusted to the police component.

My first question is addressed to Ms. Priscilla
Makotose, Police Commissioner of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). In the light ofthe significant improvements
in the security situation in Darfur and the drawdown
of UNAMID adopted by the Security Council, what
measures is the Mission taking to ensure stability
and shore up the efforts of the Sudanese Government
during the handover of security responsibilities to
local authorities?

My second question is for the Police Commissioner
of MINUSMA. In the light of the increasing security
threats, which have made MINUSMA the most
dangerous Mission, what measures have been taken
to improve security at headquarters, in line with the
magnitude of these threats? I would also like to inquire
about the efforts made to improve community outreach.
Given the role of community outreach in ensuring the
safety and security of missions, what steps should the
Council take to support the mandate of the Mission?

My third and last question is addressed to the Police

Commissioner of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti. Resolution 2350 (2017) has given the
Mission a mandate focused on strengthening rule oflaw
institutions and the Haitian National Police. I would
like to know if, in his view, this has contributed to the
success of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, and subsequently to that of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, and if it is useful
to include building national institutions as a pillar in
the mandates of United Nations missions, while taking
into account the specificities of each conflict.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to express
to the Police Commissioners our deep appreciation
for their efforts and sacrifice in the context of
peacekeeping operations.

