Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2356 (2017). We would like to
express our appreciation to the United States for taking
the lead. Our appreciation also goes to all the other
members of the Security Council for their support.

For three consecutive weeks, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has launched ballistic
missiles in blatant violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions. That is totally unacceptable. Japan
strongly condemns the most recent launch as well as
previous launches, which were conducted eight times
this year alone. The Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has obstinately continued its nuclear build-up,
while completely ignoring the will of the international
community. Those continued provocations trample
upon international efforts towards a peaceful resolution
of nuclear and missile issues and constitute a direct
challenge and threat to the security of Japan, the region
and beyond.
The international community must not let the
defiance ofSecurity Council resolutions go unanswered.
Today's unanimous adoption of resolution 2356 (2017)
sends a very strong signal that ballistic-missile launches
have consequences. On countless occasions, we have
made it Clear that we are always ready to resume
dialogue if the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
were to show sincere commitment and make concrete
steps towards denuclearization. The current pattern of
frequent and alarmingly provocative ballistic-missile
launches indicate that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea is nowhere near resuming a meaningful
dialogue. That leaves us no choice but to continue to
increase pressure on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. It is time for all States Members of the United
Nations to demonstrate a renewed commitment to
rigorously and thoroughly implementing the existing
Security Council resolutions, including the one we
just adopted today, so that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea understands that it must change its
current policy.

In addition, resolution 2356 (2017) is not the end of
our efforts. We must continue to exert pressure on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea until it shows
sincere commitment and concrete steps towards the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Japan will
continue to work very closely with Council members
and all other Member States to reach a comprehensive
resolution to the problems related to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

