Mr. Rivard (Canada): I would like to thank
Portugal for convening this open debate today. Canada
welcomes the opportunity to focus on accountability
issues related to the protection of civilians. The
evolving situation in Libya and the ongoing protection
challenges in countries such as Somalia, Yemen, Syria,
Cote d'Ivoire and Afghanistan demonstrate the need
for sustained international attention to meet the
protection needs of populations affected by violence
and armed conflict.

Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, including rape as a weapon of war
and other acts of sexual violence, continue to occur at
an alarming rate. Those who commit such acts must be
held to account for their actions. In his November 2010
report (S/2010/579), the Secretary-General identified a
number of key recommendations for enhancing
accountability to better protect civilians. I would like
to draw attention to a number of issues and country-
specific contexts that we consider particularly
important.

First, it is important that we acknowledge that
progress has been made in advancing a legal
framework for civilian protection. This has allowed us

11-5866]
to take decisive action to protect civilians. Libya offers
a key example of how the international community can
work together successfully to achieve a common
purpose. Resolution 1973 (2011) mandated the use of
all means necessary to protect civilians under threat of
attack in Libya. Resolution 1973 (2011) and, before
that, resolution 1970 (2011), sent a clear message to
the then Libyan regime, and to the wider international
community, that deliberate and targeted attacks on
civilian populations and gross violations of human
rights carry serious consequences. Canada is proud to
have played a key role in Libya, both politically and
militarily, in protecting civilians against a cruel and
oppressive regime.

Yet despite some successes of that kind,
implementation gaps remain all too often in our efforts
to ensure that our collective words of support are
effectively translated into concrete actions. The
Council must continue to exercise the range of options
it has at its disposal to prevent and stop violence
against civilians in armed conflict, including mediation
and diplomatic missions, sanctions, United Nations
mandated missions and, when necessary, the use of
force.

Secondly, it is also important that those who
commit violent and deadly attacks on aid workers be
brought to justice. The attack on the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in Kandahar, Afghanistan, on 31 October
served as a reminder of the great risks run by those
who work tirelessly to deliver humanitarian assistance.
Tragically, three UNHCR staff lost their lives in the
attack, and our condolences go out to the families of
the deceased. Those attacks underscore the importance
of continued and sustained cooperation between the
international and Afghan security forces in ensuring
that civilians are protected from indiscriminate acts of
violence. Canada is proud to play a role in Afghanistan
through our work in training the Afghan National
Security Forces so that they are capable of protecting
all civilians in the country, while ensuring that those
who target civilians are brought to justice.

Thirdly, we must be unrelenting in denouncing
violence directed against women and girls in acts such
as sexual violence, including rape as a weapon of war,
sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy
and enforced sterilization. We will continue to promote
the empowerment of women and girls. In Afghanistan,
for example, Canada has frequently stressed the need

for the Afghan Government to promote and protect
human rights, including freedom of expression and
religious belief. Canada supports programmes designed
to implement Afghanistan's 2009 law on eliminating
violence against women and to help Afghan human
rights institutions promote equal rights for all citizens
and investigate and act on violations.

(spoke in French)

Fourthly, we must vigorously defend the rights of
vulnerable religious minorities in situations of armed
conflict who are persecuted for their religious beliefs.
We also encourage key United Nations actors to
develop strategies to tackle the persecution of religious
minorities more effectively, with a view to preventing
their displacement. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. John Baird, emphasized in his address to the
General Assembly during the general debate (see A/66/PV.26) that the Canadian Government is in the
process of establishing an Office of Religious Freedom
within the Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade that will serve to promote the
protection of the freedom of religion as a key objective
of Canada's foreign policy.

Fifthly, for our efforts to succeed in the long
term, we must find ways of strengthening
accountability mechanisms in national jurisdictions. It
is the primary responsibility of every State to
investigate those suspected of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes and to bring them to justice.
The recent sentencing of four former military officers
for their role in a massacre of civilians during the
armed conflict in Guatemala - the first such
conviction of military officers in that country - is a
good example of national accountability mechanisms at
work. That underlines the need for States to meet their
obligations to investigate and prosecute persons
suspected of serious international crimes, and where
appropriate, cooperate with international institutions to
ensure that those responsible face justice.

Finally, Canada also supports the Secretary-General's
call for Member States, United Nations agencies,
international organizations and non-govemmental
organizations to continue to work to better understand
and address the impact of explosive remnants of war in
populated areas. Canada is supporting such efforts in
concrete and meaningful ways. Most recently, our
Prime Minister announced that we will be contributing
Can$10 million to help secure weapons of mass

destruction and remove and dispose of explosive
remnants of war in Libya. These measures are essential
for ensuring that civilians are protected and Libya can
move forward.

It is essential that we back our principles with
concrete action. Vulnerable populations around the
world must be able to rely on the Security Council's
continued attention and sustained efforts. And the
Council can continue to rely on Canada to support its
efforts to protect civilian populations and to promote
freedom, democracy, human rights and the rule of law
on a global scale.

