Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for presenting the forty-fourth report on
the implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina (S/2013/646, annex). We commend his
continued efforts to ensure the full implementation of
the Dayton Agreement. Resolution 2123 (2013), which
was unanimously adopted this morning and which
authorized the extension of the mandate of the European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR) for another 12 months, represents the clear
support of the international community, and is a clear
signal of how the international community, including
the Council, is committed to assist the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina towards finding a lasting solution.

In his most recent briefing (see S/PV.6966),
Mr. Inzko addressed the Council on the political and
constitutional crisis that had frozen governance in the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is unfortunate
that the current report indicates the same worrying
impasse and lack of progress. We have noted that
disagreements and inflexibility among political parties
are one of the main reasons for the continued stalemate.
We therefore call upon the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina at all levels to put national priorities above
their interests and to be more flexible so as to advance
the implementation of outstanding issues.

We are strongly concerned at the continued
negative trend being followed by some representatives
of the Republika Srpska who continue to envisage and
advocate the dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the independence of the Republika Srpska. We
believe that the continued challenge to State judicial
institutions and the constitutional State authority
pose a serious threat to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, not to mention
that it violates the provisions of the Dayton Agreement.
We call upon the authorities in the Republika Srpska to
refrain from this kind of rhetoric.

It is our view that abiding by the Dayton
Agreement, the constitutional framework and rule of
law is a prerequisite for long-term stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In that regard, we urge political
parties to participate positively in the amendments to
the Election Law, which will enable the preparation of
national elections next year. All parties must overcome
political gridlock and resolve their differences on that
issue in order to ensure legitimate national elections.
We call on the international community to redouble its
support to Bosnia and Herzegovina in that process.

On a positive note, Rwanda welcomes the
appointment of judges to fill vacant seats in the
Federation Constitutional Court under the facilitation
of the Office ofthe High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is also hoped that this will enable the
Court to resolve the underlying political dispute in the
Federation. Furthermore, we call on all stakeholders
to support Bosnia and Herzegovina to resolve the
outstanding issues in the implementation of the
objectives of the "5+2" agenda as prerequisites for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.

The visits made by the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the wider region, including to the
trilateral meeting of the Heads of State of Turkey,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, held in Ankara on
14 and 15 May, are a very encouraging step towards
the implementation of bilateral relations between
that country and its neighbours, especially Serbia. In
that regard, we commend the statesmanship shown
by President Nikolie of Serbia during his visit by
apologizing for Srebrenica and other crimes committed
during the war. That constitutes a good contribution
to improving the bilateral relations between the two
countries, and to bringing about reconciliation between
their respective peoples.

On the economic side, we welcome the positive
reports showing that exports are up by 8.5 per cent,
and the increase of industrial production by 6.9 per
cent. However, the high rate of unemployment and the
difficult fiscal situation show how much the continued
support of the international community to Bosnia
and Herzegovina is needed. We also believe that the
progress of Bosnia and Herzegovina towards integration
with the European Union and NATO is one of the key
opportunities for its economic recovery.

However, the recent statement by the European
Union that Bosnia and Herzegovina would lose its
2013 pre-accession funding, totalling €47 million, is
worrisome, and we hope that this will not slow down
the economic recovery of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
the same vein, Rwanda welcomes the census conducted
by the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which we
believe will improve economic and social planning. In
that regard, the census is a socioeconomic development
factor rather than an ethnic one.

I cannot conclude my statement without saying a
word on the issue of refugees and their return, which
is central to the full implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. We condemn any
ethnically-motivated attacks on refugees that may
hamper their return. While we commend the reaction
by authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina against
those incidents, we also find it very necessary for
the authorities to make more efforts to create an
environment conducive to their return.

Finally, as Bosnia and Herzegovina, like Rwanda,
has faced a dark history of genocide, I would like to
emphasize that justice and reconciliation, marked by
equal access to resources, services and equality before
the law, are the key prerequisites for reaching a lasting
peace and a better future for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that the continued cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia can help to achieve that goal.

