Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018).
In particular, we applaud your work, Mr. President,
together with Sweden, as co-penholders.

But this is not a moment for self-congratulation. It
has taken us far too long to agree this resolution. While
we have been arguing over commas, Al-Assad's planes
have been killing more civilians in their homes and in
their hospitals, imposing unbearable suffering. Despite
the amount of time we have spent in this Chamber over
many years discussing the devastating humanitarian
crisis, we have still not been able to achieve the peace
and security that the Syrian people so desperately need.

As the conflict enters its eighth year, the situation
in eastern Ghouta and elsewhere in the country is far
worse than we ever thought imaginable. The barbarity
and depravity of the Al-Assad regime shows no limits.
We must never lose sight of the fact that the pictures
we see and the stories we hear from this comfortable
Chamber are the agonizing reality for hundreds
of thousands of civilians - for men, women and
children who are being forced to eke out an existence
underground to avoid being killed by a regime that
commits daily atrocities against its own people.

I have heard some say that the information about
the situation in eastern Ghouta is propaganda. A doctor
in eastern Ghouta, having heard such comments, said
this morning:

"Amid the chaos and the bombs, it is the not being
believed that almost hurts the most. We are dying
here every day. And when people say that they do
not believe us, that is pain upon pain."

This is not propaganda. It is a living hell for hundreds
ofthousands ofresidents of eastern Ghouta. As we have
repeated many times, the intentional and systematic
targeting of civilians and civilian objects not only
violates international humanitarian law, it is a war
crime. The United Kingdom will be unrelenting in our
campaign to ensure accountability.

By having voted in favour of the resolution today,
we are standing up and saying that we will not stand by
and let this happen. In the face of escalating violence,
devastation and suffering, we must all now take
practical steps to improve the situation for those living
and dying in a hell of one man's making. The resolution
demonstrates our resolve to put a stop to the brutal
violence. It demands that all parties cease hostilities
without delay. That means right now, immediately.

The role and responsibility of the Council does
not end with the adoption of this resolution, quite the
opposite. All States Members of the United Nations,
but particularly Council members, must now take
responsibility for ensuring that the resolution is
implemented in full, without delay.

The resolution calls for the Council to review its
implementation within 15 days, but we must all be
active in supporting and monitoring implementation
from the moment we step out of the Chamber. If we see
any of the parties violating the terms of the resolution,
we must bring it back to the Council immediately.

Those with any influence over the Syrian
regime - Russia, Iran - have a particular
responsibility to ensure that the ceasefire is respected
in full and without delay, that all sieges are ended and
that humanitarian aid is delivered. This is the absolute
minimum that the people of Syria deserve.

As much as we welcome the adoption of this
resolution today, it is only a small step. Just as one aid
convoy in three months to a besieged area cannot even
begin to address the humanitarian crisis, one resolution
alone cannot solve the situation in Syria. We must do
everything in our collective power to ensure that this
resolution is effective in delivering for those whom we
have failed to date. We must all send a clear message to
the Al-Assad regime: abandon your attempt to pursue a
military strategy, stop fighting and engage seriously in
United Nations-led political talks in Geneva.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the words of my
Foreign Secretary. The entire world is looking at the
Al-Assad regime, Russia and Iran. They hold the keys
not only to the end of this obscene conflict, but to the
safety, humanitarian aid and basic medical treatment
that is being denied to millions of people right now
in Syria. For the mother giving birth underground in
eastern Ghouta, for the child unable to learn as schools
are closed for yet another day, for the doctor battling air
strikes to treat patients in Idlib - all of us sitting here
today owe it to the people of Syria to work together with
renewed and unyielding energy to achieve a political
solution that will bring peace to the Syrian people.

