Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation is deeply concerned about
the humanitarian tragedy unfolding in eastern Zaire, the
great loss of human life and the sudden displacement of
nearly 1.5 million Rwandese and Burundian refugees and
of tens of thousands of Zairians who have found themselves
cut off from external aid. The situation threatens to grow
into a regional military conflict that would doom all hopes
for the restoration of peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region.

Russia, like other members of the Security Council,
urgently calls on all of the belligerent parties to cease
hostilities immediately, enter into political dialogue and
refrain from any actions that might exacerbate the crisis.
The task of the United Nations and of the entire
international community is to promote reconciliation and
stabilization in this region in every possible way and to
ensure the necessary humanitarian assistance to its suffering
population. Russia, for its part, is continuing actively to
render such assistance in cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

But, of course, the main priority now is the
implementation of emergency humanitarian measures to
save the lives of hundreds of thousands of refugees and
displaced persons and that to promote their voluntary and
orderly return to their homes. That is precisely what the
Security Council has been considering over the past few
days. The solution to this urgent task was also the aim of
resolution 1078 (1996), which the Council adopted a week
ago. It not only clearly highlighted all of the indispensable
political factors, but also in fact approved the very concept
of sending a multinational force to eastern Zaire. That
resolution, which reflected the responsible approach of the
Security Council to this emergency situation, helped hasten
the formation of the multinational force. Now, when the
parameters, format, mandate and objectives of this
operation have been clearly defined, the next logical step is
to adopt the new draft resolution on the basis of the text
submitted, which would immediately launch the deployment
of the force.

I should like to pay a well-deserved tribute to the
Government of Canada, which has undertaken to lead the
multinational force, assuming a difficult burden of
responsibility in carrying out this highly complex
humanitarian action. I should also like to pay tribute to

 

those States that have already expressed their readiness to
participate in the action.

We trust that, in implementing its mandate, the
multinational force will act impartially and in cooperation
with the Secretary-General, the United Nations
Coordinator for humanitarian assistance and the relevant
humanitarian organizations and that it will regularly
inform the Security Council of the course of the
operation. We expect that all interested countries in the
region will render full support to the actions of the
multinational force and will closely cooperate with it and
with the humanitarian agencies to alleviate the suffering
of hundreds of thousands of people.

We consider important in all respects the provisions
of the draft resolution providing for the significant
participation of African contingents. If necessary, this
participation will be financed by the voluntary trust fund
established by the Secretary-General. We also attach great
significance to the draft resolution's reiteration of the
urgent need for an international conference on peace,
security and development in the Great Lakes region under
the auspices of the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity to ensure a comprehensive political
solution to the problems of the region.

The operation of the multinational force is time-
bound. Eventually, the Security Council will have to take
a stand regarding further measures. Prejudging these
measures in any way here and now would be premature.
We should not forget the bitter experiences of several past
situations, when the shift from a multinational force to a
United Nations operation was not sufficiently worked out
in detail, with sometimes catastrophic consequences. In
other situations, incidently, the idea of "passing the torch"
from a multinational force to a United Nations operation
has been rejected outright. To avoid ill-considered actions
and double standards, the Security Council must not
hasten to become engaged, but each time must, with a
sense of full responsibility, consider the possibility of
adopting one or more decisions in the light of the
Secretary-General's recommendations, of the real situation
and, of course, of the positions of the parties directly
involved. It is precisely from that perspective that our
delegation reads operative paragraph 12; on the basis of
this understanding, we shall vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

