Mr. Melescanu (Romania) (spoke in French): I
commend the French presidency of the Security Council,
Madam President, on its initiative to convene this open
debate on preventing and combating the financing of
terrorism. Let me also express my deep gratitude for the
very informative briefings by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the French Republic, Mr. Jean-Yves Le
Drian; Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov;
Mr. Marshall Billingslea, President of the Financial
Action Task Force; and Ms. Mercy Buku, an expert in
anti-money-laundering and countering the financing
of terrorism.

Romania associates itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union. I will
make several remarks in my national capacity.

In the current context characterized by multiple
and diverse threats linked to terrorism, which seriously
jeopardize peace and security, our national role
and, above all, our role as a responsible actor at the
international level are of paramount importance. Despite
the fact that national, regional and international efforts to
combat terrorism have been intensified, responses have
too often not been fully adapted to the ever-changing
working methods used by terrorist organizations to carry
out their attacks. Terrorist organizations have shown
themselves capable of acquiring their own resources
through criminal activities, such as drug trafficking,
smuggling networks and directly extorting populations.
However, when they lack the necessary financial
resources, they are nonetheless also able to carry out
attacks with reduced financial resources, entailing a
significant impact and immense loss of human life.
Consequently, the prevention of terrorist financing is a
necessary pillar in the fight against terrorism, and we
support all international and regional measures adopted
to prevent and combat this major threat.

Romania has taken a series of legislative and
administrative measures to ensure the protection of
all persons on its territory, while at the same time
ensuring that the fight against terrorism is conducted
in accordance with our international obligations
and the applicable international and national human
rights provisions. To that end, we have set up a special
structure called the National System for Preventing and
Combating Terrorism, made up of 21 public authorities.
Several of the System's authorities are directly
involved in activities to combat terrorist financing
and have developed a strategy that relies heavily on
the prevention aspect. Romania criminalized terrorist
financing beginning in 2002, and our regulatory and
oversight authorities are engaged in a process to clarify
our legislation in that area.

At the same time, we support the development and
implementation of programmes and measures aimed
at strengthening the protection of our financial system
against any form of illegal use by persons and entities
involved in terrorist and criminal activities. Romania's
extensive network of bilateral and multilateral
agreements in the area of preventing and combating
terrorism demonstrates our willingness to help establish
a broader and deeper international legal framework that
will enable us to respond effectively to the evolving
terrorist threat. We support concerted international
efforts to combat the financing of terrorism, geared
towards building upon the measures provided for in
the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism, which Romania ratified,
and resolution 1373 (2001). An additional meaningful
demonstration of Romania's support for the joint
commitment of the entire international community in
the fight against terrorism is its sponsorship of today's
resolution 2462 (2019), on preventing and combating
the financing of terrorism.

We hope to continue cooperation within the
European Union so as to deepen a comprehensive
approach to the combat terrorism financing. We also
believe that it is necessary to improve and update our
data on the sources and methods used by terrorist
groups to acquire financing. We commend the work of
all United Nations agencies with expertise in the fight
against terrorism and remain open to dialogue and close
cooperation with them on this subject.

