Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I wish to thank you, Madam President, for
having convened this debate on the situation in Haiti. I
recognize and thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for the detailed
report she presented to the Security Council today
(S/2014/162).

Colombia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Uruguay on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti recognizing the progress
made in strengthening democracy in the country.

The enactment of the Electoral Act and the
collaboration among the various parties and the
Government of President Martelly with a View to
holding legislative, municipal and local elections are
encouraging signs. The elections represent a significant
challenge that will require support and assistance
from the international community, primarily through
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH).

However, it is clear that Haiti still faces multiple
challenges. That is why I take this opportunity to
reiterate Colombia's continuous support to Ms. Honore
and the valuable work of MINUSTAH to ensure the
lasting well-being of the Haitian people, to whom we
South Americans owe a historic debt as they help us
towards our own national independence.

Colombia participates in MINUSTAH. Our
police are supporting the fight against the global drug
problem, transnational organized crime, extortion
and kidnapping. Since 2013, following calls from the
Council to broaden the role of women in peacekeeping,
our schools have trained Haitian women police
officers in Colombia and, in the field of development
cooperation, we support training in the areas of
coffee production, food and nutritional security,
the refurbishment of housing and basic sanitation,
neighbourhood regeneration and support for technical
training.

Security, stability, better living conditions for the
Haitian people and strengthened democratic institutions
must continue to be the focus of the international
community's commitment to Haiti. It is clear that
MINUSTAH cannot continue indefinitely, but we must
be cautious when considering its gradual drawdown,
because the achievements attained must not be put at
risk.

Colombia calls for the responsible gradual
drawdown of MINUSTAH, taking into account the
points raised in the latest report of the Secretary-
General, which notes that there are still important
gaps when it comes to institutions and security. The
upcoming legislative, municipal and local elections
and the presidential elections of 2015 represent a
challenge in the consolidation of democracy in Haiti
requiring appropriate support and assistance from
the international community, primarily through
MINUSTAH.

