Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Mr.
Minister, we are honoured by the fact that you have
chosen to chair this important meeting. We congratulate
Botswana on its ascension to the presidency of the
Council and look forward to working closely with
Ambassador Legwaila as he wisely guides us through this
month's work.

 

We are also most appreciative of the outstanding
management of the Council by the Ambassador of
Argentina last month. His efficiency and humour were
invaluable to our work.

I should also like to welcome the Foreign Ministers of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to our
proceedings. We very much appreciate their presence and
support.

Finally, I should like to welcome our good friend, the
Foreign Minister of Angola, to these very important
proceedings.

Today the Council has taken an important step to
support peace in Angola and the tide of democracy
sweeping southern Africa.

The Lusaka Protocol, signed on 20 November 1994,
has, we hope, brought an end to the long civil strife that
has plagued Angola. It is an agreement that meets the
legitimate concerns of both Angolan parties. It provided
concrete guarantees of UNITA's political and physical
survival, through its participation in all sectors of the
Government, the military and the police. And it ensures that
UNITA will voluntarily relinquish its armed forces and
assume its legitimate role as an opposition political party.
The Lusaka Protocol and the efforts of the Angolan parties
to fulfil their commitments are vital and promising steps on
the road to a lasting peace in Angola. The third United
Nations Verification Mission in Angola (UNAVEM. III) will
form an integral part of that process.

However, there is disturbing news today that Mr.
Jonas Savimbi is casting doubt on the Lusaka Protocol. The
resolution, in its twelfth preambular paragraph, stresses the
need for President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi

"to meet without delay with a view to building the
necessary political momentum for the successful
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol".

That meeting now becomes more critical in the light of
Mr. Savimbi's remarks. We strongly urge both leaders to
meet immediately.

My Government wishes to emphasize that any
deployment of infantry units in UNAVEM. III cannot
proceed without the Secretary-General's report that the
Lusaka Protocol is being effectively implemented.
Therefore, our message to all parties is very clear: do not
make a serious mistake at this crucial time. Do the right
thing for your people and for the future of your country.
This resolution represents the international community's
confidence in the Angolan people. We hope that in the
coming days it will not be undermined by any of their
leaders.

The mission of UNAVEM. III has clear objectives,
as described in the Lusaka Protocol: to monitor
disarmament and demobilization of combatants, to assist
military and police integration and to facilitate the
incorporation of UNITA into the Angolan Government.
When these objectives have been achieved, UNAVEM. III
will end its mandate. We have been clear in stating in the
resolution our expectation that all of this can be
accomplished within two years. We mean to hold the
Angolan parties to their commitment to complete the
process.

The people of Angola deserve our support in helping
to end the war. The Lusaka Protocol offers a genuine
opportunity to construct a lasting peace, and the
coordinated involvement of a United Nations peace-
keeping force is vital to its implementation. A return to
peace will help protect the impressive democratic
movement throughout southern Africa and provide an
opportunity for the Angolan people to realize the
economic potential of their rich land. Despite the war,
Angola provided major oil exports. Diamond mining and
excellent agricultural lands offer the hope of prosperity.
Peace will end the bloodshed and waste that Angola has
endured for more than 30 years.

But we have to be vigilant in providing this support.
The United Nations and UNAVEM. can assist the process
of political reconciliation, but it is up to the parties
themselves to demonstrate by their actions the political
will to fulfil the Lusaka Protocol. That is why we think
it important that the Secretary-General inform the Council
every month of progress in deploying UNAVEM. III and
in implementing the Lusaka Protocol, and why it is
important to express our intention to review the role of
the United Nations in Angola if the cooperation required
from the parties, upon which UNAVEM. III is based, is
substantially delayed or not forthcoming. It cannot be
stressed often enough that the parties must take action to
live up to their commitments. The Lusaka Protocol clearly
sets out a timetable, on which the parties have already
fallen more than a month behind. Both the Government
and UNITA must, to quote the Lusaka Protocol,

"furnish the United nations with details concerning
their respective forces to include number of men,

 

composition and type of force, type of equipment and
specific location." (S/1994/144], annex, p. 13, para. (c))

As the Protocol itself notes,

"This will allow the United Nations to install the
appropriate verification, monitoring or control
mechanisms." (ibid)

The Protocol signed by the parties themselves lays out
what they must do. But, as we have seen in the past, and in
Mr. Savimbi's remarks today, the parties are sometimes
reluctant to carry out their agreements. This recalcitrance
must end, for without the input and active cooperation of
the parties, the peace-keeping effort we are about to embark
upon can have no more success than past efforts, and it will
not be sustained by this body.

We also need to ensure that the support of the
international community is used effectively by the Angolan
parties and that the United Nations presence does not
become an excuse for failure to move forward. The initial
mandate of the operation will be for six months, and the
Council will be in a position to review progress before
reviewing the mandate. The peace process detailed in the
Lusaka Protocol is scheduled to be completed in May 1996.
We have in this resolution declared the Council's
expectation that UNAVEM. will conclude its operations by
February 1997 - that is giving the Angolans enough time
to hold elections scheduled to take place once the peace
process has been completed.

The Angolan Government has offered to help offset
the cost of UNAVEM. III, including by providing free or at-
cost petroleum, aircraft and buildings, in addition to the
usual waivers of customs duties and other fees. The
resolution we have adopted calls for active exploration with
both parties of substantial additional contributions to help
cover the costs of peace-keeping. It also requests the
Secretary-General to report information on such
contributions. It is fitting and fair that the rich natural
resources of Angola be made available to support
UNAVEM. III.

In closing, let me reiterate my Government's
determination to key our support for this operation in
Angola to the actions of the Angolans themselves. If
Angola's leaders are prepared to make peace by taking
concrete steps towards disarmament and demobilization of
troops, then the United States will support efforts to keep
that peace. If they are prepared to help offset the significant
costs of this operation, we will continue to support it. For
we have learned elsewhere that United Nations peace-
keeping can be effective only when the psychology of
war gives way to a commitment to peace. My
Government hopes that such a transformation has truly
taken hold in Angola.

Many have worked hard to mediate an end to
decades of civil war and to foster reconciliation in
Angola. Peace in Angola would end Africa's longest-
running conflict, one that has cost up to a million lives,
crippled 100,000 people and left 7 million refugees and
displaced persons. With our decision today we have
advanced substantially the prospect that the hope of the
Lusaka Protocol, and the promise of peace in Angola,
can be realized.

