Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium)(spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated
countries of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as
Iceland and Liechtenstein, European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) countries belonging to the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
statement.

Above all, I should like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the Council
presidency during a month that will be tightly packed
and filled with challenges, all of which we know you
will be able to meet. I should also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Hans Haekkerup, for all of his comprehensive and
regular briefings. We should also like to congratulate
him for the scope of the work he has carried out, along
with the men and women of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), in order
to implement Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
and we would reassure them of our support in their
coming tasks.

The European Union will indeed continue to
assist UNMIK in its efforts to develop effective, multi-
ethnic and democratic provisional institutions of self-
government which meet the European Union's
standards, particularly as regards human rights and
good governance. The same applies to everything
concerning the implementation of law and order
through strengthening the police force and developing
an effective and objective judicial system. Finally, it
will support UNMIK's efforts in setting up the
foundations for sustainable economic development in
the context of a market economy.

Among these important aims, recent
developments concerning the preparation of the
elections to be held on 17 November obviously draw
our attention. The European Union welcomes the
registration of a considerable number of Serbian
electors in Kosovo over recent weeks. Allow me to
emphasize, yet again, the importance we attribute to
the massive participation in the ballot by all the
communities in Kosovo so as to ensure that they are
suitably represented in the new democratically elected
institutions, as pointed out by previous speakers. We
also welcome the certification of the "Return" coalition
of Serbian political parties for the future elections. The
positive role played by Belgrade in the registration of
electors and political parties should now be followed
by a clear appeal to the Serbian community in Kosovo
to take part in the elections. This is highly important.

Lastly, sustained attention and collaboration of all
the parties are still necessary to resolve the issues of
security, missing persons and the return of displaced
persons. As the Secretary-General's Special
Representative said, considerable progress has been
made in this area, despite the problems that persist.
Close collaboration between Belgrade, UNMIK and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) remains vital in this connection.

The situation of Mitrovica is still of the utmost
sensitivity. We would encourage the Albanian political
leaders to take all the confidence-building measures
possible to allow the return to Mitrovica of the non-
Albanian communities. We would likewise encourage
the Serbian political leaders to take similar confidence-
building steps to enable Albanian families to live and
work in peace in the north of Mitrovica and the north
of Kosovo. Generally speaking, and to avoid any fresh
misunderstandings, the European Union recommends
that the important decisions directly affecting the
population of Mitrovica and northern Kosovo be
accompanied by an intensive media campaign.

We hope that The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia continues, for its part, to take decisive steps
towards the national reconciliation of all its
communities. The Security Council, in its resolution
1371 (2001), has associated itself with the efforts made
by the Member States and international organizations
concerned to support application of the Framework
Agreement and, in this respect, has energetically
supported the establishment of a multinational security
presence. The European Union would encourage the
Parliament and all the democratic forces of The former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to continue to
commit themselves to the further legislative work
needed to implement the Framework Agreement. The
European Union would point out that full and fair
implementation of the Framework Agreement by all the
parties concerned is the only guarantee of a return to
peace, of national reconciliation and of rapprochement
with the European Union.

The deadline of 17 November will soon be upon
us. These elections, and the democratic institutions to
emerge from them, will provide impetus for the
advancement of implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). Even if, for the past few weeks, our attention is
mainly drawn to this event, it is nonetheless only one
stage in a process that will require even closer attention
on the part of the international community. More than
ever, collaboration, cooperation and partnership will be
the watchwords of our future endeavours. The
European Union is making this one of its main
priorities.

