Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kubis, and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin, for their statements.

I align myself with the statement that will be made
by the observer of the European Union.

On 18 June, Afghanistan entered the final phase of
the transition, which will come to an end in a little over
a year. Afghan security forces are now responsible for
security throughout the country, highlighting the fact
that Afghanistan's sovereignty has been restored. This
success was made possible by the international forces,
who will continue to support their Afghan counterparts
until the end of 2014.

The international community's presence alongside
Afghanistan will not end with the transitional period.
International partners in Afghanistan, such as France,
have formalized or are in the process of formalizing,
with the Afghan Government, a framework for different
bilateral relations based on strengthened military and
civilian cooperation. Moreover, the contours of the
future international missions to support the Afghan
security forces are being defined, in response to
requests from the Afghan authorities and in accordance
with the decisions that have been taken .

This is thus the beginning of a new, promising era
for Afghanistan that is also fraught with risks. Everyone
around Afghanistan and inside the country is closely
following developments in the situation. But, as pointed
out by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2013/535),
Afghanistan now also has a number of assets, in the
midst of a volatile environment. We must build on these
pillars and continue to strengthen them.

First, the Afghan electoral process must be
exemplary. On 5 April 2014, Afghans will elect a new
president. This election will be an important milestone
for the international community and its long-term
support to Afghanistan, according to the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. These elections should be
held as scheduled. They must be credible, inclusive,
transparent and peaceful.

We note with satisfaction the legislative measures
adopted during the summer, which bode well for the
election preparations. We welcome the opening on
Monday of the registration period for candidates. We
encourage all parties to take ownership of the electoral
process and to use the public forum to make their voices
heard. Deep differences remain in the vision of what
Afghanistan should be. They must be integrated into
the political process.

Secondly, the quality of the Afghan security
forces must be further strengthened. The resurgence of
fighting has led to an increase in casualties among the
security forces and civilians. But the Afghan National
Security Forces are standing firm and showing that the
efforts of the international community to train them are
beginning to bear fruit.

We are shocked by the murders of women police
officers. An increase in the number of female Afghan
police and their protection are vital to allowing Afghan
women to feel as protected as men are. We welcome
in this respect the development plan of the Ministry
of Interior to increase their numbers. The deployment
of female police personnel to polling stations will also
be crucial to enabling women to participate in the
presidential election.

Thirdly, the commitment of all international
partners to Afghanistan must be reaffirmed. We
welcome the dialogue undertaken with the partners of
the region who have a vested interest in the stability
and development of the country, including through
the Istanbul Process. We emphasize in this regard
the importance of the regional context in the fight
against the production and trafficking of drugs and the
mobilization of the international community within the
framework of the Paris Pact.

The international community will continue
to support Afghanistan during this period of
transformation. The commitments of Afghanistan's
international partners, particularly donors, must be
clearly laid out. France will therefore soon release
€2 million for the Independent Election Commission
through the United Nations Development Programme.

Furthermore, we believe that the United Nations
should be called upon to shoulder greater responsibility
in Afghanistan and strengthen the political role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), which is in ourview imperative to facilitating
the implementation of the political processes. To this
end, we believe it particularly important to simplify
the Mission's mandate and to strengthen its capacity
to coordinate the funds, programmes and specialized
agencies of the United Nations. Finally, we support the
continued presence of the Mission in every area of the
country.

I would conclude by saying that only a genuine
and inclusive inter-Afghan political process will ensure
the emergence of a stable and peaceful Afghanistan.
The dialogue must be led by Afghans, in accordance
with the principles set by them and endorsed by the
international community in Bonn in 2011, and by the
Security Council.

Many uncertainties remain, and efforts should be
pursued. However, we can collectively contain the risks
by relying on an Afghanistan that is stronger today than
it has been at any time during the past 30 years.

