Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): My delegation welcomes
the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and Ambassador
Vlora Citaku of Kosovo, back to New York, and thanks
them both for their statements. We also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his insightful briefing.

My delegation welcomes the election of Mr. Hashim
Thaci as the new President of Kosovo. We commend his
message on the normalization of relations with Serbia,
as well as his priorities, which include the promotion of
human rights and the countering of radicalization and
violent extremism in Kosovo. We hope to see under his
leaderhip sustained focus by Kosovo on reconciliation,
unity, sociopolitical reforms and economic development.
We would also like to pay tribute to former President
Atifete Jahjaga for her leadership and significant
contribution towards Kosovo's nation-building over the
past five years.

Malaysia is concerned about the violent
protests - mentioned by Mr. Tanin - by the opposition
parties and their supporters in relation to the presidential
elections, and the implementation of agreements signed
between Pristina and Belgrade through dialogue
facilitated by the European Union (EU). We reiterate
our calls on the relevant parties in Kosovo to cease
violence, intimidation and inflammatory rhetoric, and
to resolve their grievances through democratic channels,
dialogue and engagement. We hope that, under the new
leadership, Kosovo leaders will continue to engage in
an inclusive dialogue to address the people's concerns.

We recognize Kosovo's aspiration for European
integration and welcome the latest development to that
end, including the transfer of Kosovo to the visa-free
list in the Schengen area and the entry into force of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement between
Kosovo and the EU. We call on the leaders of Kosovo
to remain steadfast in implementing the Agreement and
the necessary socioeconomic reforms towards peace,
stability and prosperity for Kosovo and the region.

Malaysia also takes note of the progress made
during the reporting period to implement Kosovo's
five-year strategy to counter violent extremism
and radicalization.

With regard to ensuring justice and accountability,
we commend the ratification of the host agreement
between Kosovo and the Netherlands on the Kosovo
specialist chambers to try alleged crimes committed
during the Kosovo conflict between 1998 and 2000.

Malaysia also welcomes the establishment of
a Government commission and procedures for the
verification and recognition of the status of survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence as civilian victims, in
collaboration with the UN-Women. Such developments
are long overdue to ensure justice for the victims of
sexual violence during the Kosovo conflict.

With regard to the historic 2013 Brussels Agreement
between Belgrade and Pristina, we wish to see more
movement towards its implementation, including the
integration of the judiciary and the creation of an
association of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo.

We reiterate the need to implement outstanding
commitments in the spirit of dialogue, cooperation and
constructive engagement, to build confidence and trust
between Pristina and Belgrade. We therefore appreciate
the positive signals and commitment by both sides at
the highest level in that regard.

Lastly, I join my other colleagues in reaffirming
support for the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, which continues to play a key role
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo. We also commend the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Kosovo, and the important role of the EU Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Force in
ensuring peace, security, and the rule oflaw in Kosovo.

