Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): As this is
the first time that I take the floor since you assumed the
presidency of the Security Council, allow me,
Mr. President, to convey my heartfelt congratulations
to you. I know that our Charge d'affaires has already
done so, but I too would like to express to you my
delegation's full cooperation. I wish you every success
as you lead us in our work.

My delegation would also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting to undertake
a periodic review of the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. My delegation welcomes
the presence of Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, who is with us for the first time.
We welcome his participation in this meeting and
assure him of our support. We also congratulate him on
his important briefing.

The holding of this meeting attests to the
Council's determination to continue, and to expand, its
consideration ofthe item on the agenda. That item is of
concern to both the international community and the
United Nations. The road map, the aide-memoire and
the regional programmes that have been the product of
lengthy work by the Council serve as guidelines and as
a checklist for the Council in better understanding the
stakes and multiple challenges associated with the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and ensuring
that they are taken into account at the time
peacekeeping operations are established.

Given that the protection of civilians takes place
in a complex and changing environment, my delegation
believes that those instruments must be constantly
reviewed and updated in the light of circumstances and
the situation on the ground. In that connection, we
appreciate the good work done by the Secretary-
General that has led to the submission of the revised
aide-memoire. In particular, we welcome the inclusion
of new elements relating, among other things, to the
issues of women, child soldiers, refugees, persons
displaced within their own countries, persons in transit
and host communities. Those issues should be
considered in the establishment of any peace operation.
In that regard, questions arising from the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and from sexual
exploitation in armed conflict must increasingly be the
focus of our attention.

With regard to the link between terrorism and
armed conflict, my country has always said that this is
an urgent matter of concern that deserves in-depth
consideration. In cooperation with the appropriate
bodies, the Secretariat could enlighten us further on
this subject.

My delegation welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations that have led to the establishment of a
reference base on protection norms. We now have the
responsibility to implement them effectively. The
international community - and in particular the
United Nations, Member States and parties to conflicts,
as well as regional and subregional organizations, non-
governmental organizations and civil society - have a
leading role to play in that regard. We are pleased to
note that, acting with a number of partners and drawing
on past experience, the United Nations is putting in
place several preventive and corrective measures to
improve the situation of civilians in armed conflict.
Strong mobilization for access by humanitarian
assistance to recipients and for the protection of United
Nations personnel, associated personnel and
international humanitarian personnel, as well as the
need for impartiality by those staff and their respect for
national laws, should also be emphasized. States,
which are the primary guarantors of protection, as well
as armed groups, must, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and human rights,
shoulder their responsibilities to provide unconditional
access to humanitarian assistance. The resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council
regarding the protection of United Nations and
associated personnel, including international
humanitarian personnel, should continue to underpin
the actions undertaken by the various stakeholders
concerned.

My country attaches great priority to this debate,
not only because we are members of the Security
Council but also because we belong to a subregion that
continues to be beset by conflicts and crises whose
tragic consequences on civilians require no comment.
We are therefore duty-bound to recommit ourselves to
contributing to peace efforts in the subregion and
throughout the world in order to find the appropriate
solution to help protect civilians in armed conflict.
That is a subject that covers a wide range of issues,
including those of women, peace and security, children
in armed conflict, mines and HIV/AIDS. In seeking to
attain that goal, my delegation believes we should
explore the possibility of carrying out an in-depth,
comprehensive study of those subjects in order to
identify commonalities and to endeavour, as far as
possible, to find common solutions, while bearing in
mind the characteristics of each of those areas. Such an
approach would assist us in rationalizing our work and
better coordinating our efforts.

Moreover, my delegation believes that the field
missions of the Security Council have helped to raise
institutional awareness. Such missions should be
systematically used to raise awareness about the issue
of protection. In addition, the Secretariat should
periodically submit reports on that matter. That would
help us to evaluate the implementation of the road map
and the aide-memoire in order that they can be revised
as necessary. My delegation would also like to suggest
that the Secretariat organize seminars for interested
stakeholders to receive a though briefing about the road
map and the aide-memoire. That would make possible
a better understanding of those instruments and help to
facilitate their implementation.

In that regard, my country welcomes the
important plans developed, and the programmes of
action undertaken, by the Department for Humanitarian
Affairs in regions and countries affected by conflict,
including Liberia, Palestine, Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The establishment
in Liberia - for the first time - of a cross-cutting
human rights protection unit is a commendable
initiative that deserves to be extended to other areas
concerned. That is the best way to promote at the
international and regional levels a culture of protecting
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Those steps should also be supplemented by the
implementation of the eight points for humanitarian
action highlighted in Mr. Egeland's briefing.

Finally, while we support the proposals and
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Secretary-General, we reiterate our conviction that the
international community, without minimizing the
question of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, should concentrate more on preventing
conflicts and on peace-building in order better to serve
the noble and inspiring cause ofinternational peace and
security.

