Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, after having conveyed to you the warm
greetings and best wishes of your friend and brother,
Cheikh Tidiane Gadio, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Senegal, I would at the outset like to express sincere
congratulations on behalf of the Senegalese delegation
for the extremely important initiative that you have
taken in organizing this debate on such a pressing issue
as child soldiers.

More than 300,000 children under the age of 18
are participating actively in armed conflict throughout
the world. Over a million children have met this fate
over the past 10 years, and hundreds of thousands of
other children are enlisted in armed forces in countries
where there is currently no armed conflict. These child
soldiers must carry out all types of tasks. While some
of them are involved in combat, others are often used
for sexual purposes or as spies, messengers or servants.
Some child soldiers must also lay or clear landmines,
with all the risks that this activity entails.

Often enlisted by force, equipped with
sophisticated and deadly weapons and supplied with
intoxicating substances, which make them even more
dependent on their group, child soldiers become human
bombs, who are a danger both to themselves and to
others.

This bleak picture, which is far from being
exhaustive, shows us to what extent the scourge of
child soldiers is a permanent threat to our societies and
a serious violation of the rights of children by those
who are recruiting them.

International norms and principles for the
protection of children affected by armed conflict exist.
Moreover, officials of armies or armed groups that
engage in enlisting children are often known and the
theatre of their operations is identifiable, because these
are usually well known areas of conflict or tension.
Ultimately, we are dealing here with an equation where
all the factors are known - in other words, an
equation without unknowns. Yet, the international
community, despite the consistent efforts it has made,
has always encountered enormous difficulties in
tackling this problem.

The scourge of child soldiers has not yet been
brought under control and remains a topic of great
concern for the United Nations. Yet, Senegal is
convinced that the international community can defeat
this evil if it can step up its actions in at least the
following three areas.

First, there must be broader ratification and
rigorous implementation of the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child pertaining to
the involvement of children in armed conflict, which
entered into force on 12 February 2002. However,
before that can occur, all States must show true
political will and agree that the implementation of the
Protocol must be subjected to strict and continuous
oversight. Moreover, there needs to be greater use of
the sanctions regime under the international law that
prohibits the recruitment of, and participation by,
children in armed conflicts. In that respect, the Rome
Statute establishing the International Criminal Court is
an effective cornerstone in that it considers it a war
crime to recruit or enlist children under the age of 15
years into armed groups or forces, or to actively
involve children in hostilities.

Nevertheless, it is true that law can only have an
impact if it is effectively applied and if Violations are
followed by sanctions. Thus, the Senegalese delegation
is of the View that rigorous application of such
sanctions would act as a real deterrent.

Secondly, the international community should
enhance its efforts aimed at raising awareness and at
prevention. In that respect, it is crucial that substantive
programmes be initiated in countries where conflicts
are ongoing, with a view to providing alternative
prospects to children and their families. In that regard,
the fights against poverty and illiteracy are, inter alia,
key elements of these programmes where civil society
and non-governmental organizations play a pivotal
role.

Thirdly and finally, maintaining and enhancing
programmes for the demobilization and reintegration of
child soldiers are, in our view, of the utmost
importance. Speakers from this morning and this
afternoon have already highlighted those issues, so I
will not address them.

Apart from the elements just mentioned, Senegal
supports unreservedly, the rapid implementation of all
the measures and recommendations set forth in the
report of the Special Representative to the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Otunnu,
whom we congratulate for his commitment to the cause
of child soldiers. My country remains equally
committed, together with all the States members of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), to a conscientious implementation of the
declaration and plan of action signed in 2000 during
the ECOWAS Conference on War-Affected Children.

