First of all, I would like to thank the various speakers for their statements. As participants in the Doha peace talks take a pause following the conclusion of a code of conduct, we call on all parties to take stock of their actions, present and future. Afghanistan is at a crossroads, and we sincerely hope that those talks will bring peace to the Afghan people. In that process, the gains of the past two decades must be preserved and even strengthened, especially with regard to human rights and the strengthening of the position of women. The protection of children must also be at the heart of the negotiations, including confidence-building measures such as the release of detained children and rehabilitation programmes for children associated with armed groups. We urge all parties to ensure the meaningful participation of women in the negotiations. We must listen to the voices of young people, such as Ms. Zadran. Violence must be reduced. We therefore call on all parties, in particular the Taliban, to take immediate steps towards a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire, which is all the more necessary in view of the current pandemic. In that regard, I reiterate our position on sanctions against the Taliban: the delisting of members from the regime under resolution 1988 (2011) is not automatic but depends on the conditions set out in resolution 2513 (2020), including progress in intra-Afghan negotiations and a reduction in violence. The brutality of the Taliban's attacks is in stark contrast to their stated commitment to peace and their participation in peace talks. We condemn the high level of violence against civilians, in particular children. In the third quarter of 2020, the United Nations counted among the victims 773 children - 773 in three months. We also specifically condemn the recent attacks against human rights defenders and journalists and call for the perpetrators to be swiftly brought to justice. In that regard, I stress the importance of combating impunity and the need for transitional justice in Afghanistan. We welcome the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan on victim-centred justice. As this is our last statement on Afghanistan within the framework of our current mandate in the Security Council, I would like to assure the people and the Government of Afghanistan of Belgium's firm commitment as they take the path towards peace and prosperity. At the United Nations, in the European Union (EU) and at the bilateral level, they can count on our support. Over the past five years, we have contributed more than $60 million to the Afghan national army trust fund and, this year, $8.4 million have been earmarked for the acquisition of vaccines and medical equipment for the Afghan army. As the EU made clear at the Geneva Conference last month, our future support will depend on progress in the areas of transparency, good governance, anti-corruption and gender equality. Lastly, I would like to thank the Permanent Missions of Germany and Indonesia, in particular their experts Friedrich Schreder and Kartika Handaruningrum, for their exemplary work as co-penholders over the past two years. We wish the best to their successors, Norway and Estonia.
