Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Allow me at the outset
to thank Mr. Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his very important briefing and
for the principled elements that he raised, especially
the position of the Secretary-General that all these
illegal activities, policies and practices of Israel, the
occupying Power, must stop immediately, especially in
occupied East Jerusalem, and be rescinded.

We also agree totally with Mr. Feltman and many
other leaders, including President Barak Obama
speaking before the General Assembly, that the status
quo cannot be sustained and is not an option. Precisely
for that reason, we have put before the Security Council
a draft resolution reflecting the initiative of President
Mahmoud Abbas that contains elements of a parameter,
with a time frame, to end the occupation. If we cannot
collectively convince the occupying Power to negotiate
with us the end of occupation in order to allow for the
independence of the State of Palestine, and thereby to
actualize the global concensus on a two-State solution,
then the option of the two-State solution may not be
available to us. For that, there Will be no one to blame
except the occupying Power for not responding in a
responsible and positive way in negotiating with us, in
good faith, the end of occupation.

Israel is still insisting that it is not an occupier
and that there is no occupied terroritory, in complete
contradiction to the many relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the United Nations, as well as
the global consensus that the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, are
defined as occupied territory. Israel is not listening or
abiding by the Council's will. It is not listening to those
resolutions, and so long as it continues not to listen,
peace will not move forward. On the contrary, we will
face explosive situations such as that we are facing
today in occupied East Jerusalem.

I thank you, Madam, for your swift response to our
urgent appeal and to the formal request of Jordan, the
Arab representative on the Security Council, to convene
this emergency meeting to address the critical situation
in occupied East Jerusalem, which clearly has a bearing
on the crisis situation in the rest of Palestine, as well as
in the region and far beyond. Jerusalem, the Holy City
of the three monotheistic religions, was and remains
the key to peace. The City is the heart of Palestine and
has historically been the religious, political, social,
economic and cultural centre for the Palestinian people
for centuries. And Jerusalem, a theatre for both conflict
and peace, has always maintained an Arab and Islamic
identity, and will continue to do so.

Yet, Jerusalem is under siege as Israel, the occupying
Power, continues its reckless attempts to change its
character, falsify its history, alter its demography and
negate Palestinian rights and connections to Jerusalem.
Israeli provocations and incitement, particularly
at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, home to the holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque and Qubbat Al-Sakhra * the Dome of the
Rock - are further inflaming this volatile situation,
aggravating religious sentiments, deepening mistrust
and threatening to ignite yet another cycle of violence,
including instigation of religious conflict. Such illegal
Israeli actions are severely exacerbating the conflict
and obstructing a peaceful solution, with grave
implications. We have therefore been instructed by
President Mahmoud Abbas to bring this crisis situation
to the urgent attention of the Security Council, in full
recognition of its Charter duty with respect to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In countless official letters conveyed to the Security
Council and in repeated statements in this Chamber,
we have urged that serious international attention be
given to the crisis in occupied East Jerusalem caused
by Israel's illegal policies, practices and provocations.
We have repeatedly appealed to the Security Council
to uphold its resolutions on Jerusalem - including
resolutions 446 (1979), 452 (1979), 465 (1980), 478
(1980) and 672 (1990) - as an urgent contribution to
reducing tensions and stabilizing the situation on the
ground and as a long-term contribution to the efforts
to achieve a peaceful solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, which is the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
We recall in particular the Council's determination that
all measures taken by Israel, the occupying Power,

"to alter the character and status of the Holy City of
Jerusalem, and in particular the recent 'basic law' on
Jerusalem, are null and void and must be rescinded
forthwith" (resolution 478 (1980), para. 4).

Moreover, we recall the Council's determination that

"the policy and practices of Israel in establishing
settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967 have no legal
validity and constitute a serious obstruction to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East" (resolution 446 (1979), para.]).

The Council further calls on Israel

"to cease, on an urgent basis, the establishment,
construction and planning of settlements in the
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem" (resolution 465 (1980), para. 6).

Have the resolutions been implemented? The answer
is obviously "no". Israel continues to do exactly the
opposite.

While the rest of us seek peace and try any and
every initiative aimed at ending this nearly 50-year
military occupation and salvaging the two-State
solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, Israel
is instead expanding and entrenching its illegitimate
control over occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of
occupied Palestine through countless unlawful policies
and measures.

Moreover, Israel not only denies that East Jerusalem
is occupied and refuses to recognize Palestinian rights
or presence or history with respect to the city, but
actively seeks to negate those rights and to characterize
Jerusalem as a solely Jewish and Israeli city, ignoring
its centrality to the Arab countries and the Muslim
Ummah - for whom Al-Quds Al-Sharif is the first
Qibla and third holiest site - as well as its centrality
to Christianity.

Since the occupation began in 1967, Israel, the
occupying Power, has never ceased its unlawful
attempts to create facts on the ground to alter Palestine's
demography, character, legal status and geography. It
has targeted occupied East Jerusalem in particular with
such illegal measures and has openly permitted and
supported the illegal and violent actions of its settlers
and extremists in the city.

Israeli settlement activities have persisted unabated,
with the construction and expansion of settlements, the
building of the wall and recurrent announcements about
plans for the construction of thousands more settlement
units. The latest declaration, this week, concerns the
construction of another 1,000 units. It was preceded
by an announcement regarding the construction of
more than 2,600 units in the city earlier this month,
which was preceded by the issuance of military orders
to confiscate 1,000 acres of Palestinian land in the
Bethlehem area, and so forth.

Every day the territorial contiguity and integrity of
our State is being fragmented and undermined by those
illegal actions, which seriously diminish the viability
of the two-State solution.

The occupying Power has also continued to
confiscate property, including the seizure last week of
35 Palestinian homes by extremist settlers in the Silwan
neighbourhood of occupied East Jerusalem. Such
actions have forcibly displaced hundreds of Palestinian
families from the city, in addition to their displacement
by other illegal measures, including the demolition
of Palestinian homes, the revocation of Palestinian
residency and threats to forcibly transfer thousands of
Palestine refugee Bedouins, which would be a violation
of their human rights.

Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem also suffer
from acts of raging violence, discrimination and racism
directed against them by Israeli extremists, who persist
in their attacks against Palestinian civilians, including
killings, assaults and kidnapping attempts on children,
as well as attacks against Muslim and Christian holy
sites, including the vandalizing and desecration of
several mosques and churches in the city.

Israeli occupying forces and Jewish extremists
also continue carrying out incursions into the
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound and attacking Palestinian
worshippers. Israeli officials, including the Prime
Minister and members of his Cabinet, persist in their
grotesque competition to see who can most effectively
provoke Palestinian and Muslim sensitivities by
spewing dangerous rhetoric and uttering incitements
and hate speech at an alarming rate.

Provocation continues via attempts to pass
legislation to change the status quo of the holy city.
At the same time, Israel continues its excavations and
tunnelling in the city, including near and under the
holy sites, threatening their integrity, foundations and
sanctity. Stringent restrictions on access to the city,
affecting both Palestinian Muslims and Christians,
severely impede freedom of worship and of movement,
while closures of Palestinian institutions in the city
continue.
We strongly and unequivocally condemn all those
illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of occupied Palestine. Such illegal policies and
measures, along with the deplorable, illegal blockade
of our people in the Gaza Strip, who are suffering
grievously as a result of the disastrous impact of
the recent criminal Israeli war waged against them,
in addition to all the other measures of collective
punishment imposed by Israel on our people, have
created an explosive situation, which, if left unattended,
will deteriorate further, with grave consequences.

That the situation is illegal and unsustainable
and destroys the prospects for peace is not merely
a Palestinian narrative or perspective. It has been
deemed as such by the Council, based on the United
Nations Charter principle of the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force, and the relevant
provisions of international law, particularly the
Fourth Geneva Convention, which strictly prohibits
colonization activities, among other prohibitions. The
positions of the International Court of Justice and the
General Assembly are also very clear in that regard.

Moreover, the international consensus is firm
regarding the illegality of the Israeli settlement
enterprise and the status of Jerusalem, including
non-recognition of Israeli claims to sovereignty over
East Jerusalem and agreement that East Jerusalem
is occupied territory and remains an integral part of
the Palestinian territory that has been belligerently
occupied by Israel since 1967.

The international community, especially the
Security Council, must send a clear message and
reaffirm its established positions and the international
consensus. The Council must fulfil its responsibility
to bring an end to this illegal situation, which has
broad and dangerous political, religious and security
dimensions.

Israel, the occupying Power, must be compelled to
immediately and completely cease its illegal settlement
activities throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and to cease all provocations
and incitements at the holy sites in occupied East
Jerusalem and against the Palestinian people and
their leadership. Israel must be compelled to comply
with international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and to commit to the path of peace. If that
course fails, Israel must be held fully accountable for
its crimes and obstruction of peace.

Jerusalem is a painful reflection of Israel's
entrenched occupation and its total rejection of peace.
Yet, deeply committed to peace, we remain insistent
that Jerusalem become a reflection of our collective
determination to achieve a two-State solution based on
the pre-l967 borders, with an independent, sovereign,
contiguous and democratic State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security.

We therefore reiterate our appeal to the members of
the Security Council and the international community to
support our initiative and adopt a resolution reaffirming
the fundamental parameters of the two-State solution
and delineating a time frame to bring an end to the
Israeli occupation and achieve the independence and
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. Such a
resolution would constitute a major contribution to the
efforts to salvage the prospects for peace and accelerate
its realization, with a view to ultimately ushering in a
new reality in which Jerusalem is a shared capital of
peace and a new era opens up for our peoples and the
region as a whole.

