Mrs. Ogata (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees): I would like to start by thanking
representatives for their very warm expressions of
appreciation for the work that my Office has done,
including myself. This is always a very encouraging
recognition that I always try to pass on to my
colleagues who are really spread out all over the world.

I am also pleased to note that some of the points I
made in my briefing have been responded to with the
promise that the Council will be looking into them
further and also that there was some recognition that
my comments will serve as food for thought.

I was particularly pleased to receive some
response on the question of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) - a matter I
would really like the Council to examine further and on
which I have received assurances from several
delegations - because we cannot take care of
disarmament and demobilization. It is necessary to
have police or military personnel to disarm people who
are armed and we cannot do this. Even with funding
from the World Bank for disarmament and
demobilization, the persons who carry out this task
would have to be people who know that they have to be
armed, so that they can disarm. It is on that basis that
the next step of reintegration will require civil society
involvement and the involvement of humanitarian and
development agencies. We should be ready to take this
on much more quickly, but I think that this division of
responsibility is something on which I would like
further clarification.

I do not think it will be possible for cross-border
mandates for peace to take effect soon. However, I
think that some of the delegations who have visited
West Africa in particular, will have noted how
impossible it is to contain fighting and to stop the
fighting from moving across borders, and will
understand the importance of trying to look at the
border situation.

I am fully aware that no peacekeeping forces can
be deployed along the entire 1,000 kilometre border of
any country. But geography is a very important factor.
There are points through which refugees flee and it is
in those places, for example in Guinea it would be
mainly in two areas - in the west in Forecariah and in
the eastern part in the Gueckedou area - where the
refugees have gone and I think these are the places
where more focused observer missions might make a
big difference, as has been seen in Zaire. That, then, is
the thinking behind my plea , almost, to look at border
areas, which would help not only refugees but prevent
insecurity from spreading.

The third point is about the ladders of option. I
have been talking about ladders of option for
establishing the security of refugee settlements, as well
as security for the humanitarian workers. I would like
to emphasize that we should look first at the local level
and at how local police and law enforcement capacity
can be strengthened. This is where assistance to
develop local capacity is the primary, preliminary step
and then sometimes it becomes necessary to move on
to regional or subregional arrangements. In this area
many States are now helping in regional military
training and so on. This is very welcome and then, at
the very end, as a last resort, international help is
forthcoming.

In my Office we have studied the ladders of
option together with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and have constructed and strengthened our
emergency services unit. We were concentrating on our
own strengthening of emergency services so that I do
not think that we have really contacted Governments
that have offered to enter into partnership through
various stand-by arrangements. But I think we have
now identified areas where we clearly need stand-by
arrangements and support and it is in this sense that we
will be contacting Governments that have already
expressed their readiness, whether in humanitarian
security staff, logistic support or readiness of various
kinds. We would like to come back to the Council
much more systematically and I think we would be
able to do that towards the end of the year. I hope we
will get practical responses, because no organization
should maintain, or can maintain, large standing
capacity. It is really through stand-by arrangements that
I think we will be able to be more effective. The timing
gap is a problem and I agree that it is not just the
peacekeepers or the humanitarian workers that can
maintain stability. This is a very complex question, but
I would still like to say that we need peacekeepers or
observers to come in quickly.

I appreciated that several delegations noted the
importance of funding and I did not mention funding
here. I was referring more to peace and security
management. However, peace and security, staff
security, all require money and this is where I would
like to appeal to the Council. We have arrived at the
fourth quarter with a deficit. A shortfall of $140
million is foreseen, which means we really have to cut
back. Whether it is in the refugee programmes or our
own deployment of very important and necessary staff,
we have to cut down.

For example, I was in Afghanistan recently. I
would like to mention this serious situation, as the
world's largest group of refugees is still the Afghans.
Some 2.5 million have been in Pakistan and Iran for a
long time, almost 20 years. The burden, as the delegate
of Bangladesh mentioned, is very heavy on both the
Governments and people of Pakistan and Iran. Yet, the
situation inside Afghanistan is such that it is not so
easy to promote return. However, in both countries I
have seen Afghan refugees lining up, wanting to be
helped to return.

There also I need resources. It is a small amount
for an initial reintegration package that we would like
to give them. Afghans are wonderful organizers of
transport and they can manage the transportation, but
we still have to have money to give them. With these
funds there would be many more ready to go back. Of
course, there are many other conditions, such as human
rights, girls' and women's education, and so forth. But
people do want to go back. We know how we can
organize this. I have talked with the authorities of
Afghanistan too, but we need funds. This is what I
wanted to add to our appeal, and perhaps from the
peace and security point of view, you could also
underscore the need for funds, if we are to have peace
and security and the resolution of refugee problems.

I am very grateful for the opportunity you have
given me and your assurance of continued support to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.

