Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset I wish to thank the briefers for their presentations.

The recent situation in South Sudan remains
complex. On the one hand, the security situation
in Juba is easing. President Kiir is continuing to
implement the joint communique' (S/2016/776, annex)
issued by the Transitional Government of National
Unity of South Sudan and the Security Council. He
has agreed to the participation of troops from relevant
neighbouring countries in the Regional Protection
Force. Furthermore, the Transitional National
Legislative Assembly has started its work, and the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC) has
organized a workshop on setting up their own permanent
ceasefire and transitional security arrangements. On
the other hand, the overall situation in South Sudan
remains grim, with numerous difficulties involving
humanitarian assistance. The international community
should continue to provide assistance in the following
areas.

First, it is necessary to continue pushing for a
political process aimed at resolving the issue of South
Sudan. The international community should accelerate
efforts to ensure that all of the parties in South Sudan
return to the track of implementing the political
settlement and peace agreement in the interest of
resolving differences through dialogue and negotiation,
in a joint effort to achieve the peace, stability and
development of South Sudan.

China supports all means aimed at strengthening
further implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in the
areas of good offices, the protection of civilians and
assisting humanitarian access, with a View to resolving
the problems encountered in the process of cooperation
with the Transitional Government of National Unity of
South Sudan through patient dialogue and consultation.

Secondly, it is necessary to ensure the full
participation of regional and subregional organizations.
China has consistently backed the settlement of African
issues by Africans using their own methodologies. It
has supported the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development in its leading role in the settlement of the

South Sudan issue. The United Nations must increase
its support to the JMEC Chairperson, Mr. Festus
Mogae, and the African Union High Representative
for South Sudan, Mr. Alpha Oumar Konare, so as to
enhance mutual cooperation and coordination in the
interest of enhancing synergy in the political settlement
of the South Sudan issue.

Thirdly, the implementation of the relevant Council
resolutions must enjoy the support and cooperation of
the Transitional Government of National Unity of South
Sudan. The Transitional Government is committed to
the implementation of the joint communique issued
with the Security Council and the implementation
of resolution 2304 (2016). It is also committed to
supporting the full implementation of the UNMISS
mandate and the work of the humanitarian actors.

The Transitional Government of National Unity of
South Sudan agreed to allow the relevant neighbouring
countries to send their troops to participate in the
regional protection force and agreed to discuss with
UNMISS lands for the regional protection force.
The Security Council and the relevant parties should
seize this opportunity to encourage the Transitional
Government to promote consultations with all parties
involved and implement the joint communique and
relevant Council resolutions in ajoint effort to promote
peace and stability in South Sudan.

Fourthly, China commends Ambassador Seck for
his leadership in the active work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan and has taken note of
the interim report submitted by the Panel of Experts
to the Sanctions Committee (S/2016/963). China urges
the Panel to strictly abide by the Council's mandate
and conduct its work objectively and fairly in putting
forward its practical recommendations to the Sanctions
Committee concerning South Sudan.

In today's complex situation, the Security Council
should send further positive signals to all sides and
encourage all parties in South Sudan to continue their
efforts to implement the peace agreement. The Council
should be prudent in taking action on the sanctions,
with a view to avoiding complicating the situation.

