Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank the President for
convening this quarterly open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing.

In view of the time constraints, I would like to
make a short statement; the full version thereof is being
circulated.

Our position on the Middle East peace process has
been consistent and clear. India supports a negotiated
solution resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living within secure and recognized borders,
side by side at peace with Israel, as endorsed in the
Quartet road map and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

Our continued commitment to the Palestinian cause
and earnestness towards developing stronger bilateral
relations are demonstrated in our successive high-level
visits to Palestine in the recent past. The President
of India visited Palestine on the first-ever State visit
from India, in October 2015. The Indian External
Affairs Minister visited Palestine this month and held
discussions with the Palestinian leadership, including
with President Abbas.

Our approach to Palestine has crystallized into
a policy with three core dimensions, namely, first,
solidarity with the Palestinian people; secondly,
support for the Palestinian cause; and, thirdly, support
for Palestine's nation-building and capacity-building
efforts. India's empathy for the Palestinian cause and
our friendship with the Palestinian people remain
undiluted. This is an integral part of our foreign policy.

As part of our support for the nation-building
efforts of Palestine, we have been consistently
expanding technical and financial assistance to it.
In addition, India annually contributes $1 million
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and has pledged
and contributed $4 million in response to the National
Early Recovery and Reconstruction Plan for Gaza.

India remains firmly convinced that dialogue is the
only viable option to effectively address the Palestinian
issue. We remain hopeful and urge both sides to resume
the peace process soon, for a comprehensive, just and
lasting resolution of the issue.

In Yemen, we have been urging all the parties
concerned to amicably resolve their differences and
find a consensus-based solution. We express our deep
concern about the activities of proscribed outfits and
radicalized and extremist groups in the West Asia and
Gulf region, especially in northern parts of Iraq and
Syria, which are having a critical impact on peace and
stability in the region. We believe that the consolidation
of political processes and solutions while building
durable State institutions will be the effective way to
address such extremism and radicalism in the region.

Turning to Syria, we would like to express our
continued concern at the ongoing violence in the country
and the loss of human life. India has consistently called
for a comprehensive political resolution of the conflict
that brings all the parties to the negotiating table. It has
to be a Syrian-led process and must take into account
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. We
maintain that there can be no military solution to the
conflict.

We are encouraged by resolution 2254 (2015),
adopted on 18 December 2015, which lays out a road
map for a political solution of the Syrian conflict. We
remain hopeful that United Nations mediation efforts
will yield results.

The humanitarian situation in Syria and the
neighbouring countries has to be addressed effectively.
We have contributed $4 million as humanitarian
assistance for Syrian refugees and intend to participate
and contribute in the forthcoming meeting on Syria
scheduled to be held in London in February.

