Mr. Schwaiger: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving the floor to the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey and Croatia and the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, as well as the
Republic of Moldova, Georgia and Ukraine, align
themselves with this declaration.

At the outset, let me express our strongest
condemnation of the terrible attack that took place
yesterday in Mogadishu. Let me also express our
condolences to the Permanent Representative of
Somalia, to the Somali federal institutions, to the
Somali people and to the families of the victims.

The European Union is fully committed to
fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia in the
framework of a comprehensive strategy where the
ownership of regional States is crucial because they
suffer the main consequences of piracy. The EU High
Representative, Lady Ashton, visited the region in May
to confirm that the European Union will support the
region's own efforts in coming up with solutions to
counter piracy and taking leadership in that regard.
Recently, the European Union supported the first
regional workshop on piracy for Eastern and Southern
Africa, organized by the Common Market for Eastern
and Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean Commission
and held in Seychelles on 19 and 20 July. This
workshop demonstrated real regional solidarity and
emerging ownership. We look forward to the second
ministerial meeting, which will take place in Mauritius
in October, where the regional countries are expected
to present and endorse a strategy and action plan on
piracy. The EU has already expressed its readiness to
play a proactive support role by contributing to the
implementation of such a regional strategy.

One important aspect of fighting against piracy is
effective prosecution of suspected pirates captured in
the course of operations. We are grateful to our
partners in the region, who are showing leadership in
this respect. The EU has been providing assistance to
Kenya since May 2009, and since early 2010 also to
Seychelles, to cope with the extra demands placed on
their judicial systems as a result of receiving and
prosecuting transferred piracy suspects. These
programmes are implemented by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. This is an example of
successful coordination and cooperation among the
EU, the United Nations and regional countries, but
there certainly is room for further action. The EU will
continue to offer support to other States in the region
affected by piracy to help develop their judicial
capability as envisaged in the Djibouti Code of
Conduct. We encourage further contributions from
States to the International Trust Fund to Support
Initiatives of States Countering Piracy.

We also hope that conditions in Somalia will
improve, so as to enable Somali authorities to
progressively take on more responsibilities in
prosecuting pirates. The European Union specifically
supports this perspective, including through rebuilding
prisons and supporting judicial processing, which are
part of a wider response programme financed by the
European Union in the area of rule of law and security.
Additional support measures could also be considered
in the future, depending on the anti-piracy
commitments of relevant actors.

The EU is also working on maritime capacity-
building at the regional level in close coordination with
other international partners, in particular the
International Maritime Organization, in order to help
regional coastal states to better respond to piracy and
armed robbery against ships, as well as to other threats
to maritime security and safety. We commend the work
of Working Group 1 of the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia and its efforts to coordinate and
prioritize contributions to building regional counter-
piracy capacity in the region.

While a lot has been done, the fight against
piracy is far from being concluded. We need to find an
effective solution for the prosecution and detention of
pirates which ensures compliance with international
human rights law, and we urge countries in the region
to assume collective responsibility for combating
piracy. A sustainable solution should also include
measures to ensure that those who plan, organize and
finance acts of piracy are brought to justice.

We welcome the Secretary-General's continued
engagement in the fight against impunity for those
responsible for acts of piracy, and we are studying with
interest his valuable report (S/2010/394) on possible
options to further the aim of prosecuting and
imprisoning persons responsible for acts of piracy.
These options, as also presented in detail by
Ms. O'Brien, the Legal Counsel, clearly need further
consideration taking into account current practices and
the long-term perspective. We look forward to the
outcome of today's debate and to further discussing the
matter in the Contact Group as well, taking into
account the information provided by the Secretary-
General in his report. In this context, we stress the
important role of Working Group 2 of the Contact
Group and express appreciation for its activity.

Operation Atalanta has been successful in
implementing its mandate. It is, however, recognized
that such naval operations and subsequent prosecution
and detention of captured pirates represent only one
aspect of the fight against piracy. More attention needs
to be paid to comprehensive solutions dealing with root
causes of piracy within Somalia. As a complement to
efforts combating piracy at sea, the initiatives on land
in Somalia should very much focus on strengthening
the Transitional Federal Institutions and, where
appropriate, regional administrations and local
communities in order for them to deliver necessary
services to Somali people. The EU Training Mission is
part of this effort. Further support is needed to improve
the judiciary and custodial sectors in Somalia, as well
as to fight poverty.

In this perspective, the ongoing development
initiatives devoted to improving the underlying
socio-economic situation that gives rise to piracy play
an important role and should be strengthened. It is
important that land-based efforts remain one of our
priorities when addressing counter-piracy activities in a
holistic way. The EU, as part of its already
comprehensive engagement in Somalia, calls on all
partners to further strengthen and coordinate their
support in the fight against piracy, including by
enhancing their initiatives on land.

