Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to express our best wishes and offer
our cooperation to the delegation of Burkina Faso for
the conduct of the Council's work during December. I
would also like to thank the Burkina Faso delegation
for the close cooperation we developed with them in
the Security Council over the past year. Mexico would
like to acknowledge Ambassador Mayr-Harting and the
Austrian delegation for their excellent work as
President of the Security Council in November.

My delegation would like to thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the International Tribunals for
Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia for presenting their
respective biannual progress reports (S/2009/587 and S/2009/589) on the completion strategies of their
activities, including the specific measures they have
adopted to conclude their work, as well as the progress
made in fulfilling the recommendations of paragraph
259 of the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/258),
which the Council endorsed.

We acknowledge the efforts by both Tribunals to
accelerate the completion of their judicial activities in
a responsible and efficient way, guaranteeing the main
objective of imparting justice and respecting the due
process rights of the accused. We are aware that
judicial activity will always be subject to a series of
unforeseen conditions and circumstances and that both
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) face them in the best way
possible. However, the actions already undertaken by
both Tribunals give us the confidence to urge them to
implement additional measures to conclude their work
and give weight to the establishment of a residual
mechanism.

With regard to the report of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, we wish to emphasize
some of the progress that has been made, in
comparison to the biannual report of last June. A
significant number of sentences have been pronounced
and several trials are close to sentencing, that is, before
the end of this year. Two fugitives have been arrested -
one of them of a high rank - thanks to cooperation by
neighbouring States, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda. Significant measure have been
adopted with regard to criminal procedures to preserve
the necessary evidence to begin the trials that we all
hope will take place in the near future against those
accused who are still at large.

Regarding the report of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the transfer to
national jurisdictions of cases of mid- and low-level
accused stands out. That contributes to strengthening
the national capacities of countries in the region to
handle serious violations of international humanitarian
law. Additionally, data on the progressive reduction of
judicial activity are relevant in that the residual
mechanism can have a judicial function limited to
accused of the highest rank.

We have taken note of the valuable judicial
cooperation by the Government of Croatia, and we
encourage it to continue in the same way with issues
pending before the Tribunal. Unfortunately, we have
also taken note - and this is an insult to the
international community - of the need for all States,
not just the States in the region, to end the impunity
that two of the main perpetrators of the most serious
human rights violations in the Balkans have continued
to enjoy.

Both Tribunals have emphasized the need to
maintain their staff and to extend certain mandates of
some judges in order to meet the dates that the Council
has established for the completion of their tasks. We
should not overlook the fact that the Tribunals have to
face the ongoing challenge of achieving a balance
between imparting justice, administrative efficiency,
guaranteeing the fundamental rights of the alleged
perpetrators, witnesses and victims, and completing
their work as soon as possible. Nor can we
underestimate the fact that that task is doubly difficult
in the context of judicial proceedings. For those
reasons, the Security Council should continue, in our
opinion, to have a pragmatic and flexible approach
with regard to the Tribunals' completion strategies. We
believe the best option would be for them to conclude
their work in the very near future, but not because of
peremptory dates.

Progress in the implementation of the completion
strategies, which the Tribunals have shared with us,
can contribute to the establishment of the residual
mechanism in a more manageable and efficient way. In
the coming months we will be giving shape to the
residual mechanism in the framework of the Informal
Working Group on the International Criminal
Tribunals, on which our colleague from Austria has
given a very detailed summary. We have a very
important foundation for that, thanks to the Secretary-
General's report and to the first-hand, detailed
information on each of the functions to be assumed by
the mechanism that those in charge of the Tribunals
have just presented to us, information based on
experience.

Even in the midst of those minute considerations,
the Security Council must continue to observe the
principal goal, which is that of guaranteeing the
carrying out of justice with regard to the most serious
crimes and atrocities against humanity that were
committed in the context of conflict in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Mexico will continue working
in the next few months to contribute to the successful
implementation of the completion strategies of both
Tribunals and the establishment of the residual
mechanism.

