Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): Let me first
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of this
Council and, secondly, align my delegation with the
statements made by the representatives of Egypt, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and Tajikistan,
on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.

Malaysia is deeply concerned by the recent
disproportionate attacks by Israeli military forces in the
Gaza Strip. The attacks have resulted in a number of
civilian casualties and, if left unchecked, would lead to
greater destruction and further loss of lives, especially
among the civilian population in the Gaza Strip. We
therefore urge all involved parties to refrain from any
provocative act and call on the international community,
especially the Security Council and the Middle East
Quartet, to act swiftly and decisively to ensure that
7

Israel ceases its military operations in the Gaza Strip and
to prevent any further escalation of violence.

My delegation is also concerned by recent articles
and comments appearing in the newspapers regarding
the so-called Goldstone report (A/HRC/ 12/48). We are
of the view that such comments have not nullified the
report or suggested that the author wanted to retract it.
In this regard, my delegation supports the statement by
the three other co-authors of the report, which, in a
way, has further bolstered the process of having Israel
answer to the world for having used disproportionate
force leading to the death of approximately 1,400
Palestinians during the military onslaught it carried out
over two years ago. We would like to state here that the
imperatives of peace and justice are mutual, and
therefore justice for the Palestinians in Gaza cannot be
delayed in order to reach peace.

In this connection, we reiterate our call on Israel
to completely lift the blockade on Gaza, which is a
form of collective punishment that is forbidden under
international law, and to expedite further approval of
United Nations projects. Israel must fulfil its legal and
international obligations by stopping all settlement
activities, the construction of the separation wall and
the demolition of Palestinian-owned buildings and
infrastructure, particularly in East Jerusalem, which are
illegal under international law and represent serious
impediments contributing to the deadlock of the peace
talks.

Resolving these issues will require the
international community to focus all its energy and
effort at achieving a comprehensive peace in the region
and restoring the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to an independent State of
Palestine. All parties must act truthfully and sincerely
to achieve these objectives. We again urge the Security
Council to take the necessary measures to implement
the Council's very own resolutions on Palestine and on
the Middle East, failing which the Council's credibility
would be at stake.

