Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Feltman, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs; Mr. Vale de
Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Cardi, Permanent
Representative of Italy to the United Nations, for their
comprehensive and detailed briefings regarding the
follow-up on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).

We are of the view that the Security Council
should always be credible and earnest when addressing
the risks of nuclear proliferation, without selectivity
or politicization. We have always underscored that
principled position in all international forums. In that
same vein, Egypt's efforts to promote the universality
of the non-proliferation and disarmament regime bear
witness to our firm national position.

Egypt has on previous occasions welcomed the
nuclear agreement with Iran enshrined in the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We view
that agreement as a step towards the consolidation of
security and stability in all the countries of the Middle
East. Nevertheless, resolution 2231 (2015) goes beyond
the provisions of that agreement, as it forges clear
technical and legal regulations governing the transfer of
conventional weapons and related technologies by Iran.

We stress the significance of the accurate and
succinct implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
in accordance with its purpose, namely, addressing
the risks of nuclear proliferation. Similarly, Iranian
nuclear activities should be subjected to the necessary
international controls in order to ensure Iran's
compliance with its international obligations. That
should eventually be integrated into the wider context
of the implementation of international resolutions
relating to the establishment of a Middle East zone
free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of
mass destruction.

We consider the accurate, succinct, comprehensive
and effective implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
to be an important element for stability in the Middle
East, which will also prevent the launch of a regional
arms race. It presents a rather significant opportunity
to limit turbulence in the region, which is further
exacerbated by Iran's regional behaviour, in particular
the following subversive acts.
First, Iran has been fuelling conflicts in hotspots of
armed conflict in the Middle East, especially in Yemen
and Syria. Secondly, it has participated in the illicit
smuggling of arms and weapons for militias and armed
groups, which runs counter to resolutions of the Security
Council and the provisions of international law. Thirdly,
Iran has continued to intervene in the internal affairs
of Arab States and has, in that connection, exported
destructive and chaotic ideas that incite sectarianism,
violence, extremism and terrorism.

In that vein, the previous Secretary-General spotted
several instances of Iran violating its obligations.
Mr. Feltman mentioned them in his briefing, and I will
not reiterate them. However, I would like to highlight
certain points. First, there was an arms shipment seized
by France in March 2016. In fact, the report proved
that that shipment was of Iranian origin and had been
shipped from Iran with Somalia as its destination.
Secondly, the continued ballistic missile tests will
eventually exacerbate regional tensions. Thirdly, we
look forward to the completion of the investigation of
the Iranian shipment seized by Australia in early 2016.
We call upon the Secretariat to inform us as soon as
possible of the relevant technical conclusions.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
resolution 2231 (2015) and compliance with it by all
parties should be comprehensive and integrated. The
Security Council shall be held accountable by the
international community and international public
opinion to verify how earnest and serious that compliance
is. Any failure or omission in that regard will eventually
undermine the value and credibility of Security Council
resolutions. In that connection, we would like to pay
tribute to the Permanent Representative of Italy and
his delegation as the Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). We stress the centrality of
that role in following up and briefing member States
of the Security Council on any developments, whether
they be irregularities, violations or contraventions, in
a timely manner in order to allow the Procurement
Working Group, and thereby the Security Council,
to undertake the appropriate measures. In that regard
we welcome Ambassador Cardi's intention to hold
informative meetings open to all States Members of the
United Nations.

