The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf
of the members of the Security Council, I condemn
in the strongest terms the reprehensible terrorist
attack perpetrated in Kabul on innocent civilians of
Afghanistan and of many other nations. The members
of the Security Council extend their deepest sympathy
to the families of the victims who lost their lives,
and solidarity to the people and Government of
Afghanistan. Please stand for a moment of silence in
honour of the victims.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President

The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first public meeting of the Security Council for the
month of June, I should like to take this opportunity,
on behalf of the Security Council, to pay tribute
to His Excellency Mr. Elbio Rosselli, Permanent
Representative of Uruguay, for his service as President
of the Council for the month of May. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Security Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Rosselli and his
delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council's business last month.

Congratulatory remarks to the newly
elected members


The President (spoke in Spanish): I should also like
to take this opportunity to sincerely congratulate Cote
d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, the Netherlands,
Peru and Poland on their election as non-permanent
members of the Security Council. We look forward
with interest to their contribution to the work of the
Council starting in 2018.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Cfite d'Ivoire


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Cote d'Ivoire
to participate in this meeting.

On behalfofthe Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. A'ichatou
Mindaoudou, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I now give the floor to Ms. Mindaoudou.


