Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank Ambassador Loj of
Denmark, Ambassador Mayoral of Argentina and
Ambassador Motoc of Romania for their briefings to
the Council on the activities of the committees whose
work they have the heavy responsibility of conducting.
I also express my great appreciation to the various
teams of experts that provide technical support for the
Committees' activities as they carry out their mandates.

Since the tragic events of 11 September 2001,
terrorism has emerged as one of the major scourges of
our time. Through its various manifestations, terrorism
has demonstrated the scope of the threat it poses to
international peace and security. Terrorism is a crime
against humanity. It threatens the lives of innocent
civilians. It exacerbates the divisions between
civilizations and between religions. In doing so, it
greatly undermines the fundamental values of today's
world, in particular human dignity.

Today's public meeting is being held a short time
after the attacks in London. We take this opportunity to
reiterate our condolences to the families of the victims
and to reaffirm our firm condemnation of the
phenomenon.

The fight against terrorism requires the
mobilization of all States. We must therefore continue
to pool our resources and efforts to protect our
populations from that threat. In that context, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its Executive
Directorate, the 1267 Committee and the 1540
Committee provide a framework for coordination and a
driving force for international cooperation aimed at
enabling our States gradually to put in place and
strengthen the appropriate legal, institutional and
operational framework for the effective implementation
of the measures set out in the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

Let us recall that that these measures relate
primarily to controlling flows of funds, the trans-
border activities of groups or individuals associated
with terrorist entities, and the flow of arms and other
sensitive products, with the goal of cutting off
financing of terrorist activities, inhibiting the
movement of terrorists and denying them access to
weapons.

It is extremely important that these measures be
implemented consistently. With respect specifically to
weapons of mass destruction, it is urgent, in order to
prevent their acquisition by terrorists, to institute, for
example, strict controls on the movement of dual-use
chemical components and other sensitive materials
needed for their development. In addition, all States
must understand the need to do so and take appropriate
measures in that respect. We encourage the 1540
Committee to undertake an outreach effort with respect
to the resolution to raise the awareness of all States, in
particular those that do not feel that they are affected
by its provisions.

The 1267 Committee, for its part, must, in the
exercise of its mandate, continue to enhance its
working methods by defining clear rules and principles
for managing the list of terrorist individuals and
entities.

The entire machinery established by the United
Nations to fight terrorism must continue its resolute
efforts to assess, on an ongoing basis, the efforts
undertaken by States in order to help them build their
capacities to meet their international obligations and to
increase the effectiveness of their actions in the fight
against terrorism. Indeed, the arsenal for that fight
must become fully functional and enable States to
prevent terrorist acts.

To that end, my delegation firmly supports the
holding of a constructive dialogue with Member States
in order methodically to determine their technical
assistance needs and to promote international
cooperation so that they can receive the necessary
assistance. In that connection, visits to States, with the
involvement of regional organizations, are extremely
useful, because they make it possible to enhance such a
dialogue on the ground.

We also encourage increased cooperation among
the various committees in the implementation of their
quarterly work programmes as well as the sharing of
information and experiences among them, given the
significant contribution that such efforts can make to
enhancing the consistency of United Nations action
and to developing a set of best practices in the fight
against terrorism.

My delegation advocates universal accession to
the various conventions and protocols related to
terrorism. Those States that have done so must take the
appropriate measures to meet their international
commitments in the fight against terrorism, including
the submission of periodic reports.

In that regard, reflection must be undertaken on
how to streamline the process of requesting States'
reports so that a consolidated report can be produced
relating to their obligations under the various Security
Council resolutions on terrorism. We believe that this
is an urgent task for the expert groups of the three
Committees.

Above and beyond all of those actions, we
believe, and will continue to say as much, that the
international community must deal with and address
racial inequality, injustice, underdevelopment and
conflict, because such systemic dysfunctions contribute
to violence and extremism. Solutions need to be found
in order to deny terrorism its breeding grounds. In that
respect, we welcome the recent decisions of the Group
of 8 and the various measures undertaken within the
framework of United Nations reform to enhance the
effectiveness of the action of the international
community in the fight against terrorism.

