Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It gives
me great pleasure at the outset to convey to you, Mr.
President, my appreciation for giving the States non-
members of the Council the opportunity to discuss directly
with the Council the issues under consideration.

The issue of the role of the Security Council in the
prevention of conflicts, which the President of the Council
has chosen to consider in an open debate, is Without any
doubt one of the most important issues under consideration
in the international arena. This question acquires a greater
dimension by virtue of the nature of the subjects it raises.
It is thus worthwhile to pause and consider this matter and
give it the attention it deserves.

Article 1 of the United Nations Charter charges us
with preventing conflicts, as this is one of the purposes of
the United Nations. The authors of the Charter realized that
the prevention of crises was a better and more cost-
effective alternative to dealing with conflicts than
confronting them after they have taken place. This is
particularly true with regard to issues affecting the peace
and security of peoples. The authors therefore wisely and
appropriately incorporated this principle into the edifice
established by the Charter without deviating from it.

In this way, the Charter requires the involvement of all
major bodies of the United Nations, and not of the Security
Council alone. In fact, the Charter details the role of the
major bodies and conveys upon each its own competence
to combat and remove the causes that threaten peace and to
cooperate to solve the economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian problems that are usually considered to be the
causes of armed conflict.

For example, poverty and ignorance are usually
considered to be two of the major causes of conflicts.
Nevertheless, we find that dealing with these two issues and
remedying them fall within the exclusive competence of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
If we consider the specificity of the tools available to the
Security Council and the nature of its role, then we find
that these two issues are far from its competence. The
Council should therefore deal with these issues in the
context of full respect for the delicate system of checks and
balances between the major organs of the United Nations
as established in the Charter, particularly the General
Assembly, in addition to the other bodies within and
outside the United Nations.

In accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter, the
Security Council may consider any conflict or situation
that may lead to international friction or that may give
rise to disputes, in order to determine whether the
continuation of the conflict or the situation will jeopardize
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
implementing this provision, the Council has a mandate
to take measures to prevent such disputes and situations.
Yet, its means to do so are voluntary and fall Within the
framework of the peaceful resolution of conflicts. This
requires absolute respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and non-intervention in their internal
affairs by attempting to obtain their approval before
adopting or implementing such measures. International
practice stresses this interpretation of the Charter.

Chapter VII also enables the Council to assume a
preventive role by calling on the parties to a conflict to
take interim measures until the dispute is settled
peacefully. Problems arise when the Council is either
called upon or acts on its own to intervene and deal with
situations within its mandate under Chapter VI by using
the means provided by Chapter VII. Those Chapter VII
provisions pertain to coercive and punitive measures and
range from interim measures to the use of force.
However, this transcends the authority of the legal system
that outlines the elements under which action may be
taken and the tools that may be used as established by the
Charter in Chapters VI and VII. The structure of the
edifice set up by the Charter is based on a careful and
clear respect for the dividing line between those two
Chapters.

It is therefore absolutely important that the Council's
preventive intervention not cause collateral damage to the
parties directly involved or to third parties whose interests
are linked to one of the parties to the dispute. The
Council must give the parties directly involved an
opportunity to present their points of view to it before it
makes recommendations or implements specific measures.
We also call upon the Council to permit States that are
not members of the Council and that may believe that
their interests may be harmed by the Council's action to
discuss the measures under consideration, in accordance
with Article 31 of the Charter.

 

If for whatever reason the Council fails to fulfil its
functions, then the only option is to resort to the General
Assembly on the basis of the resolution "Uniting for
peace". With regard to this resolution and the role of the
General Assembly, we are astonished by the approach that
has often been followed by some countries in avoiding
using this resolution or in ignoring the role of the
Assembly, especially since these same countries have
occasionally resorted to this approach when their own
interests and visions coincided or agreed with the
framework of the resolution "Uniting for peace".

The Security Council's endeavours to develop its role
in the prevention of conflicts so that it may change its
approach from responding to crises to establishing a culture
of preventive policies to deal with disputes and defuse them
before they become full-fledged conflicts forces all of us
here to scrutinize the issue. The Council should work in
this context in accordance with the rules accepted by the
international community and by all members of the United
Nations, and on the basis of commonly agreed principles.
We believe that in its work the Council must not take up
concepts that do not enjoy full acceptance by Member
States, particularly those which remain controversial.
Concepts such as humanitarian intervention and
humanitarian security could prove to be more harmful than
useful. I do not believe that many of us have a specific
definition for these and other similar concepts.

On the other hand, the Council should only adopt
measures when it determines that a threat to peace exists or
that an internal conflict may threaten international peace
and security. It should do this in accordance with the
provisions of Article 39 and with a full awareness of the
serious implications of its actions if it decides to intervene
by using force.

The importance of the Council's abiding by this
becomes more urgent in the light of the developments that
have taken place in the international arena after the end of
the cold war, since many of the ongoing armed conflicts are
civil wars - intra-State rather than inter-State conflicts.

This in turn raises the question of the United Nations
ability to intervene to settle such conflicts. If a decision to
intervene is taken, whether at the regional level through
regional organizations or at the State level through the
United Nations, we must then abide by certain basic
elements, prominent among which are the following:

First, there should be no distinction between one
region and another, or one country and another. That is to
say, all must be treated equally and be accorded the same
importance. Currently, this is implemented only after
much hardship and pressure.

Secondly, there must be a determination to carry out
the task in the face of any obstacles or challenges.
Casualties, however large their number and despite their
sensitive nature, should not lead to an impasse in
peacekeeping operations or in controlling the situation in
a specific location and in preventing further deterioration.
Hence, no operation should be terminated because there
have been casualties, or halted because of certain risks.

Thirdly, the behaviour and commitment of the
personnel of peacekeeping forces should not be limited
exclusively to upholding the directives and concepts
contained in the Secretary-Generals bulletin, issued at the
beginning of August last, setting guidelines to the rules of
international humanitarian law as it relates to
peacekeeping operations, on which my delegation had
certain reservations. However, this matter falls outside the
scope of our discussion today.

The peacekeeping force, or its personnel, should feel
that the international community is not just backing them
but is also monitoring their performance. Hence any
military actions undertaken against them or any threat of
action against them will have its consequences. There is
no doubt that the tragedy of Srebrenica is one of the
elements that compels me to mention this point.

Fourthly, intervention in accordance with Chapter VI
or VII of the Charter should not and must not negatively
affect the territorial integrity or sovereignty of the State
concerned under any circumstances. Many of the practices
of the current decade involve many issues that require us
to consider, inquire into and analyse their implications.

Fifthly, it is important that the Council not rush to
deal with a specific situation from a specific
predetermined conception that could eventually lead to
serious consequences. Let us take the events that occurred
in Bosnia and Herzegovina as an example of what should
not be repeated. The Council adopted a resolution under
the pretext of halting the confrontation and restricting the
ability of the combatants to continue the armed conflict.
The resolution prohibited the supply of arms to the two
parties despite the fact that one of the two parties - and
the Council and its members were fully aware of that -
had an overwhelming military superiority, which led to
terrible massacres. This eventually forced the Council,

 

after a period of inaction and flimsy pretexts, to actually
intervene on an international level.

The claim that we should let conflicts run their course
and be finally resolved in the interest of one party or the
other, as some have repeatedly said, should not be the
approach adopted by the Council.

We fully understand that what pushed the issue of the
prevention of conflicts to the top of our agenda is the
Council's desire to deal with the cases that have
accompanied international changes. When the situation
requires the intervention of the Council and the Council
uses the appropriate tools Within the proper constitutional
and legal framework, the Council will have succeeded in
fulfilling its role in the maintenance of international peace
and security. I refer here to the success of the Council in
dealing with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

What is alarming, however, is when the Council fails
to act in matters that require its intervention, as witnessed
in the events that took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Kosovo and others. Yet we must not forget that the Council
itself was the real cause of this failure. Many of the
obstacles that prevent the United Nations from taking up its
role in the maintenance of international peace and security
are due to shortcomings in the Council's methods of work.
This is manifested in particular in the abuse of the right of
the veto, or in the threat of using it, thereby impeding the
work of the Council and precluding it from shouldering its
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter.

Other problems are double standards, selectivity, lack
of transparency and giving priority to the political
considerations of Council members, particularly the
permanent members, over the collective joint considerations
of the members of the Council and of the United Nations
as a Whole. All this has led the Council to use force outside
the legal framework of the Charter of the United Nations,
which underlines the pressing need to reform the Council's
methods of work.

Expanding the role of the Council under the pretext
that the Charter is a flexible document that can always be
adapted to deal with What some consider to be urgent needs
related to developing situations faces some reservations on
our part, and is a matter that should be handled with
extreme care.

If a specific international concept is agreed upon, then
amending the Charter must become one of the direct
priorities of international action, and the issue should not be
abandoned because of the difficulty of achieving it.
Acting outside the Charter, whatever the considerations
that are presented as a justification, will not necessarily
lead to preventing the problems and risks that the
international community faces today. In fact, it could lead
to their exacerbation.

The way to achieve this is to deal not only with the
problems of poverty and the need for the economic
development of societies but also, and to a great extent,
to reform directly the working methods of the Council
that prevent it from taking effective action.
We have consistently called for regulating the use of
the veto in order to ultimately limit its use to extreme
cases and in accordance with objective provisions to be
agreed upon.

In brief, the Council must respond to the many
voices calling upon it to reform its methods of work. The
Council should respond to the recommendations of the
General Assembly contained in resolution 51/193, as the
Council, with its 15 members, represents the will of the
full membership of the United Nations in safeguarding
peace and maintaining security in the world, and should
bring the necessary transparency to its work, particularly
its informal consultations, which occupy most of the time
and the debate of the Council.

I would like to refer briefly to the important and
effective role played by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. We encourage him to play his role,
whatever difficulties may arise, since it stems directly
from the Charter. Furthermore, that role should be based
on and guided by the Charter. The role of the Secretary-
General has become of such great importance - perhaps
it has always been so - that we must ensure that he is
free from pressure. It is only logical, therefore, within the
framework of reforming the United Nations and
safeguarding its effectiveness, to consider limiting the
Secretary-General to one term of office, although such a
term might last for 10 years. In that way he - or she, as
the case may be - could undertake his or her
responsibilities free from pressure.

In brief, the issue before us should be included in
the agendas of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, so that more detailed and
comprehensive discussions in those forums can
complement the beneficial initiative of the Council. The
responsibilities and mandate of the Council stem from the
Charter, and the implementation of the ambitious project

 

formulated by the Secretary-General will require
cooperation between the United Nations and the
humanitarian protection organizations, because it exceeds
the capabilities of the United Nations and the Security
Council working alone.

