Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): We would also like
tojoin previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate.

Allow me at the outset to pay tribute to the United
Nations peacekeepers who put their lives at risk in the
line of duty and express our deepest sympathy for those
who paid the ultimate price for the noble cause ofpeace,
most recently in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic.

Peacekeeping is the flagship activity of the United
Nations aimed at assisting host countries in the difficult
transition from war to peace. The intensification and
sophistication ofasymmetrical threats posed by terrorist
and extremist groups is a serious challenge to United
Nations peacekeeping, both in terms of force protection
and the implementation of the mandate. In that context,
peacekeeping missions should be supported logistically
so as to be well equipped, trained and prepared to meet
the challenges. We need to have in place predictable,
professional and flexible logistic support systems, as
well as the necessary tools and means for increasing
the performance of our troops and police. Peacekeeping
is constantly evolving and being tailored to meet new
challenges. The United Nations has come a long way
in that endeavour, and its peacekeeping capabilities
have progressed considerably over time. We welcome
the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which we fully endorse.

The diversity of challenges associated with
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts requires the
contribution of a wide range of actors, including regional
and subregional organizations, civil society and the
private sector. As the dimensions of conflicts and crises
now outpace the United Nations response capacity, we
should adapt our approaches to respond to present and
future crises. Various regional organizations, such
as the African Union (AU), have become established
actors in peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, and
the United Nations should be able to support and make
use of the capabilities of those organizations. In that
regard, we value the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union and other regional and
subregional bodies on the continent. Turkey encourages
the expansion of the United Nations-AU partnership
so as to include the areas of institutional capacity-
building, security sector reform, the protection of
civilians, human rights, gender mainstreaming and
combating organized crime. We must take stock of
the positive efforts of the international community to
reform peacekeeping missions to fully restore peace
and tranquillity throughout the continent.
The ultimate objective of our missions in Africa
needs to be generating success stories of African
ownership and responsiveness in cooperation with
the international community and national authorities,
consistent with the concept of African solutions to
African problems. Somalia is a textbook example of the
partnership and collaboration of the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union (EU). We
greatly appreciate the noble endeavour of the African
Union Mission in Somalia in the pursuit of bringing
peace and stability throughout that country. In that
regard, a special debt ofgratitude should be extended for
the sacrifices made by the troop-contributing countries.
With that notion in mind, we also maintain our support
for Somalia in numerous areas through bilateral means.
We are particularly focusing on capacity-building for
Somali institutions in terms of military and policing in
close cooperation with our international partners.

Peace and security constitute important pillars
of our approach towards Africa. Turkey has allocated
resources to the activities of the Eastern African
Standby Force from its annual contributions to the
African Union. We are also working on providing
further support to the African Capacity for Immediate
Response to Crises. Turkish peacekeepers continue
to serve in various United Nations, NATO and EU
missions across the globe, including in Afghanistan,
Africa, the Balkans and the Middle East, where they
contribute to the training of security personnel and
the capacity- and institution-building of military and
security forces and provide technical assistance to and
strengthen civilian and law enforcement institutions.
We will maintain our support, and we look forward
to contributing to upcoming debates on responding
to the multitude of challenges faced by international
peacekeeping today.

