Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this urgent meeting. I
thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman and Mr. Hug,
Deputy Chief Monitor for the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

It is disturbing that the Council must again
return to this issue, since fighting has flared up and
Russian-backed separatists have broken the ceasefire
provided for in the Minsk agreements. The fighting
on Wednesday around Marinka and Kyivsky was an
alarming escalation of violence in eastern Ukraine.
It is clear from the OSCE spot report that this was a
separatist assault on Ukrainian military units. The
OSCE observed heavy weapons mobilizing in the
territory controlled by the so-called Donetsk People's
Republic. Those weapons moved westward, in complete
disregard of the terms of the Minsk agreements. Action
of that kind and on that scale was clearly premeditated.

We have previously seen Russian-backed separatists
seek to provoke a Ukrainian response and then twist
that - as the Russian media are again seeking to
do - into claims that it was the Ukrainians who
launched an assault. These feints are transparent, and
Russian claims and those of their separatist proxies
carry no credibility. The world is watching. We know
who is supporting the separatists. We have seen Russian
soldiers captured in the Donbas. We have heard Russia's
attempts to come up with innocent explanations for
their presence there. We have noted the amendments
to the Russian State secrecy law, which now prohibits
the release of information about the deaths of soldiers
in peacetime. This legislative action suggests that
the Russian authorities want to silence the justified
questions they are facing from families, journalists and
civil society. We have seen Russian-supplied T-72 tanks
and Uragan rocket launchers operating on Ukrainian
soil, and we have seen countless conveys of supplies
flooding across the border from Russia. Russia claims
these are humanitarian supplies but will not cooperate
with the legitimate Government in Kyiv in a way that
allow for verification of these claims.

The tragedy and the hypocrisy of the separatists is
that the ordinary people of Ukraine are the ones who
suffer. More than 6,000 have been killed, and more
than 1.3 million have fled their homes. We hope that
Mr. Simonovie, of the High Commissioner's Office,
will be able to brief the Council on his recent report
on the distressing human rights situation in eastern
Ukraine later this month. There are three things that
now need to happen to prevent further escalation.

First, Russia must immediately withdraw its
military forces from Ukraine, stop its flow of weapons
to the separatists and make every effort to secure
a political solution to this crisis. This includes the
immediate release of Nadiya Savchenko, who has been
illegally detained for nearly a year.

Secondly, we urge Russia to use its considerable
influence on the separatists so that they cease their
provocative behaviour and live up to their commitment to
implement fully the Minsk agreements. The separatists
forces are Russia's creation; they are Russia's tool.
Russia has the capacity and the influence to control
the separatist forces. It must exercise that influence
to ensure compliance with the Minsk agreements. If it
is not ready to do so, the Council must be clear in its
condemnation.

Thirdly, it is vital that all parties engage seriously in
the process and implement the Minsk agreements. The
Trilateral Contact Group and Trilateral working groups
are essential mechanisms for making this happen, and
their roles are clearly spelled out in paragraph 13 of the
February Minsk agreement. We need all parties, both
Russians and Ukrainians, to engage in these groups in
a genuine and constructive way. We were disturbed to
hear that the economic working group was not able to
meet earlier this week because a Russian participant did
not attend and that Russian and separatists participants
walked out of a session of the Trilateral Contact Group.

The European Union has made clear that the
duration of sanctions against Russia is directly linked to
the complete implementation of the Minsk agreements,
and through resolution 2202 (2015) this Council has
made clear that we too expect complete compliance
with the Minsk agreements. So there is no military
solution. The Minsk agreements are the only way that
stability can be restored in eastern Ukraine. We must
all recommit to their implementation and to upholding
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Ukraine.

Let us not forget that the crisis started with the
illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia. More than a
year since that illegal annexation, we cannot lose sight
of what is at stake in eastern Ukraine. A return to
violence and conflict would come at a terrible human
cost for all sides, and it would represent a further attack
on the rules-based international system that we have
shared and valued for the past 70 years. We all depend
on that system enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Any escalation in Ukraine calls into question
Russia's commitment to those principles.

Our relationship to Russia extends far beyond the
borders okaraine, but in order to foster the cooperation
and trust we want, those relationships must be based on
honesty, mutual respect and dialogue. Until Russia is
able to demonstrate that commitment in Ukraine, the
Council needs to remain actively engaged in overseeing
the full and timely implementation of resolution 2202
(2015).

