Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure, at the outset, to express our sincere thanks to
the Republic of Indonesia for organizing this debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would
also like to express our appreciation to Her Excellency
Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, for presiding over this meeting. I also thank
the Secretary-General, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Executive Director

of the Center for Civilians in Conflict for their thorough
briefings to the Security Council.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
adoption of the four Geneva Conventions, following the
end of the Second World War. The Conventions were
not merely legally binding international instruments.
They were also the result of a painful humanitarian
experience caused by the scourge of the Second World
War. The international community drew many lessons
from those experiences, which in turn were translated
into a number of principles, purposes and fundamental
norms that were enshrined in the Conventions. They
now form the cornerstone of the rules of international
law. The Conventions guaranteed protection for people
from the scourge of war and its destructive effects, in
particular for those not involved in acts of aggression,
including the wounded, the sick, prisoners and
civilians, as well as civilians living under occupation.
The Conventions called for the protection of their lives
and dignity without discrimination.

This year also coincides with the twentieth
anniversary ofthe Council's adoption ofresolution 1265
(1999) and the inclusion of the protection of civilians as
an item on its agenda.

There has been major development at the conceptual
level with regard to the protection of civilians, in
particular since the adoption of resolution 1265
(1999), which placed the issue of protecting civilians
at the top priorities of the Security Council and as
one of the fundamental pillars of the peacekeeping
mandates. However, it is a source of grave concern
that that conceptual development was not accompanied
by progress in translating it into concrete measures
to protect civilians on the ground. Civilians continue
to bear the brunt of conflicts and constitute the vast
majority of their victims.

The tragedies of civilians in many of today's world
conflicts, in particular in the Middle East and Africa,
pose an unprecedented challenge to the fundamental
pillars of international humanitarian law and the
enforcement of the principle of protecting civilians in
armed conflict, especially women and children, who
are the most vulnerable to violations.

Egypt recognizes its responsibility to prevent such
violations. That is why we have made tireless efforts to
advance the agenda of protecting civilians within the
United Nations system, including the initiative in which
we participated along with four other non-permanent

members of the Security Council at the time. The
purpose was to introduce a draft resolution on medical
protection in armed conflict, which was later adopted
as resolution 2286 (2016) at the very beginning of
Egypt's presidency of the Security Council in May 2016

Also, based on Egypt's belief in the importance of
promoting the frameworks and governing principles
of peacekeeping operations, in particular with regard
to the protection of civilians, we acceded to the Kigali
Principles, in November 2018, as well as to the voluntary
compact on combating sexual exploitation and abuse.
Egypt has also taken a number of national measures
and actions in support of the agenda of protecting
civilians in peacekeeping operations. Moreover, at the
March Ministerial on Peacekeeping, Egypt pledged to
hold training sessions on comprehensive protection for
civilians, which are currently being developed.

It is no secret that peacekeeping operations face
serious challenges in implementing the protection of
civilians mandate in armed conflict. There has been a
significant qualitative and quantitative change in the
nature of conflicts. Contemporary conflicts are usually
characterized by the phenomenon of non-State armed
actors systematically targeting civilians as a military
strategy. Furthermore, conflicts are increasingly taking
place in densely populated areas where explosive
weapons with indiscriminate effects on civilians are
used. All that requires a comprehensive approach
that takes into account the specific characteristics of
each conflict and prioritizes above all the protection
of civilians, particularly women, children and the
most vulnerable.

In order to be effective, the protection of civilians
in armed conflict cannot be limited to material or
physical protection. It also must focus basically on
finding political solutions to end a conflict and prevent
its recurrence. As well, it must address the root causes
of conflict and take a more comprehensive approach
that addresses the challenges of eradicating poverty
and socioeconomic marginalization, while promoting
the role of national institutions and mechanisms
involved in preventing and managing conflicts,
regardless oftheir nature, as well as promoting stability
and ensuring that all parties to a conflict comply with
the rules and provisions of international human rights
law and international humanitarian law and ensuring
that violators are held accountable. In addition, more
attention is needed in future to address new challenges
that threaten civilians, above all the spread of
international terrorism.

We also stress that the primary responsibility for the
protection ofcivilians lies with States and Governments.
The goal of peacekeeping operations is to strengthen
the ability of States to fulfil their commitments. At the
same time, peacekeeping operations must respect the
principles of sovereignty, national ownership and the
culture of the host State.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that our
meeting today constitutes an opportunity to assess the
scale of progress made with regard to the implementation
of the agenda related to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We strongly stress promoting the noble
values and principles of international humanitarian
law on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, in
particular the most vulnerable, including women and
children, without politicization or selectivity.

