Mr. Dieye: I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council today. I would like to highlight the need to prevent violent extremism through an approach grounded in sustainable development and human rights. I will highlight how the United Nations is using such an approach to successfully address violent extremism in Africa. We stand ready to support you, Mr. President, in your efforts to support peace, prosperity and progress in Africa. Let me first state emphatically that development effort is yielding an economic renewal, peace and prosperity on the continent. Countries even in the Sahel are showing significant economic growth potential, with a projected 6 per cent in Burkina Faso and the Niger, 5.6 per cent in Chad, 3.6 per cent in Mauritania and 4.8 per cent in Mali. All countries in the region have undertaken voluntary national reviews at the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development and are making progress to achieve many Sustainable Development Goals. Let us not forget the progress in Africa and the promise of Africa, and let us celebrate the development investments that underpin them. Yet we see that the African continent is increasingly challenged by instability, especially in what is now referred to as the arc of instability spanning the Sahel, the Lake Chad region and the Horn of Africa, with epicentres in the Liptako-Gourma triangle, central Mali, the Lake Chad basin and Somalia. We in the international system are also challenged to address that instability, given our lack of empirical evidence. So often, we do not know with absolute certainty the specific needs of communities and institutions, the strategies that work to meet those needs or how we can invest to achieve measurable, sustained impact. That is why the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) serves the system by investing in quality research and evidence-based programming to enable action. For example, our approach to preventing violent extremism is based on groundbreaking research that draws on interviews with more than 700 former members of violent extremist groups to understand the drivers of recruitment. Our 2017 study Journey to Extremism in Africa: Drivers, Incentives and the Tipping Point for Recruitment finds that 55 per cent of voluntary recruits express frustration over their economic condition; 83 per cent believe that their Government looks only after the interests of a few; more than 75 per cent have zero trust in politicians and law-enforcement institutions; many have a low level of education; and the majority of recruits come from borderlands or peripheral areas that have suffered generations of marginalization. In those ungoverned and neglected spaces, which are hotspots of violence, communities experience a lack of access to services, such as education, health care, justice, security, livelihoods, the opportunity to influence the decisions that affect their lives and the opportunities they need to thrive. Those are the challenges that underpin violent extremism. In addition, our 2019 report Invisible Women: Gendered Dimensions of Return, Rehabilitation and Reintegration finds that many violent extremist groups in Africa have co-opted the message of women's empowerment and improved socioeconomic conditions. Many women who voluntarily join are attracted by that message. If these root causes of violent extremism are not addressed, the risk of the continued recruitment of women, including the re-recruitment of many thousands of female returnees, will continue. Allow me to reiterate the primacy of prevention in addressing those root causes of violent extremism. Investing in prevention is good economics. A report jointly published by the United Nations and the World Bank shows that every $1 invested in prevention reduces the cost of conflict by over $16 in the long run. Investing in prevention protects a State against a loss of 2 to 8 per cent of gross domestic product per year. And yet the majority of funding is not allocated to prevention and peacebuilding, but to crisis response. According to a 2018 report issued by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, only 2 per cent of the total official development assistance to fragile countries went to prevention, and only 10 per cent to peacebuilding. Investment also tends to overly focus on securitized approaches, even though we know that such approaches carry arisk of increased violent extremism. Ourresearch demonstrates that the trigger for 71 per cent of people who join violent extremist groups is their experience of law enforcement committing human rights abuses. A purely securitized approach to violent extremism ignores the evidence about what must be done to effectively address that challenge. We know that development solutions are needed to address the proven root causes of violent extremism, and we know that they are effective. We have data to show that dialogue supports significant attitude and behaviour change among people from different political, religious and social groups. We have empirically demonstrated that projects integrating psychosocial support, skills training and education reduce extremist tendencies among youth and increase tolerance in communities. We have data to show that investing in women's empowerment and gender equality promotes peace and security. Hence an integrated and balanced approach to security and development is needed to effectively address the challenges posed by violent extremism. Security interventions should aim to reinforce human security - mending the social contract between the State and society where it has eroded and strengthening social capital among communities where it has frayed - thus leading to more robust social cohesion.Fundamentally, that would entail fostering community ownership, sustained investment in human capital, strengthening regional governance mechanisms and kick-starting economic prosperity through scaled-up investments at the local, national and regional levels. UNDP is a global leader in providing support to address the root causes of violent extremism. We bring development solutions to complement security measures through a practice of global prevention of violent extremism, with regional and national projects for 34 countries. Since 2015, our regional project to prevent violent extremism in Africa has supported 21 countries across the continent. Based on research from the Journey to Extremism in Africa report, UNDP's regional project has a reputation as a thought leader, trusted partner and innovator on the prevention of violent extremism in Africa. The project has shown that political will for collaboration in preventive cross-border activities is key to addressing spill-over effects. The Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu used to say that war horses breed in the frontiers. Neglecting one's frontiers leads to war and violent extremism. At UNDP, we cherish the importance of partnership. We believe in the "all of United Nations" approach. We work closely with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Peacebuilding Fund and other members of the United Nations Global Counter- Terrorism Coordination Compact. We also ensure close collaboration with members of civil society, the private sector and faith-based organizations. Let me conclude by saying that we applaud the African Union (AU) for its visionary support to the Silencing the Guns campaign to promote prevention, management and resolution of conflicts in Africa through the control of illegal weapons. We salute the AU for recognizing the need for whole-of-society approaches to address violence in all its forms. We invite the AU's Peace and Security Council to unify supporters of the diverse perceptions and interpretations of the concept of the prevention of violent extremism. We also call on all Member States to strongly invest in, and to scale-up, risk-informed development and prevention to sustainably address violent extremism by tackling its root causes. The United Nations system will continue to play a decisive role in support of Africa.
