Mrs. Kazragiene (Lithuania): I thank Argentina
for holding this important debate, and the briefers for
their valuable input.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.

As today we are commemorating the tenth
anniversary of the deadly attack against the United
Nations Mission in Iraq, let me stress the importance
of and our shared responsibility for ensuring the safety
and security of all those - United Nations personnel,
humanitarian aid and medical workers - who serve in
order to safeguard peace and security.

I would like to focus on two issues, namely,
compliance with and strengthening accountability for
violations of international humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law.

As a State party to all international humanitarian
law instruments, including the Geneva Conventions, its
Additional Protocols and treaties limiting or prohibiting
the use of certain types of weapons, Lithuania strongly
believes that international humanitarian law is an
indispensable tool in protecting all persons affected by
armed conflict. The Lithuanian national commission
on the implementation of international humanitarian
law, established in 2001, coordinates the promotion
and dissemination of international humanitarian law
to the military, the police and the general public. As
part of their effort to protect civilians, the Lithuanian
armed forces focus both on limiting military actions
in operational areas and on improving the situation of
civilians by providing medical care and undertaking
demining activities and gender-related training for
local populations. Lithuania regularly supports projects
related to the destruction of small arms, antipersonnel
mines, cluster munitions and unexploded ordnance.

Lithuania believes that the Arms Trade Treaty will
help to reduce human suffering by ensuring a more
responsible arms trade. We were glad to be part of
successful efforts advocating for strong norms aimed at
preventing arms transfers that could be used to commit
or facilitate violations of international humanitarian
law, in particular attacks directed against civilians,
gender-based violence and violence against women and
children.

Lithuania strongly believes that accountability is
not only about bringing justice when compliance with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law has not been observed, but also about sending a
message of deterrence to all potential perpetrators that
such lapses in compliance will not be tolerated.

Credible information on violations of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law should be
both a prerequisite and a trigger for efforts to ensure
accountability. Lithuania attaches great importance to
the timely recourse to and firm reliance on fact-finding
mechanisms. Given the independent and permanent
nature of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission, we call on all States to consider accepting
its oversight and making use of its good offices,
including in cases ofnon-international armed conflicts.

The primary obligation to ensure accountability
and compliance lies undoubtedly with national
jurisdictions. Therefore, in the long-term, investment
in strengthening their capacities to investigate
and prosecute individual perpetrators is the key.
International justice and reconciliation mechanisms
were designed to support and complement such national
efforts in bridging the immediate gaps. The Security
Council would also benefit from streamlined practices
in its response to alleged violations of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. Lithuania
strongly believes that the Council's powers to refer
situations to the International Criminal Court provide
a unique opportunity to make accountability applicable
all around.

The role and essential rights of victims must not be
overlooked when considering accountability. Lithuania
welcomes the trends in modern international criminal
justice that empower victims and bring retributive
and restorative justice closer together. Again, we see
the Rome Statute as an example of how the traditional
approach of retributive justice might be supplemented
by two distinct forms of victim redress, namely,
reparations ordered by the Court and support provided
to victims independently by the Trust Fund.

Lithuania welcomes the work of the informal
expert's group on the protection of civilians as an
important forum for keeping the Council informed of
protection developments on the ground, and encourages
the continuation of that practice and exploring ways to
make greater use of the Group.

Civilians still represent the vast majority of
victims in armed conflicts. Given the changing nature
of the concerns related to the protection, the Security
Council has to play a role in finding adequate solutions.
There will always be some disagreement within the
international community on how to respond to a given
situation, but when tens of thousands of civilian lives
are threatened, the world expects the Security Council
to unite and act.

