Ms. Bird (Australia): It is well understood
that prevention is always better than cure. Conflict
prevention was the reason that the United Nations
was created, yet it remains a predominantly crisis-
driven Organization, reliant on traditional response
mechanisms that are straining to meet increasing need,
particularly as contemporary conflicts are becoming
more complex and asymmetrical and posing ever
greater threats to a larger number of civilians.

The evidence drawing the link between peace
and security and development is overwhelming. The
report of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, States of Fragility 2015: Meeting
Post-2015 Ambitions, affirms that conflict can lead
to a reversal of national development gains by more
than 20 years. The World Bank has also identified the
correlation between violence and poverty.

As others have mentioned, Sustainable Development
Goal 16 affirms the universal recognition accorded to
promoting just, peaceful and inclusive societies and
to preventing conflict. In order to achieve sustainable
peace and security, the United Nations must address the
root causes of conflict and end the cycle of violence
and relapse. That requires an integrated approach. The
Security Council has a crucial role to play in addressing
that.

First, more regular and comprehensive briefings
of the Council on fragile and conflict affected
countries - informed by arange of stakeholders - could
promote better understanding of the drivers and
root causes. Secondly, the Council should enable the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to play the bridging
and advocacy role envisioned when the PBC was
established in 2005. In that regard, we welcome the
involvement of the Chair of the PBC in today's debate.
Thirdly, the Council should consider how other United
Nations bodies can contribute to peace and security.
Programmes run by the United Nations Development
Group to support the rule of law, anticorruption and
effective and accountable institutions, can help in
addressing the drivers of conflict and in sustaining
peace following conflict. In turn, those considerations
could help ensure that Security Council mandates
draw on the full range of the United Nations conflict
prevention, mediation and development tools.

The Council's mandates should reinforce ongoing
United Nations peacebuilding, State-building and
associated development efforts in the field to help
prevent future conflict and build the foundations of
a peaceful and inclusive State. The United Nations
must also ensure greater operational cohesion at
Headquarters and in the field, reinforced by appropriate
leadership, capacity and resources for United Nations
peace operations and country teams. The successful
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
provided a useful example of how that can be done.

As co-facilitator, with Angola, of the consultations
on the review of United Nations peacebuilding, we
look forward to further discussions with the United
Nations membership on reforms to the way the United
Nations does its core business of preventing conflict
and building sustainable peace and security. Today's
debate, which has highlighted the important role that
development plays in achieving sustainable peace,
contributes to that crucial reform work.

