Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour speak
on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank Guatemala for this timely
initiative. On 3 April, the High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union, Catherine Ashton, welcomed Guatemala's
accession to the Rome Statute. At present, 121
States are parties to the Rome Statute. We welcome
the announcement made by Haiti during the recent
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels
concerning its intention to ratify it, and we praise the
decision of the Government of Cote d'Ivoire to commit
to ratifying the same treaty following the reform of its
constitutional framework.

The European Union and its member States are
firm supporters of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), which is critical to the international community
in bringing tojustice those individuals bearing criminal
responsibility for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity when national courts are unwilling
or unable to prosecute them. The year 2012 represents
a milestone for the ICC as the Court delivered its first
verdict against Thomas Lubanga, who was convicted
for recruiting and using child soldiers.

In that context, the European Union and its member
States underline the important relationship that already
exists between the ICC and the Security Council.
Resolution 67/1 of the General Assembly recalled the
role ofthe ICC in a multilateral system that seeks to end
impunity and establish the rule of law. The Security
Council acknowledged the role of the ICC, in particular

in its resolutions 2053 (2012) on the Democratic
Republic of Congo, 2062 (2012) on Cote d'Ivoire, and
2071 (2012) on Mali. It also did so with regard to sexual
violence in conflict in resolution 1960 (2010) and
concerning children and armed conflict in resolution
2068 (2012).
The Security Council is also connected to the ICC
by its ability to take action, as foreseen in the Rome
Statute. We commend the Security Council for its
decisiveness in referring the situations in Darfur and
Libya to the ICC. Follow-up by the Security Council on
the situations which it has referred, inter alia with regard
to instances of non-cooperation, remains important, as
does sufficient support for the actions of the Court.

Efforts to combat impunity will not be effective
unless there is greater collective and individual
cooperation with the ICC. Without State cooperation,
the ICC cannot fulfil its mandate. That also applies
to all States parties to the Rome Statute when the
Security Council has referred a situation to the Court
in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Out of 23 individuals against whom the ICC
currently has open cases, 12 are currently absconding
from justice and some have done so for several years.
That stifles the ICC's capacity to deliver justice.
Non-cooperation with the Court in regard to the
execution of arrest warrants constitutes a violation
of international obligations; in certain circumstances
related to referrals by the Security Council, it also
constitutes a beach of obligations under the Charter.
The European Union and its member States underline
the importance of consistent action to encourage full
cooperation of States with the ICC, including the
prompt execution of arrest warrants.

In March, High Representative Catherine Ashton
firmly recalled, in the context of resolution 1593
(2005) referring the situation in Darfur to the ICC,
the importance of all States Members of the United
Nations abiding by and implementing the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council under Chapter VII
of the Charter. She recalled the fundamental principle
contained in the Rome Statute of the ICC, namely, that
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole must not go unpunished. Putting
an end to impunity for the perpetrators of those crimes
contributes to the prevention of such crimes.

Justice and peace, indeed, constitute intertwined
goals, and it is both logical and necessary that the ICC
and the Security Council collaborate for that purpose.
We have already seen the deterrent effect of the Court's
action and are convinced of its positive contribution to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We call upon all States to cooperate with the Court.

