Mr. Umemoto (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation for the dedicated efforts of each of the
Chairs of the Council's three counter-terrorism-related
Committees in preparing their respective briefings.

Through many measures taken by the relevant
agencies, the fight against terrorism has made steady
progress at the United Nations. However, it remains
deeply troubling that terrorist attacks persist, some of
which have taken place recently in areas such as South
Asia, the Middle East, North Africa and the Sahel.
The terrorist attack in In Amenas, Algeria, and
the latest tragedy at the Boston marathon have shown
us the necessity of increasing efforts to promote the
fight against terrorism. In that regard, Japan expects
the three committees to coordinate and cooperate
closely with Member States and conduct constructive
discussions and effective and efficient activities on
counter-terrorism measures.

Ten Japanese citizens were killed by the attack in
In Amenas. There is no excuse for violence against
innocent people. We condemn such abject terrorism.
In reaction to the incident, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs ofJapan, Fumio Kishida, announced three areas
of focus for our foreign policy. Japan will strengthen
international counter-terrorism measures; support
the stabilization of the regions of the Sahel, North
Africa and the Middle East; and promote dialogue and
exchanges with Islamic and Arab States. On the basis of
that policy, we will take various measures.

Japan will take active part in the international
efforts to counter terrorism, not only in the framework
of the United Nations but also through the Group of
Eight and the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum. We
hope that the visit to Japan planned by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
led by its Executive Director, will further deepen the
existing cooperation between CTED and Japan.

In order to ensure the legitimacy and credibility
of United Nations counter-terrorism measures,
unceasing efforts in that regard must be made by all
three Committees. For example, it is important to keep
updating the sanction lists to reflect the current status
of individuals and entities. Japan will continue to work
closely with the Ombudsperson and the Monitoring
Team with that objective in mind.

With respect to the United Nations counter-
terrorism coordinator, Japan understands the need to
establish that post in order to ensure consistency and
integrity in the field of counter-terrorism at the United
Nations. We should make every effort to pursue true
effectiveness and efficiency in counter-terrorism
measures at the United Nations through the creation of
that position.

Japan continues to attach great importance to
preventing the proliferation of goods and technologies
related to weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).
We have been working closely with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
strengthen regional and global efforts to better regulate
the export and border control of WMD -related materials.
Japan invited the 1540 Committee expert group to the
regional initiatives it has taken, namely, the twentieth
export control seminar of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, held from 26 to 28 February, and the
ninth Asian senior-level talks on non-proliferation, held
on 14 March.

Such collaboration with the 1540 Committee has
provided an important opportunity to participants in the
region. They were able not only to exchange information
on effective ways to implement relevant Security
Council resolutions on WMD non-proliferation, but
also to understand the recent trend in the illicit transfer
of goods and technologies now emerging throughout
the world. Japan will continue to actively support other
Member States in their efforts.

Turning our attention to the work of the 1540
Committee itself, we welcome the strong emphasis
placed by the Chair on outreach and partnership with
relevant stakeholders. We commend the Chair's efforts
to strengthen the Committee's work by the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the resolution next
year. We support the focus placed by the four working
groups under the Committee, and we understand that
respective groups are making efforts to produce tangible
outcomes. Japan strongly hopes that their activities will
become more visible to all Member States, as they need
to have a strong sense of ownership in advancing the
objectives set forth in the resolution.

As a way of nurturing the ties between the Member
States and the 1540 Committee in order to tackle the
challenge of WMD non-proliferation, the Permanent
Mission of Japan will organize the fifth seminar on
non-proliferation and disarmament in New York on
10 June, partnering with the Missions of Poland and
Turkey. Japan will continue to cooperate positively
in order to ensure that the three Committees can
continuously and fully carry out their roles.

