Mr. Coulibaly (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June and to assure you of our
full cooperation. I would also like to congratulate the
delegation of Poland on its exemplary conduct of the
Council's work during the previous month. I would like
to express our gratitude to all of the members of the
Council for their ongoing support to the peace process
in Mali. And I thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his support and for his recent visit to Mali
from 29 to 30 May in solidarity with the Malian people
and the Blue Helmets.

My delegation takes note of the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/541), and we
thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his comprehensive and
faithful presentation of the report, including on the
recent developments in Mali that have occurred since
it was published.

First, we welcome the fact that the report emphasizes
the recent progress made in the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
including the start of operations for the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Kidal, Timbuktu and
Gao; the Government's provision of heavy weapons
to strengthen the capabilities of the Mechanism's Gao
battalion, considering that it has been operational since
2017; the ongoing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, with preregistration of former
combatants; the establishment of interim authorities in
regions that had been awaiting them and the provision
of 8 billion African Financial Community francs in
investment and technical support. Such progress also
includes the transmission to the National Assembly
of a draft law on the creation of territorial authorities
in the regions of Me'naka and Taoudenni and the
commencement of work on security sector reform. In
addition to the total end of the belligerence between the
Malian parties since the signing of the Agreement in
2015, those achievements constitute important steps in
the peace process in Mali.
I am also pleased that the report underlines the
determination of the Malian parties to work together
to continue to step up the implementation of the
Agreement. The Malian parties reaffirmed, with one
voice, such commitment to the Secretary-General
at his meeting with the members of the Agreement's
Monitoring Committee in Bamako on 30 May.

The progress made speaks to the firm and constant
political will ofthe President ofthe Republic ofMali, the
Government and all the Malian parties to implement the
Agreement, together with the international community.
Such political will has been expressed through
various initiatives since 2013 - beginning with the
preliminary Ouagadougou agreement, the generalized
decentralization of states in 2014, national meetings,
the Conference on National Understanding, the
charter on national understanding, the law on national
understanding, which absolves all those involved in
armed rebellions, excluding those who were prosecuted
for serious crimes, and our own petition to the Council
for a sanctions regime to encourage all parties to the
Agreement to implement it. I want to remind members
of the Council of that because it is important to bear
in mind.

It is true that the implementation of the Agreement
is experiencing some delays, but the factors causing
those delays have been gradually identified. I would like
to add that the intense work carried out by the Council
and MINUSMA, and related efforts of the Government,
have made possible the undertaking of efforts that
Council members have themselves observed. There
is a need to step up that approach to continue along
those lines so that while we prepare for the presidential
elections, which were broadly mentioned today, the
implementation of the Agreement continues without
our efforts losing momentum.

The situation in the central part of the country
is one of the Government's major concerns with
regard to attacks by terrorist groups and incidents
involving communities, as well as the lack of agro-
pastoral production to ensure food security. That is
why we believe that the integrated security plan for
central regions, adopted in February 2017, is the ideal
framework for the holistic response we are providing,
with the support of our international partners.

As the Security Council prepares to adopt a draft
resolution to extend the mandate of MINUSMA for one
year, it is important to share with Council members
the real expectations of our Government. In that
connection, I will begin by addressing the support
needed for the electoral process. As members know,
the first round of the presidential elections is scheduled
for 29 July - 45 days from now. The holding of those
elections, under the required conditions of transparency
and credibility, is crucial for the consolidation of
democracy and the legitimacy of the institutions in our
country. That is why the Government, in upholding the
Bamako declaration of3 November 2000, is requesting
substantial support from MINUSMA, particularly in
the areas of security and logistics.

At the same time, the implementation of the
relevant provisions of the Agreement must continue.
We urge MINUSMA to take measures to enable Mali to
re-establish its authority over its entire territory, protect
civilian populations, support the redeployment of the
Administration, support the provision of basic social
services to the population, strengthen cooperation with
the national defence and security forces and accelerate
planned support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel for its effective operationalization.

In order to enable MINUSMA to fully and
properly implement its mandate, the Government of
Mali requests that the capacities of that important
Mission be strengthened in terms of training,
logistics and operational resources. With regard to
the reconfiguration of MINUSMA forces referred
to in the report, the Government of the Republic of
Mali expresses its preference for maintaining and
strengthening the current arrangements in view of the
challenges involved in organizing and securing the
presidential, legislative, regional and local elections,
which run from July 2018 to August 2019. Also, the
reconfiguration, as proposed, could entail, if it were
implemented now, the risk of creating a security
vacuum, which could jeopardize the progress achieved
in the peace process and regional stability.

In that context, the most credible option is to
expedite the implementation of the relevant provisions
of articles 21 and 54 of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation, which stipulate, inter alia, that the
redeployment of the reconstituted armed and security
forces shall be carried out under the leadership of the
Operational Coordination Mechanism with the support
of MINUSMA and that the international community
is the guarantor of the scrupulous implementation of
the Agreement.

The report under review indicates an increase in
cases of human rights violations, including inhumane
and degrading treatment, arbitrary detention and
extrajudicial executions, with particular reference
to the Malian defence and security forces working in
the context of anti-terrorist operations. In that regard,
as I have said before when addressing the Council, I
would like to strongly reiterate the commitment of
the Government of the Republic of Mali to respect,
and ensure respect for, human rights. I reaffirm here
my country's full commitment to the successful
investigation of every case reported in the report. In that
connection, I note that administrative and disciplinary
measures have been taken with regard to military units
deployed in the regions concerned, military prosecutors
have been seized to clarify the reported cases and the
results of those investigations will be published as soon
as possible.

As I have had to emphasize before the Council, the
Government of Mali, in compliance with the directives
of the President of Republic, observes a zero-tolerance
policy on human rights violations. We have specifically
asked MINUSMA to share with us the information
it has so that we can work together to ensure that all
investigation processes are completed and judicial
action is taken if necessary. In that regard, I welcome
the Secretary-General's recognition, in paragraphs 37
and 38 of his report, that the Government has clearly
reiterated its commitment to not tolerate abuses
against civilians.

The Government of Mali is aware of the urgent
need to make the presidential elections on 29 July as
transparent and peaceful as possible. It is working
to that end daily and without respite. It is in that
context that a consultation framework has been set
up, including the political parties of the presidential
majority, the opposition and civil society. At the same
time, I can assure members of the Council that the
material and logistical arrangements are in place to
ensure free, reliable and peaceful elections. An audit of
the electoral register was conducted, which was carried
out by a team from the International Organization of
la Francophonie that found the register to be reliable.
I would mention that the chair of the audit committee
was a representative from the opposition. New voter
registration cards have been printed and will be
distributed in the coming days. A consensus-based
revision of the electoral law was conducted and put
to the vote in the National Assembly. The Malian
opposition did not vote against it. That demonstrates
a genuine space for dialogue and highlights efforts to
ensure full inclusion in the preparations for elections
and the full participation of all Malian stakeholders in
the political process.

The Government will do its utmost to ensure
that elections are conducted in a safe environment
across the country. More than 11,000 members of the
Malian defence and security forces will be deployed,
in addition to our MINUSMA partners, the French
Operation Barkhane force and contributions from
signatory movements. We must commend and thank all
our partners for the assistance that each has provided to
ensure success in the upcoming elections, which will be
important for peacebuilding in Mali and in the Sahel.

As the Council knows, combating terrorist groups
and other transnational organized crime elements
remains a priority for the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel. To that end, I again request that
the Council ensure that the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel be granted a mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and
predictable and permanent funding, including through
the United Nations.

1 would like to reiterate that the Government
of Mali remains fully determined to honour its
commitments in implementing the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, which, for us, is the only
reference framework for a lasting settlement of the
crisis and the only political endeavour that could help
us rebuild national unity.
Lastly, on behalfofthe Government and the people military personnel and civilians, who have lost their
of Mali, 1 should like once again to pay tribute to the lives in M3"

memory of all Malians and non-Malians alike, both The meeting rose at5.15p.m.
