Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I, too, should like to join in condolences to the
Government and the people of China for the
earthquake that they suffered today.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for
his briefing on the situation in the Middle East, and the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.

Since the Council's most recent consideration of
the issue at hand, the situation in the Middle East has
continued to deteriorate and tension and violence
between the parties have increased. The situation is
most worrisome and not conducive to the resumption
of dialogue. In these circumstances, the international
community, including this Council, should continue to
encourage the swift resumption of direct peace
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority based on agreements and obligations
previously reached.

We know that this is the only way to achieve a
comprehensive and definitive solution to the conflict in
the Middle East that will reaffirm recognition of
Israel's right to exist and enable the establishment of a
politically and economically viable Palestinian State
living side by side with Israel within secure and
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions, the Road Map, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. We
therefore support the Quartet's declaration of 19 March
and welcome the initiative to hold so-called proximity
talks so long as they lead to the unconditional
resumption of direct negotiations within a reasonable
time frame and do not become an exercise in
distraction.

In order to establish conditions conducive to
dialogue, it is indispensable that Israel and the
Palestinian Authority respect the Road Map principles
that form the basis for the resolution of all pending
issues in this conflict. Similarly, both parties should
avoid actions that run counter to international law and
international humanitarian law, as well as any
provocative statement or act of violence that could lead
to an escalation of the conflict.

We reiterate once again that the demolition of
homes, evictions and the expansion of settlements in
the West Bank and East Jerusalem, including so-called
natural growth, constitute violations of international
law and represent serious obstacles to the peace
process. We urge Israel to cease these practices as soon
as possible and to revoke recent measures taken in East
Jerusalem so as to open the genuine possibility of
resuming negotiations. Such unilateral actions should
not prejudge the result of negotiations and will not be
recognized by the international community.

We commend the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority to meet its commitments in the areas of
security and economic development in the West Bank,
which have now begun to bear fruit. In that regard, we
also note the positive economic and human impact of
Israel's initiative to partially lift restrictions on the
movement of people and goods in the West Bank. We
hope that these measures will be pursued and lead to
the full and irreversible dismantling of all checkpoints,
which is an indispensable condition for the
establishment of a viable and independence Palestinian
State.

We are convinced that improvement in the living
conditions of the Palestinian people, coupled with
effective security control by the Palestinian authorities
in the West Bank, are fundamental elements in the
achievement of lasting peace in the Middle East. We
therefore support the plan of Prime Minister Fayyad to
build the economic and institutional bases of the future
Palestinian State, and we call on the Quartet and the
international community to actively support that effort.

The deterioration of the humanitarian situation
and the intensification of violence in Gaza and
southern Israel are also sources of serious concern. The
blockade of the population of the Gaza Strip has
proved to be counterproductive because it perpetuates
the illicit trafficking of materials, fuel and food and
opens the door to the illicit traffic in weapons, thereby
jeopardizing the security of the entire region. Proof of
that is the increase in rocket attacks against the civilian
population of Israel, which have generated new
military reprisals, with tragic consequences. We
condemn such acts of violence and once again urge all
actors to respect the provisions of international
humanitarian law at all times.

The international community must do its utmost
to prevent a new spiral of violence that could lead to
armed confrontation. In these tense times, we call for
general calm and respect for the provisions of
resolution 1860 (2009). We insist once again on the
need to establish an international monitoring
mechanism to guarantee a lasting ceasefire, the
opening of border crossings and the control of illicit
weapons trafficking. We also support the initiatives of
the Secretary-General with respect to the
reconstruction of infrastructure in Gaza, and we
welcome Israel's agreement to permit some of these
projects to begin and to allow certain essential products
to enter Gaza. This is a first step that should lead to the
full opening of the crossing points. We also stress the
importance of completing as soon as possible the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process, supported by
Egypt. It, too, is a fundamental step towards the
construction of the future Palestinian State.

Peace in the Middle East also has a regional
dimension. We are therefore concerned by the ongoing
Violations of the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006),
in particular the daily incursions of Israeli armed
forces into the territory of Lebanon; by the discovery
of weapons and explosives in the zone of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon; and by
other incidents under investigation. We call on
Lebanon, Israel and all other actors involved to honour
the provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and to refrain from belligerent rhetoric that
could lead to an escalation of violence. It is critical to
this process that the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of Lebanon be
strengthened. We also hope that Israel and Syria will
resume their indirect talks, which could help to begin
to resolve pending questions and foster confidence and
security in both States.

In recent days there have been important
initiatives in the area of arms control and nuclear non-
proliferation. And we are only a few weeks away from
the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The Middle
East must not be an exception in this sphere. Mexico is
convinced that the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-
free zone in the region of the Middle East should be
part of a broad, comprehensive political understanding
that guarantees peaceful coexistence among sovereign
States in that region, including a future Palestinian
State, and that takes account of the legitimate security
concerns of all States.

