Mr. Takasu: It is my distinct honour and pleasure
to present to the Council the annual report on the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2008/4l7). The
report covers the wide range of activities undertaken
by the Commission during its previous session. Thanks
to the dedicated efforts of members, the Commission
made steady progress and produced concrete results in
many areas of its work.

Maintaining peace and security is a prerequisite
for successful post-conflict peacebuilding efforts. It is
equally true that durable peace and a sustainable State
will never be achieved without good governance, the
rule of law, respect for human rights and economic
recovery and development. The Peacebuilding
Commission is a unique United Nations organ that
addresses all those challenges in an integrated and
coherent manner. It brings together all stakeholders. It
formulates an integrated strategy and monitors its
implementation. It garners support and mobilizes
resources. The Commission is grateful to the Council
for the political guidance and substantial support that it
has received and that is essential in fulfilling such a
role. I also believe that the Commission can in turn
fulfil a useful role complementary to that of the
Council.

First, the four country-specific configurations
engaged in intensive work, under the strong leadership
of the respective Chairs, to produce tangible results
supporting national efforts. Integrated strategies were
adopted for Burundi and Siena Leone, and they are
now being implemented. The strategy for Guinea-
Bissau was recently adopted. A field mission will visit
the Central African Republic shortly to prepare for that
country's strategy. The notions of national ownership,
sustained partnership with the international community,
mutual accountability and dialogue - in other words,
a cooperative and participatory approach - have come
to be the greatest assets and have added value to the
Commission.

Secondly, there are many more countries in the
world than those now on our agenda that are facing
challenges in the post-conflict process. The
Peacebuilding Commission may provide invaluable
support for efforts to address these challenges by
developing effective peacebuilding strategies and
08-56187
policies. With that purpose in mind, the Organizational
Committee conducted in-depth policy discussions on
the synergy between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and the role of the private sector. The Working Group
on Lessons Learned took up several topics in order to
share best practices from past efforts.

Thirdly, a serious effort was made to enhance
partnerships at the highest level, in particular with the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), the African Union and the European Union.
Regular consultations with the Presidents of the
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council were established. Many outreach efforts
were made by the Chairpersons and the Peacebuilding
Support Office to deepen understanding regarding the
specific needs of post-conflict countries and the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Building upon our achievements to date, I would
like to outline four priority areas that need to be
focused upon.

First, we must continue to produce tangible
results on the ground. We should bring about Visible
impacts of direct benefit to the people in the countries
under consideration. To consolidate peace, it is
essential that people actually be able to see and
experience signs of the arrival of peace after a
ceasefire, in the form of positive changes in their
livelihoods. We need to elicit the support of all
stakeholders and to mobilize resources, not only from
traditional partners but also by bringing in new and
non-traditional partners.

In that context, the call made by the Security
Council in the recent presidential statement on Guinea-
Bissau (S/PRST/2008/37) for support for the
implementation of its integrated strategy was very
useful and appreciated. Such political support by the
Council is essential if the Peacebuilding Commission is
to fulfil its mandate. I hope that the Council will
continue to express its strong support for the work of
the Commission and the implementation of the
integrated strategies.

It is crucial that the United Nations presence on
the ground have the appropriate mandate and capacity
to support the work of the Commission and the
engagement of the national Governments concerned.
The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone is a good example. We would encourage
08-56187
the Council to consider that need when it reviews the
mandates of relevant missions and offices.

Secondly, strategic and policy discussion must be
deepened. The strategy for international peacebuilding
efforts is still in its early stages of development. We
must make every effort to develop policies on how to
fill the gap between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and also the gap between peacebuilding and
development. There is a need to promote policy
guidance for effective peacebuilding efforts through
discussions in the Commission. Topics such as youth
employment, the role of the private sector, justice and
peace and the subregional dimension may be
considered. Post-conflict early recovery will be a major
issue of interest, both for the Council and for the
Commission in the coming months. The Commission
will cooperate closely with the Secretariat in preparing
the report of the Secretary-General on that subject, and
early examination by the Commission will provide
useful inputs to the forthcoming review in the Council.

In anticipation of the inclusion of additional
countries on the agenda, the issue of the entry point for
the Peacebuilding Commission is also important.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not mutually
exclusive. We should avoid duplication of efforts, of
course, but some overlap may be necessary and
justified in certain cases to ensure a seamless
transition. We request the Council to continue to
consult closely with the Commission on the referral
process.

Thirdly, partnership must be strengthened.
Building upon efforts to establish strong partnerships
with United Nations funds and programmes, the World
Bank, the IMF, regional development banks and major
bilateral players, we must continue those efforts in
order to make certain that the commitment of those
partners is translated into specific cooperation on the
ground. We will also continue to engage actively with
civil society organizations.

Fourthly, the coherence of the Peacebuilding
Commission's activities must be ensured. We will
continue our efforts to ensure that all parts of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture work in a
coherent and coordinated manner for the sole purpose
of serving people on the ground. As many Member
States urged last week in the general debate of the
General Assembly, the Commission will continue to
3
improve the efficiency of its working methods, with a
clear sense of added value.

Finally, during the reporting period, the
relationship between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission was well established. As
Chairperson, I regularly consulted with the Presidents
of the Council, and I am very grateful for that courtesy.
In addition, the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations were regularly invited to the relevant
Council meetings. I was personally invited to open
Council debates on cooperation with the African
Union, security sector reform, women and peace and
security, and post-conflict early recovery. Those
interactions became an established practice that is
beneficial to both organs.

In recent years, the Government of the Central
African Republic has worked to re-establish stability
throughout the country and to launch a national
reconciliation process. In the international community
that has engendered the hope that the situation in the
Central African Republic will be stabilized in the
coming years, as well as renewed trust in the political
will of the country's protagonists.

National ownership has already been reflected in
the identification of national priorities. We welcome
the commitment of the Government to make training a
crucial part of its future efforts. The process of
political dialogue should be restarted and include all
armed groups and political actors, so as to genuinely
re-establish peace and stability throughout the whole of
the country's territory. The Commission will therefore
have to support the Government's efforts, on the one
hand, while, on the other, the Government
demonstrates true political will in order to together
build lasting peace in the Central African Republic.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute to the
leadership of Ambassador Takasu, Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission, who has succeeded in
breathing the necessary life into the work of the
Commission during the second year of its existence. I
should also like to express our appreciation for the
work of the Peacebuilding Support Office and to thank
Ms. Carolyn McAskie for her commitment. I also wish
to express our full cooperation to Ms. Jane Holl Lute,
the new Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding
Support.
