Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
warmly to thank you, Sir, for having selected this issue
for this wrap-up discussion. We feel that it is a very
important issue and that it is quite timely, in view of
the upcoming Security Council missions to Africa.

As Greece will be speaking on behalf of the
European Union after my delegation has spoken, and in
order to be brief, as is required for our statements
today, we will limit ourselves to expressing our views
on four points which, in my delegation's view, are of
particular importance given the fact that these missions
are about to take place - missions in which we will be
involved.

First, I will touch on the subregional dimension,
which is of extreme importance in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in Africa. We believe that
subregional initiatives must have the support of the
international community. In this regard, we are pleased
to note the increasingly important role played by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in West Africa, and in particular its active
participation in the conflict in Cote d'Ivoire.

We also have noted with interest the revitalization
of the Economic and Monetary Community of Central
Africa (CEMAC) in the context of the conflict in the
Central African Republic. We also believe that it is
important to revitalize the forum established by the
Mano River Union, which could play a very important
role in promoting confidence-building measures among
its three member countries.

It is also encouraging to note at the regional level
that the African Union is prepared to play an active
role in managing and resolving conflicts, as can be
seen in the mission now deployed in Burundi to
supervise the ceasefire and to demobilize the rebel
groups on a voluntary basis.

Secondly, the humanitarian situation is an integral
part of conflicts and not a subsidiary or auxiliary one.
It is essential for humanitarian questions to play a
central role in the resolution phase of conflicts because,
unfortunately, the repercussions of the complex
conflicts taking place in Africa very dramatically affect
civilian populations. My delegation would reiterate that
it is unacceptable that in many cases the various
warring factions do not allow humanitarian
organizations access to the civilian population.

Thirdly, respect for human rights is a fundamental
issue and is also related to the question of how to
address the question of responsibility for violations of
human rights in the resolution phase of a conflict. We
deem impunity to be unacceptable. Only by
establishing adequate mechanisms which ensure just
treatment of this issue can progress be made in
reconciliation, which is one of the greatest challenges
for societies emerging from conflict.

Fourthly, and lastly, let me turn to the post-
conflict phase. It is important for the Security Council
to pay due attention to this phase, since its fragility is
one of the greatest challenges facing those African
States which have been able to emerge from conflict.

In many cases, this post-conflict phase takes
place in a regional framework characterized by other
conflicts and by the presence of destabilizing factors
such as arms trafficking, the presence of mercenaries or
the problem of refugees. It is very important, therefore,
for the international community to follow up this post-
conflict phase very closely, providing the required
political and financial support.

In this regard, we welcome the increasingly close
cooperation between the Council and the Economic and
Social Council in establishing ad hoc groups, and we
endorse the comments to this effect that were made this
morning by Special Adviser Gambari.

To conclude, we express our gratitude once again
for the choice of this issue for today's meeting. We are
confident that the practical conclusions that we reach
today will be integrated into the missions and that the
principal recommendations of the missions will receive
adequate follow-up from the Council.

