Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We are deeply honoured that the Foreign
Minister of Singapore is presiding over this important
meeting.

Today is an historic day for East Timor and for
the United Nations. It is above all a time to rejoice as
East Timor celebrates its first day of independence.
Cuba has expressed its wish to establish diplomatic
relations with East Timor and to develop lasting bonds
of friendship and cooperation with that country. We are
particularly pleased at the fact that, on its very first day
as an independent State, East Timor has formally
requested admission as the 190th State Member of the
United Nations. We are certain that this request will
enjoy the full support of all.

Many difficult challenges lie ahead for the newly
independent State. That is why it will continue to need
the careful attention, assistance and cooperation of the
international community, including the United Nations.
The United Nations must remain in East Timor for as
long as is necessary - no more and no less. The
planning that has been done for the United Nations
presence in East Timor over the next two years is
prudent and timely. The Secretary-General could not
have made a better choice than that of Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma to head the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor, which is formally established
as of today. Aware of his skills and dedication, we are
convinced that Ambassador Sharma will successfully
fulfil his new responsibility.

The Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, of which Cuba is a founding member, had the
situation of East Timor on its agenda for many years.
We are gratified that the efforts of the Committee are
recognized in the presidential statement to be adopted
by the Security Council today.

The maintenance of harmonious relations
between East Timor and its neighbours will be of great
importance to the stability and prosperity of the region.
In that respect, we wish to recognize the role played by
Indonesia in the peace process and its support of the
United Nations work in East Timor. We note with
satisfaction the full readiness of both parties to resolve
pending issues and to build a relationship of
partnership, cooperation and friendship.

Speaking before the Security Council on 26
April, both President Xanana Gusmao and Chief
Minister Alkatiri emphasized the need for international
support in several areas of great importance to East
Timor. In concrete response to those appeals, Cuba is
opening the necessary contacts with the Government of
East Timor in order to offer assistance in various areas.
The Cuban delegation attending the proclamation of
independence ceremonies will submit to the East
Timorese authorities a number of concrete proposals
for bilateral assistance and cooperation.

In conclusion, I wish on behalf of my country, the
greatest of success to the entire Government and
people of East Timor and to assure them that they can
always count on Cuba's support and solidarity.

