Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti: I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for inviting me to
brief the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

I welcome the Permanent Representative
of Mozambique, as Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP), Ambassador
Antonio Gumende; the Permanent Representative of
C6te d'Ivoire, on behalf of the President of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Commission, Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba; and
the Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau,
Ambassador Joao Soares Da Gama. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his briefing and for his
valuable work as head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).

Since the coup d'etat of 12 April, the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
has been striving to facilitate dialogue among the
main stakeholders and international partners of
Guinea-Bissau, in particular ECOWAS and the
CPLP, to enable concerted action by the international
community in addressing the situation in the country.
A number of coordination meetings have taken place.
Although the international community has shown unity
of purpose - the restoration of constitutional order
and the return of stability to Guinea-Bissau - we still
lack a common strategy to achieve those goals. Such
objectives can only be reached if the international
partners of Guinea-Bissau speak with one voice,
underscoring that the international community will
work in a coherent and coordinated manner towards an
inclusive and sustainable solution to the current crisis.

Almost four months after the military coup,
constitutional order is still to be restored and
the humanitarian and economic situation keeps
deteriorating on the ground, as we just heard from
Mr. Mutaboba's briefing. The derailment of the
electoral process has reduced international confidence
and donor support for the country, thus threatening the
hard-won socio-economic gains that stability brought to
Guinea-Bissau in the recent past, especially as regards
institution-building, economic recovery, financial
management and the fight against drug trafficking.

The current arrangement for the transition in
Guinea-Bissau has not been accepted by key national
stakeholders, and still does not meet the requirements
of legitimacy according to many of the country's
international partners. It is not conducive to stability
or a sustainable political solution, as it excludes the
main political force in Guinea-Bissau. The current
transitional arrangement also calls into question the
country's capacity to pursue efforts related to its most
pressing peacebuilding priorities, such as security sector
reform and the fight against impunity and transnational
organized crime, in particular drug trafficking.

The restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau should be brought about through
dialogue and negotiations, with the participation of all
political forces in the country. The United Nations, the
African Union, ECOWAS, the CPLP and the European
Union should seek convergence of views and mutually
reinforce each other's actions in order to support such
a process.

To that end, we should consider the holding of a
high-level meeting on Guinea-Bissau, to be convened
by the Secretary-General, with the aim of articulating a
common strategy to bring a lasting and stable solution
to the current crisis in Guinea-Bissau. Such a meeting
would require adequate preparation in order to achieve
meaningful results. The configuration is ready to
contribute to such an initiative.

