Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this briefing on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) and congratulates
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of UNAMI, for her
informative briefing on the latest developments and
continuing challenges to peace and stability in Iraq.

cote d'Ivoire welcomes the spirit of compromise
that has prevailed in the Iraqi political class and has
made it possible to fill the vacant posts of the Ministers
of Justice, the Interior and Defence. Cote d'Ivoire
encourages Iraqi political actors to continue along
that path with a View to appointing a consensus choice
to head the Ministry of Education, whose mission is
crucial, particularly in war-affected areas. Forming a
complete Government should make it possible to meet
basic social needs, especially in the areas of health,
education, water and electricity. The election of the
chairs, vice-chairs and rapporteurs of the parliamentary
committees, an essential cog in the institutional
machinery, is also to be welcomed.

My country urges the Iraqi authorities to ensure that
the gender dimension is effectively taken into account in
their peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. Similarly,
with regard to the particularly alarming humanitarian
situation in some regions of Iraq, my country would
like to urge the international community to pursue its
efforts to mobilize the necessary resources to finance
the 2019 humanitarian response plan, amounting to
$701.2 million, of which only 41.1 per cent has been
raised so far.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the cooperation between
the federal Government and the Kurdish Regional
Government and hopes that dialogue will be maintained
in order to find mutually satisfactory solutions to the
issues of oil resource sharing and Kurdistan's debt.

Concerning the fight against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, which remains active despite its
military defeat, my country calls for substantial support
to be provided to the Iraqi forces in terms of capacity-
building. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
constructive cooperation between the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, UNAMI and the Government of Iraq. In my
country's view, it is imperative to enforce the principle
of accountability for crimes committed by Da'esh,
in keeping with the provisions of resolution 2379
(2017), in order to guarantee victims' rights through
fair proceedings. In addition, Cote d'Ivoire calls for
continued cooperation between the Governments of
Iraq and Kuwait in order to find a definitive solution to
the issue of missing Kuwaiti nationals and the return of
seized assets.

Given the multifaceted challenges facing Iraq, my
country would like to reiterate its call to the international
community to continue its support for the Iraqi
Government in its post-crisis reconstruction efforts.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its full
support for UNAMI and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for their continued commitment
to peace, long-term stability and development in Iraq.

