Mr. Dumitru (Romania): First of all, the
Romanian delegation would like to welcome the
presence here of the Presidents of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), Judge Meron and Judge Mose, as well as of
the Prosecutors of the two International Tribunals,
Ms. Del Ponte and Mr. Jallow. We would also like to
thank our guests for their highly informative and
comprehensive presentation of the most recent
measures put in place to implement the completion
strategies of the two Tribunals.
While we welcome the significant progress made
in implementing the completion strategies, we are,
however, concerned about the continued existence of a
number of factors that could jeopardize the time frames
set out in Security Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and
1534 (2004). We emphasize in this respect the
importance of full cooperation by all relevant countries
with the Tribunals, especially by arresting and handing
over the principal fugitives, facilitating access to
evidence and granting waivers of immunity to enable
witnesses to provide statements or testify before the
Tribunals.

We are of the View that an increased level of
cooperation would also have a positive impact on
relations between some of those countries and various
international organizations.

Constantly reviewing the caseload of the
Tribunals in order to retain on their docket only those
cases involving the most senior leaders, suspected of
being most responsible for crimes within the
jurisdiction of the relevant Tribunal is also essential for
the successful implementation of the completion
strategies. We would be interested to learn in further
detail how the mechanism envisaged by the judges of
the ICTY in this respect by amending the rules of
procedure and evidence will further facilitate this
process.

Nevertheless, we are of the opinion that the
concept of senior perpetrators could be further
adjusted, as the wording of resolution 1534 (2004)
permits, so as to allow an even greater number of cases
to be transferred to national jurisdictions. Of course, in
putting forward such a proposal, we are well aware of
the need that all the requirements relating to the full
observance of fair trial, due process and international
human rights have equally to be met. It is also in this
context that we welcome the efforts jointly undertaken
by the Tribunal and the Office of the High
Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
establishing the War Crimes Chamber in Sarajevo, and
encourage the authorities in Zagreb and Belgrade to
take the requisite steps in order to overcome obstacles
that would prevent the transfer of such cases to their
national courts.

Insofar as the ICTR is concerned, we take note of
the fact that the Prosecutor contemplates, in paragraph
39 of his report, the possibility that none of the cases
might be transmitted to national jurisdictions, in which
situation the Prosecutor may eventually consider
alternate proposals to be made by the Security Council.
Perhaps Mr. Jallow could comment on those alternate
proposals.

While an increased number of guilty pleas
entered by those accused at both Tribunals would
undoubtedly facilitate compliance with the terms of the
completion strategies, we are of the View that efforts to
reach that objective should not result in compromising
internationally recognized principles of due process,
fairness and the rights of both the accused and the
Victims.

On the other hand, in the case of the ICTR, the
limited number of accused who have pleaded guilty
might lead to the worrisome conclusion that there is a
substantial lack of awareness and willingness to
assume responsibility for the grave crimes committed
by a large majority of indictees.

Turning now to the issue of the end of the tenure
of the ICTY's permanent Judges, which could also
affect the implementation of the completion strategy, I
should like to express Romania's readiness to further
contribute to discussions within the Security Council
aiming at identifying a viable and commonly agreed
solution.

