Mr. Skoog: I am truly honoured to brief the Security Council on behalf of the European Union (EU). As of today it has been 12 months since the Government of the Central African Republic and 14 armed groups signed the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic in Bangui. The report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/124) gives a clear picture of the accomplishments in the implementation of the peace process, as well as of the remaining challenges. I will focus on those areas in which the European Union sees the greatest need for all stakeholders now to act with resolve. Let me mention what we see as positive developments. First, this is the only one among the many earlier agreements signed in the Central African Republic that is holding. This is not a minor achievement, it needs to be consolidated, and confidence in the agreement needs to be maintained and strengthened. This will best done through its effective implementation. This result is largely owing to the determination of President Touadera and his Government to maintain a courageous and conciliatory posture. We welcome the appeasing approach adopted in dealing with the former Presidents' return to the country. They have to become part of the process. We also commend the Government for pursuing the dialogue with other stakeholders, including former high-level officials, armed groups and the region. Holding bilateral joint commissions with neighbours of the Central African Republic helps to build confidence and solidify peace. We also see progress in setting up the special mixed security units, which benefit from significant EU support. We are witnessing the first encouraging signs of State authority returning to some regions, and as the deployment of the national Armed Forces is progressing, we should ensure that the process receives the necessary support in order to be sustainable and credible. By now, all stakeholders should realize that, despite its imperfections, the Bangui agreement remains the only joint and viable framework for peace, whereby everyone - signatories, facilitators, civil society, political actors, and partners of the country - has a role to play in making it work. (spoke in French) Let me also talk today about the next steps and the challenges that we must face. One year after the signing of the agreement, several armed groups continue to fail to uphold their commitments. The violence that erupted on Sunday in Birao between two armed groups was unfortunately not an isolated incident. It was a planned operation carried out to undermine the peace agreement. At the end of the day, the local populations are the main victims and the work of the humanitarian actors is prevented. Nothing justifies that violence. The European Union urges the parties to honour their word. We also call on the Government and the guarantors and the facilitators of the Bangui agreement to act and to seriously consider imposing sanctions against those responsible for those acts. This intolerable situation must end. The violence is also the result of a culture of impunity that has gone on for far too long. The fight against impunity must be pursued and centred on justice. That is one of the key provisions of the agreement, which is critical to supporting the population. In addition, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process must be stepped up and carried out simultaneously with the establishment of the special mixed security units. In that regard, the specific criteria for demobilization, disarmament, verification and training must be followed to the letter. Unfortunately, we note that some armed groups are not meeting those criteria, although they are well defined. Instead of committing to their obligations, several leaders are trying to renegotiate the terms. Once again, we urge the guarantors and facilitators of the agreement to take the appropriate measures necessary. (spoke in English) That brings me to the role of the European Union. We stand by our commitment to working with the Government and the people of the Central African Republic and all other stakeholders. Our commitment is also clearly attested by the European Union's significant support for the upcoming elections. The EU will shoulder roughly half of the estimated budgetand plans to deploy electoral experts. We hope that other donors will follow our example, and we echo the appeal made earlier by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in that respect. Elections are essential to consolidating democracy and democratic institutions. Postponement is not an option. Political leaders must show responsibility by contributing to a peaceful, transparent and inclusive electoral process. Likewise, the support of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) for security and logistics remains of critical importance. The constitutional calendar needs to be respected. The EU is deploying a civilian mission - the European Union Advisory Mission in the Central African Republic - to support reform and deployment of the internal security forces. The EU Advisory Mission will complement the valued work done by our European Union Military Training Mission in the Central African Republic (EUTM-RCA). The EUTM-RCA continues to work in full transparency, coordination and cohesion with MINUSCA and others. Iwilljustadd final word to reiterate ourcommitment to a solid partnership with the United Nations and the African Union, as shown by, among other things, our joint trilateral high-level mission to the Central African Republic. I would like to stress that the recent campaigns of manipulation and disinformation against international partners in the country, notably against MINUSCA, are a matter of serious concern to us. I want to reiterate our full support for the work of the Mission and praise the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who is here today. The Central African Republic has the potential to turn into a success story for the Council and, most important, for the people of the country itself, but that will require that we remain united, engaged and mobilized.
