Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Sir, for presiding over this debate.
Let me also thank Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui,
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), for his significant contribution to the
Mission. I would like also to thank Mr. Nigel Fisher for
taking on the important responsibility for MINUSTAH.
I would also like to pay tribute to the men and women
of MINUSTAH for the commitment and fortitude they
have demonstrated under difficult circumstances.

I welcome the Secretary-General's report on
MINUSTAH (S/2013/139), issued on 8 March. As
the report mentions, Haiti continues to face many
challenges. Haiti still needs to improve its basic
infrastructure, such as roads, electricity and the
provision of potable water, as well as social services,
including access to education and medicine.

High levels of unemployment and crime also
persist. The establishment of a temporary electoral
council is also needed to carry out the next election in
a peaceful and democratic manner. Many challenges
remain for Haiti on its path to recovery, reconstruction
and development. In addition, Hurricane Sandy hit the
nation in late October. The international community
responded promptly, and Japan provided an emergency
grant of $1.2 million. However, more support is still
needed.

The international community, however, also
acknowledges and welcomes the progress that has
been made in the recovery process in Haiti. Since
the earthquake in 2010, more than 10 million cubic
metres of debris have been removed, and the number of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) has been reduced by
more than 75 per cent. Now that three years have passed
since the deadly earthquake, the Mission remains
highly necessary and significant, but the needs of the
Haitian people have shifted. Haiti has made remarkable
progress since Japan pledged $100 million towards
emergency relief and reconstruction in 2010. Japan has
actually already disbursed an amount exceeding that
original pledge.

In recognition of that shift on the ground, Japan
decided in July 2012 that it would wind down the
operations of the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force's
engineering unit in Haiti; the unit had withdrawn from
Haiti by the end of December 2012. The number of
personnel who have served in the Japanese contingent
since its beginning totals approximately 2,200.

The contingent has made contributions to the
recovery of Haiti through various efforts, including
the removal of rubble, the dismantling of damaged
buildings, the repair of facilities in IDP camps,
road repair, the construction of orphanages, and the
distribution of water in response to the outbreak of
cholera. The contingent also contributed to human
resources development in Haiti through the sharing
of expertise on civil engineering equipment. That
equipment also was finally donated to the Haitian
Government.
The Japan Ground Self-Defense Force's engineering
unit was able to gain a great deal of experience in
MINUSTAH. In that context, we would like to share
that experience here, in New York, at a seminar today.
Starting at 2:30 p.m., the Permanent Mission of Japan,
together with the Permanent Mission of Brazil, will host
a seminar at the Japan Society focusing on the evolving
roles of military engineering units in peacekeeping
missions. Engineering units can play a critical
enabling role in multidimensional missions as early
peacebuilders. Our seminar will aim at illuminating,
and gaining an in-depth picture of, the evolving roles
of engineering units, as well as identifying future
opportunities and challenges.

Even after the withdrawal of its engineering
unit, Japan intends to continue to support Haiti. The
Government of Japan will continue to provide support
to Haiti for its restoration and the establishment of basic
social services, mainly in the fields of health, hygiene
and education. Japan recently decided to provide
$5.7 million in food aid and $1.6 million in capacity-
building assistance to the Haitian Government.

As the Council is aware, two years have passed
since the Great East Japan Earthquake struck Japan, in
March 2011. We are most grateful that the people of
Haiti expressed their sense of solidarity with the people
of Japan. I am confident that both Haiti and Japan, in
close collaboration with the international community,
will be able to overcome difficulties as we work towards
a brighter future.

