Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): Allow me at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency. You certainly lost no time in exercising your
firm, effective and businesslike leadership. I also
congratulate Ambassador Bakuramutsa of Rwanda on the
job he did last month.

Let me also thank the Security Council members that
left us at the end of last year. Our delegation certainly
learned a tremendous amount from them, and we
appreciated their support throughout the year. We also
welcome the incoming members, three of which, not
losing any time, have already delivered their first
statement here. And today I welcome in particular the
presence of Italy's Foreign Minister, His Excellency
Mr. Martino, in this Chamber.

We are discussing a draft resolution that can be
described as "the son of resolution 943 (1994)". The
Czech Republic figures among its sponsors, and there is

 

a certain logic to this, for we co-sponsored the "original"
resolution, resolution 943 (1994), as well.

Resolution 943 (1994) recognized a certain shift in the
attitude of the leaders of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). We all remember that
they had long thwarted various attempts by the international
community to seek a solution in the former Yugoslavia.
Then, in the fall of 1994, an important shift occurred: they
accepted the territorial arrangement for the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as proposed by the Contact
Group, which the leaders in Pale did not. This difference
between the Serb leaders in Belgrade and those in Pale was
accentuated further when the Belgrade Government closed
down the border with Pale-controlled territories of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Security Council decided not to ignore this fissure
between the two leaderships, but, rather, to accentuate it
further and capitalize on it. To this end, we adopted
resolution 942 (1994), tightening sanctions on Bosnian
Serbs, and on its heels resolution 943 (1994), slightly
alleviating sanctions on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
In so doing, we gave the Belgrade leadership the benefit of
the doubt, assuming for the moment that its apparent
change of heart was serious and would be long-lasting. We
were running a certain risk as well. Belgrade might have
played another trick and gone on in its old ways. There
were safeguards built into resolution 943 (1994), though;
the sanctions in question were only suspended, and a
well-defined mechanism could have reintroduced them
without much ado.

The Mission of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) dealing with monitoring the
border between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina now has 184
international members from 16 countries, including the
Czech Republic. It is about to be increased to 220
members. It controls some 70 checkpoints, most of them
around the clock, on 540 kilometres of border. The work its
members are doing is awesome, often involving great
physical exertion, and my delegation would like to pay
tribute to them here.

What the ICFY Mission can do is no doubt limited,
and some of the limitations are significant. Nevertheless,
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are
cooperating with the Mission. They do react to complaints
as they receive them. They have taken measures that clearly
distance them from any smuggling that does occur. And we
have seen no evidence that those authorities would have
condoned, let alone participated in, the violations of the
border regime that the Mission has detected. The situation
on the border is far more favourable today than it was
when we adopted resolution 943 (1994).

That is why my delegation sees no reason to change
the regime that resolution 943 (1994) introduced. We
would have agreed to an extension even longer than
another hundred days, but we have no problem with the
proposal at hand. The safeguards of resolution 943 (1994)
continue in place, unchanged, just in case Belgrade still
turns out to be of two minds.

Moreover, this new draft specifically reconfirms
paragraph 12 of resolution 820 (1993), an issue which has
been of particular concern to Croatian authorities.

The draft at hand resembles a technical resolution,
extending certain measures in place, but its role really is
primarily political. In this light, even the ICFY Mission
is playing a political role, inasmuch as it underscores the
importance of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's
playing ball with the international community. It is in the
best interests of the international community to continue
to stimulating Belgrade to exert pressure on Pale.

As for the future of sanctions themselves, this is not
the time even to consider their further abatement. The
European Union, through the delegation of Germany,
suggested in the General Assembly a series of steps that
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia could fruitfully adopt.
Of these, the mutual recognition of States of the former
Yugoslavia, within their internationally recognized
borders, is a step that we, too, have repeatedly
recommended. In this light, we look forward to further
progress in the former Yugoslavia.

