We thank the Dominican Republic for organizing this open debate on the importance of looking towards accelerating the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), which is greater today than it has ever been as we look forward to celebrating the fifth anniversary of the youth and peace and security agenda. Malta fully aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union and would like to add a few remarks in her national capacity. Malta believes that young people have an essential role to play in fostering and maintaining peace and security. In this regard, it is necessary to adopt a holistic approach that empowers youth and, at the same time, counteracts the conditions - oppression, injustices, disaffection due to youth unemployment - that provide a breeding ground for terrorism, and to tackle its multiple facets, including countering terrorism and violent extremism, promoting border security, combating terrorist financing, preventing radicalization and addressing the problem of foreign fighters, in full compliance with human rights obligations and in accordance with international law. There is a growing recognition that young people are agents of change in conflict prevention and sustaining peace. Indeed, Malta recognizes that the young can contribute actively to building peace and promoting solidarity. Conscious of the need to empower our young people by opening up additional avenues for participation through which they may express their views and ideas about this important interdependence, Malta has embarked on a number of initiatives at the national level, seeking to give our young people a stronger voice. One such initiative is the lowering of the voting age in local elections to 16 years of age. The early involvement of our youth in decision-making processes, particularly but not exclusively in those that impact them directly, will help ensure that efforts to tackle issues benefit from this additional perspective and that young people, who are themselves the decision- makers of tomorrow, gain a sense of ownership over such processes. Today's debate will provide an invigorated impetus to our engagement with the leaders of the future. It will, in particular, reinforce the United Nations capacity to engage more extensively and systematically with young people. Over time, we have observed that not only are our young people ready to participate as active contributors in debates, but that they have also become advocates for change. Indeed, it has been made abundantly clear that young people are thrilled to participate and envisage multilateralism as an avenue through which they can voice their ideas, cause positive social change and make a difference in their communities and society. In conclusion, we cannot deny the essential contribution of youth to today's society. Firm in this belief, we underline the importance that young people must be empowered and provided with the appropriate tools if we expect them to grow, develop and further shape society. Furthermore, in acknowledging that today's young people represent our future, we must ensure that they are able to develop their leadership skills by instilling in them principles and values. We need to invest in them today to safeguard our future.
