The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

The events in Burundi which have inspired this
resolution are a matter of grave concern to the British
Government. As this resolution makes clear, a lasting and
durable solution to the situation in Burundi can be found
only through a comprehensive political dialogue in
support of the principles of the Convention of
Government. We should like to reaffirm our support for
the Government of Burundi in its efforts to sustain the
principles of the Convention of Government, which sets
the framework within which the parties in Burundi should
work together to promote stability and the rule of law in
that country.

The international community is in our view rightly
focusing its efforts on facilitating such dialogue and on
preventive action designed to avert a further worsening of
the situation in Burundi. The Secretary-General, and

 

through him Mr. Faguy, the Special Representative in
Burundi, as well as former President Nyerere, who was
appointed a facilitator by the Cairo Conference of Heads of
State of the Great Lakes Region, have our strong support.
We also welcome the role played by the Organization of
African Unity and its observers in Burundi. It is right that
those in the region should play an active part in addressing
this problem. We pay particular tribute to those
neighbouring Governments that have offered sanctuary to
persons fleeing the violence.

Since the tragic events of 1993, a climate of insecurity
and fear has prevailed in Burundi, perpetuated by those
who use undemocratic means to undermine the institutions
of government. In adopting this resolution, the Council is
sending a clear message that it condemns those responsible
for the daily killings and other violence in Burundi. It is
particularly abhorrent that violence is directed against those
that are least able to protect themselves - the refugees
and the displaced persons in Burundi - and at those who
seek to ensure the continued delivery of humanitarian relief.
Such actions must stop. We welcome the sending of a
technical security mission to Burundi to examine ways
of improving security arrangements so that humanitarian
operations can continue.

This resolution makes clear the Council's readiness
to take measures against those who seek to determine
Burundi's future by violence. The message to them is
clear. States, particularly those bordering Burundi, can
now help by preventing activity in their territory by
extremist groups that seek to incite violence in Burundi.
This is particularly true in the case of the so-called hate
radio stations.

The resolution also makes clear that the international
community is intensifying its efforts to avert a further
worsening of the situation in Burundi. In this context, we
must not be unprepared for the possibility of a further
worsening in the violence. Further steps of a preventive
nature may be necessary if leaders, both within and
outside the country, do not participate in or support the
efforts currently in train to achieve national reconciliation
and lasting stability in Burundi. We fully support,
therefore, the request made to the Secretary-General to
consider, following consultations as appropriate with the
Organization of African Unity and the Member States
concerned, further preventive steps, and to develop
contingency plans as appropriate. In our mind, no option
is ruled out in principle.

I resume my function as President of the Council.
There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration

of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.
