Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, as you approach the end of
your presidency of the Council for this month, I would
like to congratulate you on the success of your efforts.

We would like to highlight the various informal and
formal meetings that have been held to bring about the
adoption today ofresolution 2222 (2015), which affirms
the importance of protecting journalists in times of
armed conflict. It is apositive step that should contribute
to achieving such protection. The Council has held
many meetings and issued numerous resolutions and
presidential statements on the subject of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict since the topic was first
introduced in the Council, in 1999. However, they have
not been implemented. The conflicts on the ground are
still going on, and the numbers of victims, particularly
women and children, continue to rise in places such
as Syria, South Sudan, the Central African Republic
and the occupied Palestinian territories. Disagreements
between the Council's permanent members and their
exercise of the right to the veto have continued to help
worsen their plight and contribute to the incidence
of serious violations of humanitarian law and human
rights. That in turn has resulted in a huge humanitarian
crisis in terms of internally displaced persons and
refugees, now amounting to 50 million people, the
highest number since the Second World War.

The issue of the protection of civilians is closely
tied to the provision of humanitarian assistance, and
United Nations agencies are therefore having to respond
to calls for help in humanitarian crises all over the
world. The international community in general, and the
Security Council in particular, has failed to provide the
necessary protection in these armed conflicts, helping
to worsen the problems of civilians at a time when the
parties to those conflicts are ignoring all their appeals
and committing endless violations of international
humanitarian law and so forth. That said, the current
situation demands that we raise the awareness of all
the parties to the various conflicts concerning human-
rights violations and ensure accountability for such
acts through international commissions of inquiry and
special tribunals.

I would like to mention the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, where Israel persists
in its colonization policies and where human-rights
violations continue. At the same time, since the conflict
in Syria began, the people of Syria have been facing a
humanitarian disaster that has claimed the lives of more
than 200,000 people, including thousands of children,
and has resulted in the displacement of 12 million as
the crisis continues to worsen. Kuwait has held several
international donor conferences at which a total of
$6.6 billion has been pledged to help ease the Syrian
people's suffering. In that regard, we reaffirm our
support for the efforts oer. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, and the importance of
finding a political solution to the crisis in Syria, based
on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
aimed at fulfilling the Syrian people's aspirations.

The events in Yemen threaten the security of
the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council in the
wake of the acts perpetrated by the partisan forces
of the country's former President Abdullah Saleh.
Those groups want to take power and are completely
ignoring resolution 2216 (2015). They have violated
the humanitarian ceasefire, thereby furthering the
deteriorating humanitarian situation. The unilateral
measures taken by militias and forces loyal to Ali
Abdullah Saleh that control parts of Yemen are
hampering the political transition. In that regard, we
reiterate our support for restoring peace and stability
in Yemen.

In conclusion, my delegation emphasizes that the
protection of civilians must not serve as a political tool.
Impunity must not become a choice in the context of
armed conflict. We therefore reiterate our support for
United Nations efforts to protect civilians in situations
of armed conflict, particularly through peacekeeping
missions, whose mandates and tasks must be clearly
defined to ensure strengthened respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights law. I also reiterate
my country's support for international efforts aimed at
strengthening the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict.

