The President: I thank Mr. Sidikou for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Monseigneur Utembi.

Monseigneur Utembi (spoke in French): The
National Episcopal Conference of the Congo (CENCO)
would like to sincerely thank the President of the
Security Council for having invited us to brief the
members of the Council on the sociopolitical, security
and economic situation prevailing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the run-up to the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo (MONUSCO).

We would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the ongoing support of the United Nations in the
maintenance of peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. To that end, resolution 2277
(2016) calls upon the political and social stakeholders
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to engage in
an open and inclusive political dialogue on the holding
of the presidential election in accordance with the
Constitution. This two-stage dialogue, convened by the
President of the Republic, led to the comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement signed on 31 December
2016 at the Kinshasa Interdiocesan Centre, whose rapid
and full implementation CENCO strongly urges.

With regard to the socio-political situation, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is currently in the
throes of a sociopolitical, security and economic crisis
of increasingly alarming proportions. All the elected
bodies in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
exceeded their mandate, a first in the history of our
country since its independence.

Since the drafters of the Constitution did not
envisage such a state of affairs, the comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement signed at the Kinshasa
Interdiocesan Centre is the only road map that could
rescue the country from its current institutional
crisis. Unfortunately, the special provisions for the
implementation of the agreement have met with
difficulties in being concluded. While the population
is eagerly awaiting elections, the political status quo
resulting from the intransigence of the negotiators on
the remaining points of divergence, and kept in place
by political chicanery and a lack of genuine political
will, runs the risk of indefinitely postponing the full
implementation of the 31 December agreement. It is
also worth mentioning the delays in the implementation
of measures designed to ease political tensions in
the country.

The security situation, which is characterized by
bloody clashes and human rights violations, remains
a source of concern for a large part of the country,
particularly in the Kasai provinces, where the rebellion
against the central authorities, waged by Chief Kamuina
Nsapu militia forces, is spiralling out of control.
We deplore the hundreds of deaths, the exploitation
of minors, who are being doubly victimized - by
recruitment by the militias and the disproportionate
acts of repression by the police - the interruption of
schooling, the dearth of humanitarian assistance and
the imminent risk of famine. There is even talk of mass
graves. In the same area, two United Nations experts
were abducted, as well as one interpreter and three
motorcycle taxi drivers.

The Lord's Resistance Army is operating in the
far north, together with the Mbororo, with the goal
of fomenting misery among the local population.
In North Kivu, in particular in the Beri and Lubero
territories, a series of massacres of the population
continues. In Tanganyika, the deadly clashes between
the Bantu and the Twa that have resulted in the forced
displacement of families are still simmering. There are
continuing tensions in Kongo Central and in Kinshasa,
which experienced deadly confrontations on 19 and
20 September and on 19 and 20 December 2016.

I should point out that the Catholic Church is also
a victim of this tense and insecure situation. It has
been targeted all over the country by hoodlums and
insurgents who accuse it of not doing enough to enable
the authorities to implement the New Year's Eve 2016
agreement. We deplore the physical and verbal threats
that have been made to clerics in a number of dioceses,
where some bishops have received threatening phone
calls from insurgents. Some Church buildings, including
presbyteries and convents, have been attacked, burned
and looted.

With regard to the economy, the sociopolitical
crisis, which is exacerbated by the generalized
insecurity throughout the country, is not good for the
nation's economic health. The value of the Congolese
franc is falling daily against foreign currencies. Many
public and private companies are idle, and it is the
people who are the first victims, since their purchasing
power is not enough to meet their basic needs.

What does the National Episcopal Conference
of the Congo want from the Security Council? If
this crisis continues, it runs the risk of rendering the
agreement of 31 December obsolete and delaying the
elections scheduled for December 2017, or indeed even
calling for a referendum or amending the Constitution.
In that regard, in the wake of the extraordinary meeting
of the Assembly of Bishops on 20 to 25 February,
CENCO appealed to the people of the Congo in an
address entitled "Say no to the deadlock". We believe
that the only way to control the crisis is through the
comprehensive implementation of the New Year's Eve
agreement and the formation of a national Government
that possesses enough legitimacy, as well as the trust
of the Congolese people, to enable it to organize the
elections and ensure a democratic transfer of power.

Based on that, CENCO recommends, first, that the
Security Council give political, diplomatic and legal
support at the international level to the agreement of
31 December, as the only realistic road map that can
enable the Democratic Republic of the Congo to emerge
from the crisis. Secondly, we recommend that the
Council support the institutions created on the basis of
the agreement. Thirdly, the Council should renew and
strengthen MONUSCO's mandate by reactivating its
Intervention Brigade in order to ensure the security of
the civilian population and give logistical support to the
next elections.

Where the international community is concerned,
particularly the African Union, the European Union,
Great Britain and the United States of America,
we recommend, first, that they provide substantial
financial and logistical support to the organization of
the forthcoming elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Secondly, we urge them to provide
humanitarian assistance to all the victims of the
atrocities I have mentioned. Thirdly, they should put
pressure on the political and social stakeholders of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to commit to
effectively implementing the agreement of 31 December.
And, lastly, they should collaborate with the Congolese
authorities in conducting an independent and objective
investigation aimed at identifying those responsible for
the massacres that have occurred, particularly in Beni,
Tanganyika and the Kasai provinces, and for the bloody
clashes in Kinshasa.

The President: I thank Monseigneur Utembi for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Kalala.


