Archbishop Auza: The Holy See congratulates
you, Mr. President, on Kazakhstan's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
for convening this open debate to discuss the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

The Holy See deplores the untold sufferings of
millions in the Middle East because of armed conflicts
in various parts of the region, fuelled by old and new
geopolitical rivalries of countries in and outside the
Middle East. The Holy See believes that to restore
peace to the region, it is urgent that the Council apply
solutions envisioned by the Charter of the United
Nations to put an end to the humanitarian crises that
continue to ravage ancient peoples, religions and
cultures in the Middle East.

The Palestinian-Israeli peace process lies at the
centre of the maelstrom sweeping the Middle East
and is one of the longest-standing conflicts on this
Council's agenda. The Holy See reiterates the urgent
need to resume negotiations between the parties on the
central issues of the conflict, on the basis of all relevant
Security Council resolutions. Pope Francis wrote on
18 January to the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar to affirm
that the Holy See, for its part, will not cease to call
urgently for a resumption of dialogue between Israelis
and Palestinians for a negotiated solution, aimed at the
peaceful coexistence of two States within the borders
agreed between them and internationally recognized,
with full respect for the special nature of Jerusalem,
whose meaning goes beyond any consideration of
territorial issues.

There can be no doubt that the Holy City of
Jerusalem has a very special place not only in the
hearts of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, but also for
worshippers of the three monotheistic Abrahamic
religions everywhere. For that reason, during the 37th
plenary meeting of the tenth emergency special session
ofthe General Assembly, held on 21 December 2017, the
Holy See recalled the obligation of all nations to respect
the historical status quo of the Holy City, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, and
reiterated that only an internationally guaranteed status
can preserve its unique character and be an assurance
of dialogue and reconciliation for peace in the region.

Today's open debate represents a fresh opportunity
and a renewed appeal for action to push forward the peace
processes aimed at finding durable, comprehensive
and equitable solutions to the conflicts in the Middle
East, achieved through political negotiations with the
goodwill and collaboration of all States, under the
effective and impartial United Nations leadership.

