Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
felicitates you, Mr. President, for your excellent
stewardship of the Security Council. We also
congratulate Ambassador Joy ngu and the Permanent
Mission of Nigeria for their successful presidency of
the Council during October 2011.

We are grateful to the Chairs of the Committees
for their briefings, which are a valued form of direct
interaction between Member States and the
Committees.

In the interest of brevity, I shall read out an
abridged version of our statement; the full text will be
circulated to delegations.

Pakistan strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, committed by whomever,
wherever and for whatever purposes. Terrorism and
extremism should not be associated with any religion,
race, ethnicity, faith, value system, culture or society.
No religious tradition or doctrine should be depicted as
encouraging or inspiring acts of terrorism.

Pakistan, as the biggest victim of terrorism, has
paid an enormous price in blood and treasure in the
fight against this scourge.

Pakistan has made considerable progress in
countering the financing of terrorism. Pakistan has
become a party to the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and has
enacted a landmark anti-money-laundering bill. A
financial monitoring unit has been established in the
State Bank of Pakistan to monitor suspicious financial
transactions.

We welcome the split of the sanctions regime
under resolution 1267 (1999) into the Al-Qaida
Committee and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011),
focusing on the Taliban with its country-specific
regime. We hope that the separation of Committees
will go a long way towards refocusing the energies of
the international community in a more precise manner.

Pakistan appreciates the fact that the role of the
Ombudsperson has been enhanced in Security Council
resolution 1989 (2011).

We believe that Security Council resolution 1977
(2011), which extended the mandate of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), should have been negotiated after an open
debate in the Security Council in which all Members of
the United Nations would have had the opportunity to
express their views, inter alia, on scope, limitations,
future direction, tenure of mandate and experiences on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Such an
open debate would have provided a sound basis for
negotiating the extension of the 1540 Committee. An
open and inclusive process for discussing the
resolution would have helped to increase the level of
confidence of all States Members of the United Nations
in this process, as they are the ones that ultimately are
required to implement the resolution, which has its
roots in State-driven efforts.

