Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your friendly country of Indonesia
on your successful management of the work of the
Security Council this month. Your presidency has taken
the task entrusted to it of maintaining international
peace and security and respecting the provisions of the
Charter seriously, as your important statement showed.
I wish you a happy month of Ramadan.

Contrary to the belief of some, we are not opposed
to this open meeting, as it provides my country
and others with an opportunity to speak the truth
about what is happening in the city of Idlib, which is
controlled by the terrorist organization Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham. However, we have reservations about the
systematically politicized approaches taken by some
members of the Security Council, who call for such
meetings every time the Syrian Government and its
allies take legitimate action to protect Syria's citizens
from the acts of terrorist groups.

Those same States closed their eyes and kept
silent with regard to the war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed by the illegitimate United States
alliance in association with militias such as the so-called
Syrian Democratic Forces. They totally destroyed the
city of Raqqa, killing and displacing its population,
as was recently confirmed by Amnesty International,
which found that the international coalition's attacks
had resulted in the greatest recorded destruction of a
city in modern history. They also committed horrible
crimes in Deir ez-Zor governorate that resulted in the
deaths of thousands of civilians and the displacement
of tens of thousands more, especially in the area of
Baghouz and, just a few days ago, in the village of
Al-Shuhail. Besides that, tens of thousands of civilian
Syrians have been held hostage as human shields in the
Rukban camp.

The selective approach of some Council members
is helping terrorist groups and obstructing the efforts
of the Syrian State and its allies to protect the Syrian
people and combat terrorism. They are mobilizing
against the Syrian Government and its allies in order
to raise the terrorist groups' morale and provide them
with protection and political cover to continue their
bloodshed and blackmail. It might be useful for all of
us, when discussing the situation in the city of Idlib, to
have a description of the actual situation there, which
may be summarized as follows.

First, Idlib is a Syrian governorate. It is not in
Germany, Belgium or Kuwait. It is therefore the
Syrian State that is responsible for protecting it and
its Syrian inhabitants from terrorism. It is the Security
Council's responsibility to help the Syrian Government
in that respect. Idlib covers an area of 6,097 square
kilometres, 15 times larger than that of New York City's
five boroughs. We are not talking here about caves in
the Tora Bora mountains but about a vast territory in
Syria occupied by terrorist gangs that the Council has
described as a branch of Al-Qaida. Indeed, in Syria,
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham means Al-Qaida.

Secondly, we all agree that the city of Idlib and
some areas in its vicinity in north-eastern Syria are
controlled by the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorist group,
which is in fact the Al-Nusra Front, which the Security
Council has included on its list of terrorist groups and
entities as an arm of Al-Qaida in Syria. It controls
85 per cent of Idlib.
Thirdly, that terrorist group has exploited the
Turkish regime's disregard of its obligations regarding
the de-escalation zone and under the Astana and
Sochi agreements in order to seize control of Idlib and
create a hotbed of terrorism as a way of blackmailing
the Syrian Government. In response to the comments
by the representative of Belgium on behalf of the
penholders, I would like to point out that there have
been no random attacks on Syrian civilians in Idlib.
There are military operations being conducted by the
Syrian army and its allies against a terrorist entity
listed by the Security Council, aimed at liberating
the civilian population of Idlib and saving them from
being used as human shields by Al-Qaida in Syria. The
terrorists who control Idlib would not have been able to
blackmail millions of Syrians - as the representative
of Belgium indicated - without the support of the
Turkish authorities for that terrorist group and without
their disregard of their commitments under the Astana
and Sochi agreements.

Fourthly, that terrorist group has tens of thousands
of foreign terrorist fighters in its ranks who were
recruited and sent by countries well known to all of
us, some of which are unfortunately members of the
Council, with the full knowledge oftheir Governments.
They were sent from all over the world to join terrorist
organizations with multiple names and allegiances,
such as Huras Al-Din, Jaish Al-Muhajireen Wal-Ansar,
the East Turkestan Army and others, as various United
Nations reports have corroborated. None of the names
of those groups have anything at all to do with Syria.
However, some would like to call them the moderate
armed Syrian opposition.

Fifth, this terrorist group uses hundreds of thousands
of civilians as human shields, commits the most heinous
crimes against them and spreads death and destruction,
as well as destroying civilian infrastructure, including
hospitals and schools, which it turned into military
barracks and centres for detaining and torturing all
those who reject their extremist takfiri ideologies and
thinking. Even worse, those who sponsor it have created
a criminal media arm for its support, namely, the White
Helmets, which receives care and aid from its sponsors.
Sixth, the crimes committed by this terrorist group are
not limited to the areas under its control but include the
neighbouring populated cities and villages, which were
bombed and shelled with random rocket fire, resulting

in the killing of scores of civilian martyrs, most of
whom are women and children, in the cities of Aleppo,
Hama, Latakia, Muhradah, Al-Suqaylabiyah and others
in peaceful Syrian regions. We did not hear anything
from the humanitarian co-penholders in the Council
regarding a call upon the Council to meet and discuss
this inhumane and dangerous development. There
should be just one legitimate question to ask, not three
or five or six that we all must answer. It is a question that
can reassure everyone within and outside the Security
Council. It is as follows: when will the Governments
of certain countries, members and non-members of the
Security Council, stop supporting terrorism in Syria?
My American, British and French colleagues have been
commending the Turkish policy in north-western Syria.
That alone denies credibility to everything they say.

Seventh, the de-escalation agreement in Idlib is a
temporary arrangement. It cannot continue indefinitely.
It resulted from the Astana agreement and is renewable
for six months. Everyone should understand that
upholding that agreement means that the Turkish
regime must end its occupation of vast areas of Syrian
territories. The Turkish regime must also honour its
commitments to the Russian and Iranian guarantors and
the host country, Kazakhstan. It must stop supporting
terrorist groups in Idlib and cease its operations aimed
at imposing Turkish identity and building a wall along
the border south of the city of Manbij.

Against that backdrop, we believe that the question
that should be asked is the following: what options
are available to counter this terrorist threat? In order
to further simplify the question, let us imagine the
following scenarios. Let us imagine, for example, that
an Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorist group with thousands
of fighters takes over the city of Dortmund, Germany,
commits heinous crimes against its inhabitants and
attacks the cities of Dusseldorf, Bonn and Cologne
with rockets and missiles. Let us imagine that a
similar group takes over Antwerp, Belgium, and starts
carrying out heinous crimes against its inhabitants and
shelling Ghent and Brussels with rockets and missiles.
Let us imagine that a third group takes over the city
of Abdali, Kuwait, for example and commits heinous
crimes against its habitants while attacking Bubiyan
Island and the capital with rockets and missiles. Let
us imagine that a similar fourth group takes over the
city of Yonkers, north of New York, perpetrates serious
crimes against its inhabitants and attacks Manhattan,
Brooklyn and Queens with rockets and missiles. Maybe
then we call on Mr. Lowcock to send humanitarian
assistance to the Security Council in order to continue
holding its meetings.

We never want to see those scenarios take place
but, in the case of such a situation, what options would
the Governments of those countries have to protect
civilians? Ibelieve the answer is simple. No Government
will agree to surrender to terrorist threats. No country
will agree to endanger the lives of civilians while
waiting for the political machinations of some and the
hypocrisy associated with humanitarian slogans. No
country will allow its sovereign and constitutional rights
to protect its territory and its citizens to be undermined.
It is a right that is guaranteed by international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and all Security Council
counter-terrorism resolutions.

Putting an end to the suffering ofthe Syrians in Idlib
means ending hypocrisy and politicization; ceasing to
invest in terrorism; stopping to manipulate the fate of
peoples; and adopting objective and logical approaches
based on a profound knowledge of the realities and
available alternatives. It would require a minimum of
repatriating foreign terrorist fighters to their countries
instead of stripping them of their nationality. Those
countries should stop playing the immoral game of
telling the Governments of Iraq and Syria to host the
terrorists and once again suffer the consequences of
their terrorism, which the two countries have already
endured for many long years. My questions to the
countries that offer us such advice is the following: are
you ready to repatriate your citizens who are involved
in terrorist acts in Syria? Are you ready to indicate
which Governments recruited, funded and trained
those terrorists as well as facilitated their transfer into
Syria and enabled them to kill Syrians? Are you ready
to do that?

We once again warn the members of the Council
that the armed terrorist groups are determined to
perform a great play to accuse the Syrian Government
of using toxic chemical products in Idlib. They fabricate
evidence and train some of their elements to pretend
that they are suffering from the consequences of a
chemical agent and to be filmed by well-known media
networks and then accuse the Syrian Arab Republic
of such acts, similar to what has happened on several
occasions in the past.

In that regard, we have sent hundreds of letters to
the Secretary-General, the President of the Security
Council and relevant United Nations counter-terrorism
entities involved in the non-proliferation of chemical
weapons. However, we are sure that some within the
United Nations will once again not hesitate to adopt the
rhetoric of armed terrorist groups and accuse the Syrian
Government. Why? Simply because the agenda of some
within the Organization make it incumbent upon them
to become partners in blackmailing the Syrian Arab
Republic and to target it along with its allies, which are
combating terrorism on behalf of all States.

In conclusion, the continued trade in shedding the
blood of Syrians and the suffering that they endure,
which is not limited to a purely humanitarian issue,
will not prevent the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, supported by its allies, from discharging
its constitutional and legal responsibilities in order
to combat terrorism and protect its citizens. The
humanitarian issue is something, the political track
is something else and combating terrorism is yet
another thing.

