Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): For nearly two
weeks now, the Israeli military onslaught against
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip has raged unabated. Just
yesterday we witnessed a new low, with news of Israeli
strikes against schools operated by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
09-20163
Near East. Innocent civilians, including women and
children seeking refuge, have fallen victim. Once
again, Indonesia condemns, in the strongest manner
possible, Israeli military attacks against Palestinians in
the Gaza Strip, which are in contravention of
international humanitarian and human rights law.

It is a measure of the gravity of the situation that
the Security Council yesterday heard directly from the
principals concerned. We appreciate very much the
presence and statements of President Mahmoud Abbas,
Foreign Ministers of Security Council members,
Foreign Ministers of members of the League of Arab
States and the Secretary General of the Arab League
himself. Indeed, we are cognizant of, and encouraged
by, the various ongoing intensive diplomatic efforts to
bring the fighting to an end. Indonesia is particularly
mindful of the strong efforts being made by the
Secretary-General in concert with regional countries.
The role of countries in the region, individually or
collectively through the League of Arab States, in
promoting peace in the region has been particularly
pivotal.

Such intensive diplomatic efforts accentuate one
glaring fact: the continued lack of a formal and unified
Council position. Far from building on the common
position reached in the press statement by its President
on 28 December 2008, the Security Council has thus
far been unable to pursue stronger measures to end all
violence and military activities and to restore the
ceasefire in the Gaza Strip.

Of course, we are only too aware of the
painstaking process of diplomatic negotiations and the
need to formulate a finely crafted and balanced
resolution. However, when the situation on the ground
continues to deteriorate and innocent civilians continue
to fall victim, the price of delay is immeasurable.
Indonesia calls on the Council to issue without delay a
crystal-clear and simple message: end the fighting. The
cycle of violence must be reversed. The victims must
be assisted. And the peace process must be revived.
Indeed, beyond the death and destruction that the
Israeli military operations have wrought, the peace
process itself is also ultimately at risk. We believe that
a credible and permanent ceasefire, with the requisite
international mechanism, must be immediately
established.

Similarly urgent is the lifting of the closures of
the Gaza crossings and the provision of humanitarian
09-2016}

access in a continuous and permanent manner. My
delegation calls for unhindered access to the Gaza Strip
by persons, including humanitarian workers, and
essential supplies. Palestine cannot go it alone in
responding to the humanitarian challenges in the Gaza
Strip. Hence, the continued provision of emergency
and humanitarian assistance by the international
community to the Palestinian people in Gaza remains
critical.

We cannot ignore the fact that Israel has not
responded to the Security Council's call in its
statement of 28 December 2008. A situation of such
magnitude in the Middle East warrants a serious and
swift response from the Council. It is therefore our
fervent hope that Council will be able to assume its
responsibility by taking a firm and formal decision.

We believe that, should the Council remain
unable to act, alternative avenues for action within the
United Nations system should, with the support of the
parties directly affected, be sought, including the
General Assembly, by invoking the Uniting for Peace
resolution - General Assembly resolution 377 (V).

The Charter of the United Nations clearly
outlines that maintaining peace and security is one of
the purposes of the Organization. At this critical
juncture, we are called upon to live up to that goal, to
spare no effort to bring the violence in Gaza to and end
and to bring about a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

