Mr. Sarkowicz (Poland): Madam President, at the
outset, let me join other delegations in congratulating
our neighbour Lithuania on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council in February. We are grateful to
you for organizing this timely debate and for providing
the concept note on the promotion and strengthening
of the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security (S/2014/75, annex). It contains many
interesting and thought-provoking questions.

My delegation fully aligns itself with the statement
of the European Union (EU). Over the past few years,
the European Union has assumed greater responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security, as
pointed out by EU High Representative Baroness
Ashton in this very room only a couple of days ago (see S/PV.7112).

Poland fully supports the strengthening of the
rule of law as a foundation of sustainable peace in
conflict and post-conflict situations, as underlined
in the Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1), of 24 September 2012.

We are convinced that strengthening the rule
of law must involve respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, respect for the
sovereign equality of States, solidarity with the concept
of assistance to other countries and recognition of the
responsibility of States to protect their populations from
genocide, crimes against humanity, ethnic cleansing
and war crimes.

We need more reflection at the stage of creating
mission mandates. That is the time when we must
considercarefully-withbroadparticipationbyregional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
local partners - the needs and requirements for the rule
oflaw in the specific social, legal and historical context
of a given country, taking into account international
legal obligations applicable to the country. In providing
assistance, we must not overlook the rights established
by international law for women, children, minorities,
refugees, displaced persons and other groups that may
be subjected to marginalization and discrimination.

Rule-of-law assistance in post-conflict situations
is most effective when it draws on a wide range of
expertise and perspectives, including in the political,
legal, human rights, development and social areas. We
must develop a holistic and strategic approach. Rule-of-
law programmes must be guided by comprehensive
strategies that promote the integrity, transparency,
predictability and accountability of governance.

Timing, sequencing and proper adjustment are
of the utmost importance, as rightly pointed out in
the concept note for today's meeting. Rule-of-law
programmes must be implemented from the very
start of a peacekeeping operation. Waiting too long
can make the job much harder. A comprehensive
transition-management strategy is equally important,
as the rule of law is a part of both exit strategy
and entry policy. Peacekeepers often act as early
peacebuilders - that is, they implement certain early
peacebuilding tasks themselves.

Adopting a one-size-fits-all approach to rule-of-law
issues is counterproductive. That is why we must not
consider rule-of-1aw activities as just reforming courts,
criminal justice systems or penal law. In many countries,
the priorities may be to assist with constitution-making,
legislative reform, public administration reform and
local democratic governance; to support a fair and
transparent electoral system; to establish civil control
over the armed forces and police; to fight corruption; to
promote extra-judicial bodies acting for the protection
of human rights; to promote the peaceful resolution of
civil disputes; and to combat transnational organized
crime.

Strengthening the rule of law also means learning
from practice. We support the development of a
coordinated approach for measuring the effectiveness of
United Nations support for the rule-of-law component
in peacekeeping operations, as specified in the report
of the Secretary-General of 11 June 2013 (S/2013/341).
Such an approach could strengthen the United Nations
capability to collect, analyse and utilize data in
order to adjust our support in a professional manner.
Furthermore, we need a better linkage between the
evaluation and adjustment of United Nations activities
on the ground. This must involve joint and thorough
assessments with the full and genuine participation of
national stakeholders.

Poland is ready to share its experience, acquired
during our long participation in peacekeeping
operations and two decades of peaceful democratic
transition, to assist and support interested countries by
offering lessons learned and expertise in building and
developing effective institutional capacity.

Establishingtherule oflawinpost-conflict societies
is an essential prerequisite for a successful transition
from war to peace. We reinforce our commitment to
contribute to further work on strengthening the rule
of law in the maintenance of international peace and
security.

Finally, as we discuss today's important topic,
we would like to stress Poland's deep concern over
the recent dramatic developments in our eastern
neighbour, Ukraine. We strongly condemn the
escalation of violence, and we consider the use of
force as unacceptable. That may produce serious and
difficult-to-predict consequences, both internal and
external, for Ukraine. We call for dialogue and hope
that the sides will return to the negotiating table.
Ukraine's authorities should demonstrate their will
to resolve the current political crisis, as they bear a
special responsibility for further developments, given
the means at their disposal.

