Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, Mr. President, my delegation would like
to congratulate you personally and your country,
the People's Republic of China, for acceding to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. I would also like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this important meeting devoted to the
adoption of resolution 2279 (2016), on Burundi,
especially as it takes its place following resolution 2248
(2015), which remains very topical.

I would also like to thank all of the other members
of the Security Council that have spared no effort to
assist Burundians to find their own solutions to political
issues that concern them. I would also thank you,
Mr. President, for the great flexibility you have shown
during several hours of intense negotiations, which
reflects your awareness of the lofty responsibility you
have to safeguard international peace and security,
which is, of course, the main mission of the Council.

Without taking an exhaustive look at the entire
resolution that has just been adopted, I would like to
make a few general comments - constructive ones,
of course - on certain passages of the text that are
important for peacebuilding process in Burundi.

I would like to begin with the preambular part,
which is dominated by the question of the protection of
human rights and the promotion of the rule of law, and by

the fight against impunity in particular. My delegation
takes note of the appeals of the Security Council on this
matter and promises to do everything it can to ensure
that this advice would be followed by concrete facts on
the ground in an atmosphere of total transparency.

On this specific issue, however, I would like to
recall that the Government of Burundi has always
attached great importance to human rights issues. We
have adopted a zero-tolerance policy with respect to
human rights, and the National Independent Human
Rights Commission is working day and night to take up
this challenge. Despite the very tangible progress on the
ground, we humbly acknowledge that there have been
human rights violation here and there, as there have
been elsewhere. We have set up a judicial commission
of inquiry to shed light on certain allegations of human
rights violations since the beginning of the uprising to
the present day. Resolution 2279 (2016) refers to this in
its preambular part and in paragraph 2.

We furthermore recall that the Government of
Burundi has made the fight against impunity the
centrepiece of its priorities, and all of this without
taking into account political affiliations. We cooperate
very closely with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, to which we
have given free access to our services for reasons of
transparency. We have offered the same quality of
cooperation with United Nations human rights experts
who, as you know, Mr. President, visited Burundi from
1 to 8 March.

With respect to freedom of expression and civil
society, I would like to inform Council members once
again that Burundi has a great tradition of freedom
of expression as well as a tradition of active civil
society in the region, and we would like to strengthen
this practice and make it permanent. That leads me to
thank the Council for having acknowledged, through
paragraph 4 of the current resolution, the recent
good measures taken by the Government of Burundi
with a view to easing political tensions and restoring
confidence among the financial and technical partners
of our country.

As is underscored in the resolution the Council has
just adopted, we recently authorized the reopening of
private radio stations that were destroyed in the wake of
the attempted coup of 13 May 2015, namely, the Radio
Isanganiro and Radio-Television Rema FM, which are
both back on the air broadcasting freely throughout
the national territory. Besides those stations, which
have been authorized to resume their activities,
the National Council of Communication also has
authorized two private radio stations - Izere FM. and
Humuriza e and without forgetting, I would stress,
that judicial proceedings against two civil society
non-governmental organizations were lifted, namely,
PARCEM. and AJCB, which now have free access to
their bank accounts. That is something new.
With respect to political dialogue, we reiterate our
firm commitment to continuing an inclusive, frank and
sincere inter-Burundian dialogue among the peaceful
and clearly committed young men and women of the
country, those from within the country as well as those
in the diaspora, who are determined to find peaceful
solutions to our disputes. We also welcome the fact
that paragraph 5 of the resolution refers explicitly to
the importance of conducting a dialogue with only
non-violent actors, which automatically excludes the
coup plotters who wanted to overthrow democratic
institutions through unconstitutional means, which
violates the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

From a regional point of view and within the East
African Community, consultations are ongoing with
the facilitation and with the region in order to come
to an agreement - some delegations have pointed this
out - on two important points, namely, who should
take part in the dialogue in an objective way and what
the agenda will be, that is, what will be discussed at the
next session. Those are two very important issues. If
the dialogue has taken some time, it is not because of
the Government. We are ready to start even tomorrow.
Just give us the date and the agenda, and we are
ready to start and meet our compatriots. We therefore
remain quite committed to the dialogue in good faith.
As the Council is aware, the internal dynamics are
very advanced under the leadership of the National
Commission for the Inter-Burundian Dialogue, which
has done an excellent job throughout the country so that
everyone can have their say.

With regard to security, I confirm that it is
generally good throughout the national territory and
that citizens are going about their activities in calmly,
except for some residual elements of the opposition
who continue to throw grenades at peaceful citizens.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the fact that
the Council has recognized the decrease in killings in
Burundi and has condemned the use of force to achieve
political objectives, whatever its origins or its authors,
including strong condemnation of the indiscriminate
throwing of grenades at peaceful citizens. We hope that
this message will be heard by those who remotely guide
such acts from host countries abroad. I note in passing
that no ideology or political struggle can justify such
senseless acts that take the lives of women and children
in our country.

Still on the subject of security, with regard to
the desire to continue the disarmament process in
transparency and full cooperation with our partners,
the Government of Burundi agreed, before the high-
level delegation of the African Union, to the deployment
in Bujumbura of 100 human rights observers and
100 unarmed military observers to observe what
we are doing. For us, transparency is a priority. If
the observers are not all yet in Bujumbura, it is not
because of the Government. The President made a
firm commitment, and we are ready to receive them
at any time. If there are administrative delays on the
part of the other party that has to sign the memorandum
of understanding, for Burundi's part we are prepared
to do so at any time. It is a matter of improving the
existing memorandum - merely a matter of changing
the number of observers. Again, we are acting in good
faith. We are not stalling.

With regard to cooperation with the United
Nations, Burundi would once again like to reiterate
before the Council its full cooperation with the country
team and with the team of the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Jamal Benomar. We take
note of the offer of the contribution of police stipulated
in paragraph 10 of resolution 2279 (2016), which will
of course be determined in consultation with the
Government of Burundi. My country remains available
to the Secretary-General to discuss and agree upon
the nature, size and tasks of the police presence in
support the team of the special adviser envisaged in
resolution 2248 (2015).

In that regard - and this is extremely important
to emphasize - I recall that the primacy of the option
of an un-armed international presence was one of
the recommendations of the latest Summit of Heads
of State of the African Union, held in Addis Ababa;
of the the high-level delegation of the African Union
made up of five Presidents that visited Bujumbura
from 25 to 26 March; of the meeting of the ministerial
committee of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region held on 10 February in Luanda; and of
the Government of Burundi itself via its Parliament.
All those actors have opposed an armed international,
preferring instead the presence of human rights
observers and unarmed military experts. That unarmed
configuration, and I emphasize this, which is also the
preference of the African Union, is what we expect
to discuss in detail with the Secretariat in a spirit of
openness and respect for national sovereignty.

With regard to acts of aggression from Rwanda,
which several credible reports have established,
including at the United Nations, my delegation welcomes
the call on regional States in paragraph 8 of today's
resolution to contribute to a peaceful resolution of the
situation in Burundi and to refrain from supporting the
activities of armed groups. The resolution also reminds
all States of the region to respect the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region and the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees. Among
other things, that Convention emphasizes the need to
respect the civilian character of refugee camps - as
recalled as well by the Secretary-General himself here
on 21 March (see S/PV.7653) in the presence of several
ministers from the region. We hope that Kigali will
unequivocally hear that call by the Council so that
that neighbouring country, with which we share so
much, immediately ceases to facilitate the recruitment,
training and arming of the negative forces that commit
acts of aggression in our country. We also welcome the
fact that paragraph 9 of the resolution also pertains to
actors outside Burundian territory, including others in
the region.

With regard to cooperation with our partners, we
appreciate the fact that the Council pays particular
attention to the issue in the preambular part of the
resolution, notably by encouraging bilateral and
multilateral partners and the Government of Burundi to
continue their dialogue in order to create a favourable
environment for a resumption of assistance to Burundi.

I would like to conclude by saying that my country
of course welcomes that appeal. We remain very
committed to make every effort to rectify the situation
at the political and security levels, in the interests of the
Burundian people and of the region.

The meeting rose at 7.45 pm.
