Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): Before
beginning, allow me to thank the French presidency
and the French delegation for the excellent manner
in which they have guided the work of the Security
Council during the month of October.

(spoke in English)

First of all, I wish to thank the French presidency
for convening today's open debate. I also commend the
briefers, and Mr. Mubin Shaikh for his testimony.

We think that the presidential statement (S/ PRST/2017/21)
that we have just adopted is a concrete response to the
call for action that, you, Sir, have made.

The nature of armed conflict has evolved in recent
years. We especially see a significant increase in the
involvement of non-State armed actors. Of course, there
is the radicalization of conflicts. The consequences
have not changed. Children are still among those who
suffer the most. They are recruited as soldiers, abducted
and exploited. They are Victims of neglect, trafficking,
sexual violence and forced marriage. They are denied
the right to education - and the same goes for disabled
children, who, of course, have an even worse fate.

Substantive progress has been achieved since the
publication of the Graca Machel report (see A/51/306),
including thanks to the work carried out by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict. Significantly, that progress has
led to the signing of 29 action plans, 18 of which are
with non-State armed groups. The result is all the more
significant, considering the difficulties ofengaging with
such groups. We also welcome to different approach
applied in the past year to the list annexed to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/82l). We hope that it
will encourage more parties to armed conflicts to put
in place measures to improve the protection of children,
including by signing and implementing action plans. Let
me address the issue from four concrete perspectives.

First, we think that we need to continue fostering
the widest possible adhesion by States to the relevant
international instruments and promote their effective
implementation and enforcement, including the
Optional Protocol to the Convention of the Rights of the

Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
We encourage countries to do even more and make
political commitments to better protect children
affected by armed conflicts. Endorsing initiatives like
the Paris Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration,
which Italy fully supports, would make a significant
change in the lives of many children.

Secondly, Italy strongly supports the inclusion of
child-protection-related provisions in the mandates of
the United Nations peace operations. We included such
a provision when we renewed the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) this year. It is important
that peacekeeping and political missions have the
necessary means to monitor, report and respond to
grave violations. To that end, we must ensure that
child-protection-adviser positions are duly staffed
and budgeted.

Thirdly, we consider it extremely important to
offer peacekeeping personnel specific training on
child protection. Targeted predeployment training of
United Nations personnel on children in armed conflict
should be fully scaled up and become standard practice
for the United Nations, in coordination with regional
organizations. In Italy, modules on respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians are included in all the courses
that the Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units,
for example, offers each year to peacekeepers.

Fourthly, ending abuses by persistent perpetrators
does not end impunity altogether. States need to adopt,
develop and implement the legal and administrative
measures needed to ensure that the recruitment and
use of children by armed forces and non-State armed
groups is criminalized and that perpetrators are
brought to justice, in compliance with the provisions of
the relevant international instruments.

During our term on the Security Council, we
have looked at human rights violations in the field,
particularly those related to children, to articulate the
Council's response. For instance, in January 2017, under
the Swedish presidency, the Security Council included
a separate listing criterion on the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflicts, when it renewed the
sanctions regime for the Central African Republic. In
addition, the International Criminal Court (ICC) has an
essential role to play in holding persistent perpetrators
accountable for their crimes. We therefore welcome
the Court's sentencing of the militia leader from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo, for war crimes, including the conscription of
children. We also commend the adoption of a policy on
children by the ICC in November 2016.

Finally, preventing and responding to the
scourge of children affected by armed conflict in
all its aspects are not just a matter of concern and
action by the Security Council. It requires joint
effort by all stakeholders - Governments, human
rights and humanitarian actors, military and security
forces and regional, national, international and
non-governmental organizations.

I would like to conclude by stressing the need to
consider the Views of children and of the families and
communities to which they return when defining and
implementing any strategy at the local or global level.
Indeed, in serving the best interests of children, we
serve the best interests of all humankind.

