Mr. Isakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Globalization has made business not only a
key player in the global economy, but also an important
factor in global policy. The expansion of partnership
relations between the United Nations and business,
provided for in the Millennium Declaration, is an
imperative of our times and should be encouraged to
the extent to which such cooperation is in keeping with
the spirit and letter of the United Nations Charter,
above all in the social and economic sphere, is
mutually beneficial and works to strengthen the
authority of the Organization.

It is precisely in that broad context that we view
Germany's initiative to discuss, within the framework
of the Security Council, the role of business in conflict
zones. The Council's debate, enhancing the political
significance of the problem and enriching it through
the Council's experience in dealing with crises in a
number of African countries and other flashpoints,
seeks to contribute to the elaboration by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council of an
integrated approach to the interaction between the
United Nations system and the private sector in the
interests of development and of achieving the
Millennium Development Goals.

As regards interaction between the business
community and the United Nations in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-
building, one starting point methodologically could be
the fact that it is precisely business that must support
and supplement the peacekeeping efforts of the
Security Council and the United Nations as a whole,
and not the other way around. Moreover, the
parameters for such interaction must be drawn up in a
dialogue with the private sector, taking into account its
own specific approaches. The forthcoming Global
Compact Leaders Summit on 24 June could be a useful
forum in which to elucidate those approaches.
Furthermore, it may be possible to organize a
discussion of these issues in the context of the United
Nations regional economic commissions. Such a
dialogue could become even more substantive and
more closely linked to the practical tasks ahead through
the convening of individual focused discussions
between representatives of the United Nations and
interested business circles regarding subregions and
specific flashpoints that are subject to crises.

In principle, the idea is of interest that, in zones
of conflict, business would act on the basis of a
voluntary system of self-regulation that would promote
the avoidance of conflict and the settlement of its
consequences. Universally recognized principles that
must guide responsible businesses in normal
circumstances - such as respect for human rights and
non-participation in improper political activities, in
particular activities likely to involve violations of
human rights and gender equality - take on particular
significance in conflict zones. Here, we must build on
existing groundwork in the framework of the Global
Compact and on the positive experience gained in the
Kimberley Process.

But it is clear that voluntary self-restraint
measures based on purely ethical standards and
universally recognized principles are not in themselves
a panacea. It is therefore important to be guided at the
same time by existing international legal principles and
norms and to make full use of existing early warning
and conflict prevention techniques and mechanisms
which have proved their effectiveness.

Turning to the work of the Security Council, it
should focus first and foremost on issues related to the
creation of the political conditions necessary to taking
advantage of the positive potential of business to
promote post-conflict peace-building. Here, it is
critically important to ensure the required transparency
and to draw up clear and understandable rules for the
activities of foreign companies in the markets of States
that are engaged in post-conflict reconstruction. Such
rules and procedures must be based on principles of
political impartiality, equality and fair competition.

One promising area could be strengthened
interaction between the Council and the Bretton Woods
institutions with a view to promoting the timely
involvement of those institutions in post-conflict
reconstruction; that, in turn, would create a favourable
climate for private-sector involvement in various
individual aspects of peace-building.

