Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to share with Security Council members the
most recent developments on the political, security and
humanitarian situation in Mali, as reflected in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (8/2018/541).

The 12 months since the adoption of resolution
2364 (2017), in June 2017, were the most encouraging
in terms of progress in the peace process since the
signing, three years ago, of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, which was the outcome
of the Algiers process. At the same time, the security
environment remains volatile, and unfortunately
it has led to the loss of life among the civilian
population, the Malian defence and security forces,
the French Barkhane force and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). The number of MINUSMA Blue
Helmets to have lost their lives in Mali over the past
year as a result of attacks has raised the total number to
101 since the deployment of the Mission.

It was in order to pay tribute to those fallen
peacekeepers that the Secretary-General decided to
visit Mali to commemorate the seventieth anniversary
of United Nations peacekeeping on 29 May. That visit
enabled him to observe the spirit of dialogue and
collective responsibility that enabled the Malian parties
to achieve considerable progress in implementing the
Agreement in recent months and to lay the foundation
for credible, inclusive and peaceful elections.

Progress in the implementation of the peace
Agreement includes, inter alia, the establishment of
interim authorities in the five regions in the north of
Mali; the strengthening of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism in Gao and its establishment in Kidal and
Timbuktu, with 160 and 47 combatants, respectively,
to date; and the start of the pre-registration phase for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, which is an extremely important
element in that context. That progress reflects a
positive momentum in the peace process, which
inspires hope. However, it falls short and comes after
three years of delays and persistent obstacles in the
implementation of the Agreement. Furthermore, during
the past year, some important steps to sustain the peace
process and strengthen political dialogue have not
been achieved. I would mention in that regard, among
others, the charter for national reconciliation, which
was intended to strengthen the gains of the Conference
of National Understanding, held in March 2017, and to
constitutional reform, which was postponed until after
the presidential election. Moreover, the involvement of
civil society, in particular women, in the peace process
remains insufficient to date. Peace must be built on
an inclusive and participatory foundation to ensure its
sustainability and ownership by all.

That imperative is all the more important given
that the past two weeks have been marked by worrying
political tensions, fuelled by the upcoming presidential
election, which is scheduled to be held in six weeks'
time. Those tensions culminated in demonstrations in
Bamako on 2 June, where there were violent clashes
among supporters of the opposition and Malian security
forces. That violence is regrettable, and the Secretary-
General condemned the ban on the holding of the
demonstration by the Malian authorities. Subsequently,
the authorization of a new request to demonstrate
introduced by the opposition and the peaceful holding
of the march on 8 June bode well for an easing of
the situation, which is welcome and which we must
encourage and help the Malian actors to maintain.
The presidential election is a crucial stage
and should be a milestone in the consolidation of
democracy in Mali. Priority must given to cooperation
among all actors and the promotion an inclusive and
constructive political dialogue that is conducive
to the peaceful settlement of disputes, so that the
conditions are met for the holding ofpeaceful elections.
MINUSMA will continue to play an active role in that
regard, including by continuing to support the Malian
authorities and political actors through the good offices
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
as well as by providing logistical and technical support
and contributing to security for electoral activities.
The Special Representative's good offices have already
helped to support key preparatory steps in the electoral
process, such as the review of the electoral law, but they
have also facilitated dialogue among political actors
and eased tensions following the demonstrations by the
opposition on 2 June.

We think it pertinent to stress that the United
Nations is not in a position to certify the election
results, as requested by the opposition parties, as that
activity is not part of the mandate of MINUSMA.
Furthermore, any certification exercise of an electoral
process must involve the whole process, and not only
the results of the elections, and would have required
prior authorization by the Security Council.

Following the elections, our attention should be
focused on mobilizing all actors in order to generate
new and significant steps towards the implementation
of key institutional reforms outlined in the Agreement.
I welcome the publication of the first report of the
independent observer, presented to the members of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee on 28 May at its
most recent regular meeting. The report underscores
the importance for the parties to focus their efforts
on the strategic pillars of the Agreement relating to
long-term objectives, including the creation of a new
governance architecture for Mali, the reconstitution
and redeployment of a representative national army
and the creation of a development zone for the north.
Furthermore, we hope that the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017),
concerning Mali, can help to remove some of the
obstacles that continue to undermine the implementation
of the Agreement.

The worrying situation in central Mali presents us
with even more complex challenges. The political and
security environment in that region has highlighted not
only the lack ofpolitical dialogue, but also the challenges
posed to democratic and territorial governance, which
have been characterized by an erosion of the presence
and legitimacy of the State institutions.

It was in order to help respond to the multifaceted
challenges facing Mali and to breathe new life into
the implementation of the peace Agreement that the
Secretary-General mentioned in his report the idea
of a common vision - a pact - for peace that would
serve as a catalyst to strengthen the inclusive nature
of the political process before and after the elections.
That initiative would involve the Government, the
United Nations, the Security Council and other
international and regional partners. Its primary
objective would be to reaffirm the centrality of the
peace Agreement in resolving the crisis in Mali and
to underscore once again the commitment of the
United Nations to the mechanisms provided for in the
Agreement, in particular the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, chaired by Algeria, whose role is essential in
international mediation. The initiative could also cover
the key institutional reforms I have just mentioned, the
implementation of which should be accelerated the day
after the elections.

(Spoke in English)

To better support such an integrated strategic
approach at the political level, the United Nations must
also take steps to improve integration at the operational
level, while leveraging the comparative advantages of
its different agencies, funds and programmes.

In that spirit, the recently concluded independent
strategic review of MINUSMA recommended that
the United Nations country team take the lead in
humanitarian, recovery, development and peacebuilding
efforts, including supporting Government efforts to
deliver long-awaited peace dividends in an equitable,
responsible and inclusive manner, including improving
access to basic social services, such as education, health
and clean water, as well as providing more livelihood
opportunities, in particular for women and youth.
United Nations efforts to prevent violent extremism
should also be based on a coordinated, cross-sector
strategy. To support those objectives, the review team
called upon the United Nations country team to enhance
its presence in the north and centre of the country.
With regard to MINUSMA, the Secretary-General
is recommending a series of adjustments suggested by
the review, aimed at underscoring the primacy of politics
in the Mission's role. That will involve a shift in focus,
prioritization and the implementation of the Mission's
mandated tasks to maximize its role in support of the
Agreement and in amplifying the peace process.

The Mission is also to assess its current physical
footprint against political priorities, factoring in
the constraints posed by the operational theatre, the
difficulties in generating resources for the United
Nations efforts in Mali and how to more effectively work
with other stakeholders supporting peace and stability
in Mali. That will include adopting a more tailored
approach to the protection of civilians, particularly
in the centre of the country, which is characterized
by complex and localized dynamics, and leveraging
non-force assets.

Any changes in the Mission's configuration will be
carefully evaluated, in consultation with partners on
the ground, and a timeline will be developed to ensure
a sequenced approach. In that regard, the Secretariat
has worked on an implementation framework. The
support and assistance of MINUSMA should be
regularly reviewed not only on the basis of progress
in the implementation of the peace agreement but also
with regard to governance and political reforms, in line
with the stated objectives of the proposed mobilization
for peace.

Moreover, given the critical juncture at which Mali
now finds itself a few weeks ahead of the elections, but
also in view of their aftermath, we will intensify our
reporting and monitoring efforts, including through the
use of consolidated benchmarks, drawing on the peace
Agreement and the initiative for peace, as well as the
plan for the implementation of the recommendations
of the strategic review. In line with that objective, we
would wish for future iterations of the report of the
Secretary-General to focus more closely on describing
progress against those benchmarks.

MINUSMA will continue to cooperate closely
with other security actors operating in Mali, including
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), Operation Barkhane and the European Union
Training Mission in Mali. I welcome this opportunity to
reiterate the steadfast support of the United Nations for
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, to which MINUSMA stands

ready to provide operational and logistical support, as
mandated by the Security Council.
At the same time, I wish to recall that States
members of the G-5 Sahel remain accountable for the
conduct of operations, with full respect for human
rights, international law and international humanitarian
law. Such gross human rights violations as those
reportedly perpetrated in Boulikessi on 19 May by
elements of the Malian armed forces operating under
the Joint Force must, and will, be effectively addressed
through the appropriate mechanisms. In that context,
the Government of Mali has already adopted a number
of measures to address that very serious situation. To
that end, MINUSMA continues to support the ongoing
investigations by the Malian and G-5 Sahel Joint
Force authorities.

Allow me to conclude by underlining that stronger
support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, including through
predictable and sustainable financial resources, is
critical not only to ensuring the success of the Joint
Force but also to reducing the risk of human rights
violations during counter-terrorism operations by
increasing the monitoring and oversight capacity.

