Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I want to say a few words. First, I wish to make
a brief comment on Crimea, even though I said earlier
that we were not going to discuss Crimea in the Security
Council, I will give just one figure - 93 per cent. In
a recent opinion poll conducted by a German institute,
93 per cent of the inhabitants of Crimea spoke in favour
of reunification with Russia and again confirmed their
support for that historic act. We do not need to prove
anything to anyone. In regard to the concern that our
Ukrainian colleague has expressed for the inhabitants of
Crimea, I recall that the Kyiv authorities did everything
they could to complicate the lives of the inhabitants of
Crimea when they blocked water supplies, electricity
and access. The latest news is that they could not find
anything better to do than to plant landmines. They put
450 boxes of explosives under a bridge used by local
inhabitants to move from Crimea to mainland Ukraine.
That is the kind of humanitarianism that the Ukrainian
authorities present in its best version. So we will not
even discuss this further.

As for my Ukrainian colleague's description of the

situation regarding the implementation of the package
of measures related to resolution 2202 (2015), his
version is very one-sided. Ijust want to ask everyone
in the Chamber to read the report of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe's Special
Monitoring Mission, which is, generally speaking,
objective. It is important to withdraw weapons so
that the firing will cease. The representatives of the
Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's
Republic began withdrawing weapons first, and
were the first to finish the process. The Ukrainian
authorities did everything they could to delay it, but
finally, as the Ukrainian representative said, President
Poroshenko gave an order not to fire and that order is
allegedly being carried out. However, we recall that in
August President Poroshenko solemnly promised not to
bombard cities, following which cities were bombarded
for several consecutive months. But I repeat, I want
to be an optimist, so let us hope that the positive
developments that we are seeing implemented in the
package of measures will be further continued.

I also want to comment on another matter that
does not fall within the purview of the Security
Council, because it has been raised several times. I
am talking about Nadiya Savchenko. I never cease to
be surprised at how ill-informed some colleagues in
the Security Council are. The representative of the
United Kingdom, Ambassador Lyall Grant, asked me
a question: Why was Nadiya Savchenko arrested? Has
he not read newspapers? She is accused of involvement
in the killing of two Russian journalists. That is a
very serious accusation. We keep on talking about the
fact that we need to protect journalists and that there
should be no impunity. She has been accused of that
crime. Her detention is in no way illegal, because it was
confirmed by our court under our legislation. By the
way, the European Court of Human Rights refused to
implement rule 39 of the regulations of the Court in
this case, which confirms the legality of the detention
of this individual.

It has been very strange to hear demands from
the representative of the United States to release
Savchenko. The American system ofjurisprudence and
the penitentiary system have never been known for its
humanism. In Guantanamo, the United States has held
people for over 10 years without even making formal
accusations. The prisoners try to commit suicide and
go on hunger strikes. They are force-fed, and that is
considered normal. I will not even mention that the
United States has gotten into the habit of abducting
Russian individuals throughout the world, accusing them
of things invented, sometimes through provocations
by their intelligence services at the end of nowhere,
detaining them in subhuman conditions, holding show
trials on the territory of the United States, giving them
enormously long sentences, subjecting them to constant
psychological torture and holding them under trying
circumstances. I can assure colleagues that if Nadiya
Savchenko were being held in such conditions in the
United States, her fate would be predetermined. She
would never see the light of day ever.

With regard to our investigation and prosecution, our
position is that the investigation and trial will determine
whether or not she is guilty. It is not clear on what basis
Mr. Simonovic' uses his position in the United Nations
to make an appeal for the release of Ms. Savchenko.
We think that Mr. Simonovie is violating Articles 100
and 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
requires high-level professionalism, good faith and
impartiality of United Nations staff in fulfilling their
functions. If Mr. Simonovie wants to change his place
of work, he will be able to fulfil his potential in the
journalistic sphere, but in the Council let us stick to
what representatives of the United Nations are supposed
to do.

In conclusion, I have to note, regretfully, that our
discussion has been gloomier than it should have been
in the light of the initial steps taken in implementing
resolution 2202 (2015) and the package of measures
agreed to on 12 February. Nevertheless, I express the
hope that members ofthe Security Council will, in good
faith, seek to contribute to the further advancement of
the process of political resolution in Ukraine.

