Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening this important debate today. We
would also like to express our appreciation to Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his comprehensive
briefing to the Council.

Before addressing the core issues of today's
debate, I would like briefly to touch on several key
humanitarian situations that have commanded the
world's attention in recent weeks. The impact of
cyclone Nargis in Burma and the earthquake in China
have reminded us of nature's sometimes devastating
power. Canada offers its sincere and heartfelt
condolences to the friends and families of the deceased
and missing.

In Burma, it has now been more than three weeks
since the cyclone struck, yet humanitarian access
remains, at best, inconsistent. The 25 May conference
offered some hopeful signs of stronger cooperation
between the Burmese authorities and the international
community. However, in many cases, United Nations
and other humanitarian actors still await visas. For
those who have received visas, access to affected
populations is not yet guaranteed. We call on the
Burmese authorities to provide full and unhindered
access to areas affected by the cyclone to help deliver
aid to those most in need. That is urgent; the window
of opportunity to save lives is closing rapidly.

It is also clear that the consequences of armed
conflict are deadly for civilians in many countries
around the world. The deliberate targeting of and
attacks on civilian populations, forced displacement,
sexual violence and the denial of land and property
rights are far too prevalent for millions of people
globally.

In the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Sri Lanka, Burundi and Somalia, civilians are
quite simply part of the calculus of conflict. In
Afghanistan, indiscriminate acts of violence, such as
suicide bombings, serve as a potent reminder of why
support for the Afghan Government is so important.
Without a continued commitment to long-term peace
and security, civilian protection cannot be guaranteed.

All of that illustrates the point that, despite the
significant gains that have been made over the past
decade, there is a great deal of work left to do. In that
respect, the Secretary-General's report last year on the
protection of civilians offers us an important road map
when considering the question of next steps.

Increasingly, the question of humanitarian access
remains the critical challenge for the Council and
Member States. Member States have a collective
interest in ensuring safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to civilians in need. That is not simply a hope; it
is a fundamental principle of international
humanitarian action and should not be open to
interpretation. Yet full, safe and unhindered access -
so critical to providing life-saving relief and support to
vulnerable populations - remains an elusive goal.

Canada strongly supports the commitment made
by the Emergency Relief Coordinator to develop a
monitoring and reporting mechanism to understand and
address access constraints. However, the Council must
be prepared to act - drawing on the full range of tools
at its disposal - when access is systematically delayed
or denied. Those who refuse access cannot be allowed
to act with impunity. Enhanced accountability,
underscored by a clear demonstration by the Council
that systematic denial of access will not be tolerated, is
more important than ever.

Among the many protection challenges facing us,
sexual violence against women, girls, boys and men
remains particularly stark. We need look no further
than the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo to
understand the prevailing culture of impunity.
Thousands of incidents of sexual violence are
perpetrated with virtually no prosecutions. Clear
resolve on the part of the Council to prevent sexual
violence is essential. Canada believes that the Council
should underscore that there will be no impunity for
perpetrators.
Strengthening the Council's protection
framework for children can help address protection
challenges linked to sexual violence.

(spoke in French)

More broadly, Canada calls on States to cooperate in
the four countries in conflict or in post-conflict

situations in which the International Criminal Court is
active: the Sudan, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda.
Perpetrators of serious international crimes must be
held responsible for their acts.

Finally, let me reaffirm Canada's support for the
Secretary-General's 2007 proposal to establish a
Security Council working group on the protection of
civilians. We urge members of the Council to welcome
that recommendation. Moreover, it is important that
any such group be results-driven. That means that it
must be allowed to offer clear recommendations and
courses of action for Council consideration in instances
where protection concerns remain acute.

We are fast approaching the 10-year anniversary
of resolution 1265 (1999), a landmark in the protection
of civilians. The endorsement of subsequent
resolutions on a range of protection issues, including
resolution 1674 (2006), as well as the inclusion of
strong protection references in country-specific
resolutions, is an important demonstration of the
Council's commitment to that issue. The Council now
has at its disposal a sophisticated and flexible
framework for action, including in instances of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.

In conclusion, we must refocus our efforts.
Canada remains committed to protecting civilians from
deliberate targeting and abuse. In that regard, our
collective resolve is more important than ever.

