Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me,
first of all, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
manner in which you have guided our work this month.
I also wish to thank you for convening this open
meeting to consider the report of the Secretary-General
on the work being done by the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville. It is very important to know the
views of the countries of the region, which have also
demonstrated their commitment to, and cooperation
with, the peace process. I also wish to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Danilo Tiirk for his useful briefing
on the development of the process.

We welcome the progress made in stage II of the
plan for the disposal of weapons, under which over 80
per cent of weapons have been destroyed. We
nevertheless urge the parties involved to continue their
active cooperation with a view to bringing the process
to conclusion.

In that connection, we wish to express our
appreciation for the work being done by the United
Nations Political Office to facilitate and expedite the
collection of weapons. We also welcome the convening
of a round table to discuss the progress made in the
peace process, which will serve to send a message to
the population of Bougainville about the importance
and urgency to make progress in the destruction of
weapons in order to pave the way for the entry into
force of constitutional amendments.

We recognize the importance of the new
Constitution as the focus for the implementation of the
Peace Agreement of August 2001. We therefore
welcome the considerable progress that has been made,
as well as the active participation of the island's
population. We hope that that basic document will be
completed by the scheduled date and that elections will
be held this year.

We welcome the increasing cooperation between
the authorities of Papua New Guinea and the leadership
in Bougainville. The spirit of commitment and trust
between the parties was demonstrated by the signing
last February of a memorandum of understanding that
established a mechanism for consultations on all
aspects concerning the implementation of autonomy.
We also welcome the decision of the National
Government of Papua New Guinea to withdraw its
Defence Force from the island.

We wish to express our appreciation for the work
done by the Peace Monitoring Group, which has
provided ongoing support for the peace process in
Bougainville and whose withdrawal is planned for next
June. In that connection, we share the concern of the
Political Office about the need to assess developments
in the weapons disposal process and to determine
whether it may be advisable to replace it with another
mechanism.

We wish to stress that, in order for peace to be
sustainable over time, it is necessary to establish
efficient administration and a viable economy. The
relevant agencies of the United Nations must therefore
closely coordinate their efforts in Bougainville with
those of the international community of donors in order
to restore and strengthen peace. In that regard, we
should also mention that we welcome the activities that
the United Nations Development Programme has begun
to carry out in the area.

Finally, we wish to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Noel Sinclair and his team for their
valuable work on behalf of peace and stability in
Bougainville. We wish them success in their tasks this
year

