Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): On behalf of the
Chairs of the three subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
dealing with the issue of terrorism, I have the honour
to update the Security Council on the continued
cooperation among the three Committees and their
expert groups, as requested by the Council in its
resolutions 1963 (2010), 1977 (2011) and 1989 (2011)
and in earlier resolutions.

The three Committees continue to attach great
importance to coordination and cooperation between
their respective expert groups, namely, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
the Monitoring Team of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, and the Expert Group of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). The
Committees welcome the continued efforts of the
expert groups to cooperate on outreach activities and
2

country visits so as to enhance cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
increase exchanges of information, engage in joint
meetings and maintain reciprocal representation.

The Chairs are now providing updates for the
comparative table illustrating the mandates and areas
of competence of the three committees and their expert
groups, which notably reflects the adoption of
resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011) on the split of
the Al-Qaida and Taliban components of the 1267
sanctions Committee.

In the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), a
special meeting was held to commemorate the adoption
of resolution 1373 (2001) 10 years ago.

Joint and coordinated outreach activities and
country visits are important tools for the three
Committees in facilitating the full implementation of
their respective mandates. Those tools strengthen
dialogue with Member States, help to improve their
understanding of the distinct yet complementary
mandates of the three Committees, and assist in the
implementation of the relevant resolutions.

Cooperation among the expert groups has been
maintained and has increased in some areas. Since
May, all three expert groups have been represented in
more than a dozen workshops and other outreach
events, while two of the groups attended additional
meetings, such as the recent workshop sponsored by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), held from 27 to 29 September in Astana,
Kazakhstan, which focused on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in Central Asia. During that
workshop, the Expert Group of the 1540 Committee
and the CTED experts demonstrated not only the
complementary mandates of the CTC and the 1540
Committee with respect to the illicit movement of
weapons and related nuclear, chemical and biological
materials, but also how coordinated efforts are
essential to assisting the Central Asian States in coping
with existing illicit trafficking.

Other examples include a meeting held on 6 and
7 July in St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, for heads
of special services and security agencies, which was
jointly attended by the Chairs of the CTC and the 1540
Committee, as well as by the Executive Director of
CTED and the Coordinator of the Monitoring Team.
11-59163

When another United Nations body organizes a
regional workshop, the three expert groups often
participate, as in the case of the workshops sponsored
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; the
subregional workshop on the Security Council
resolutions against terrorism and their implementation
mechanisms, held in Doha, Qatar, on 17 and 18 May;
and the Arab regional workshop on monitoring and
securing movement of goods and individuals from
terrorist threats, held in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, from
6 to 8 June.

The expert groups also participated in the
workshop sponsored by the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) on the regional
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy in Eastern Africa, held in Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia, on 27 and 28 July.

An example of jointly attended events hosted by
non-United Nations bodies is the periodic meeting of
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), in which the
three expert groups collaborated in the negotiation of
FATF standards in terms of how they relate to the work
of the three Committees.

Several of the country visits organized by CTED
have included the participation of the 1267 Monitoring
Team and have been mutually beneficial in advancing
the implementation process. The 1540 Committee's
experts are now able, for the first time, to join a
country visit organized by CTED, to be held from 21 to
25 November in Myanmar, where an intensive dialogue
will be held with the relevant officials. We hope that
there will be future occasions on which the 1540
Committee can reciprocate.

The three Committees have welcomed the
progress made in applying the common strategy paper
of the three expert groups on cooperation with
intergovernmental organizations, which each
Committee had taken note of last year. The coordinated
approach agreed among the expert groups with respect
to selected organizations was enriched by the
significant contribution of the representative of CTED
and the 1267 Monitoring Team at major conferences
late in 2010 and during 2011, which brought together a
large number of international, regional and subregional
organizations to enhance cooperation with the Security
Council Committees and among organizations
themselves to promote the full implementation of the
respective resolutions.
11-59163
The outcome of those interactions is now being
used by the expert groups to refine the modalities for
information exchange, within the existing constraints
of confidentiality, to enhance and sustain coordination
and to further explore the potential of subregional
cooperation.

The CTITF continues to provide the three expert
groups with a platform for cooperation, not only
among themselves but also with more than 30 United
Nations system organizations, agencies and
programmes concerned with aspects of counter-
terrorism.

The CTITF retreat held on 12 and 13 May
provided a forum in which to take stock of the progress
made in the coordination and implementation of joint
activities. The expert groups contribute to the work of
several CTITF working groups. The three expert
groups actively participate in the relevant CTITF
working groups. For example, the 1540 Committee
experts collaborated with the Working Group on
Preventing and Responding to Weapons of Mass
Destruction Attacks.

The expert groups also participate in the
Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism
initiative, which is co-chaired by CTED. CTED and the
Monitoring Team have also assumed leading roles in
some working groups. For example, CTED is co-Chair
of the Working Group on Border Management and the
1267 Monitoring Team is co-Chair of the Working
Group on Countering the Use of the Internet for
Terrorist Purposes.

Exchange of information among expert groups is
carried out on a regular basis. They have been sharing
information on forthcoming meetings and relevant
activities. CTED has regularly shared with the other
groups its monthly reports to the CTC, including
information on its missions that the Executive Director
submits to the CTC, while the 1540 experts have begun
posting highlights of summary reports on outreach
events on the 1540 website. The three expert groups
continue to hold joint meetings when needed, both
between the heads of each team and between the expert
teams, in order to prepare them for country visits and
relevant workshops and to exchange information on
particular themes or activities in specific regions or
countries.

CTC and the 1540 Committee working group on
cooperation with international organizations have
reciprocally extended invitations to their meetings
when they arrange briefings by visiting officials from
the inter-Governmental organizations or when thematic
briefings of mutual interest are held. An example of the
Monitoring Team's active involvement was the town
hall meeting for the three expert groups held on
19 October at CTED premises for a briefing by the
coordinator of the Monitoring Team on the spread of
the Al-Qaida and Taliban aspects of the 1267 mandate.
The three expert groups were included in the special
meeting of 28 September on the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), where an
important outcome document was adopted on the basis
of the global survey on implementation of that
resolution.

Finally, in addition to invitations to the expert
groups to attend briefings of NATO or on border
control, both CTED and the monitoring teams
delivered a joint presentation this month on terrorism
prevention and countering incitement to terrorism
through the Internet.

In conclusion, terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction continue to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security. It remains
important to maintain close cooperation and effective
coordination between the CTC, the 1267 Committee
and the 1540 Committee, as well as among the expert
groups. In that respect, the three Committees look
forward to receiving further guidance from the Security
Council on the areas of common interest in order to
better coordinate their efforts and facilitate
cooperation.

I now wish to speak on behalf of the 1540
Committee. Our main developments since the last joint
briefing in May (see S/PV.6536) have been the
adoption of our report on compliance with resolution
1540 (2004) through the achievement of the
implementation of its requirements, as mandated in
resolution 1810 (2008), as well as the adoption of the
tenth programme of work, before addressing other
recent activities of the Committee.

The 1540 Committee adopted its report on
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) on
12 September (8/2011/579), and has submitted it to the
Security Council. Notably, the report finds that since
2008, more States have taken more measures to
implement almost every obligation or recommendation
in the resolution. While those trends parallel those seen

in the reports of the 1540 Committee in 2006 and 2008,
the 1540 Committee remains aware that much work
remains to be done, and that the urgency of the threat
remains considerable. Therefore, the Committee has
recommended that outreach to promote understanding
of the resolution should continue, with a focus on the
practical ways and means to help States take further
steps to implement the resolution.

On 17 June, the 1540 Committee approved its
tenth programme of work for the period until 31 May
2012. The programme of work incorporates the new
mandate and tasks for the 1540 Committee found in
resolution 1977 (2011). The programme of work
includes detailed objectives and tasks for the four
working groups of the 1540 Committee, as well as
procedures on how the 1540 Committee and the
working groups will operate.

Taking note of the adoption of resolution 1977
(2011) in April and the tenth programme of work
thereafter, the 1540 Committee has conducted activities
focused on implementation, cooperation with
international organizations, assistance, and outreach
and transparency since the joint briefing in May.

As to implementation, although the 1540
Committee did not receive any new first reports on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) during the
past six months, it did receive additional information
on implementation of the resolution from Croatia, Peru
and Qatar. In September, France submitted a national
action plan on the implementation of the resolution.
Many other States have provided additional
information to the 1540 Committee or its experts
during country-specific dialogues and other activities.

In accordance with resolution 1977 (2011), the
1540 Committee increased its efforts to engage in
dialogue with States on their implementation of
resolution 1540 (2011). Based on a December 2010
invitation from the United States to conduct a country
visit and subsequent exchanges, from 12 to
16 September the 1540 Committee visited Washington,
DC, where the Committee and experts met with
officials from nine Government departments and
several other Government bodies. The Committee and
experts were briefed on the current national measures
to implement the resolution, measures they intend to
take, and their perspective on effective practices. The
1540 Committee will work with the host country on
preparing a draft report on the visit. We can also reveal
that since May, the Committee has also received letters
of invitation for country visits to Albania, Croatia and
Madagascar. The timing and other modalities for these
visits remain under discussion.

The 1540 Committee experts have engaged in
other country-specific missions, for example to
Indonesia, Kenya, and Mexico, in cooperation with the
Organization of American States, and anticipate that
the 1540 Committee will receive more requests for
such missions in the future.

With respect to assistance, the 1540 Committee
continues to work on collecting and matching State
requests for assistance with offers of assistance, and on
possible next steps in its assistance efforts. Since the
previous briefing, the Committee has received official
information on assistance requests from Armenia,
Guyana and Mexico and on offers of assistance or the
status of assistance programmes from France, Hungary,
Mexico, Portugal and the United States. The
Committee updated a consolidated list of its formal
requests for assistance, which we agreed to share with
the Group of Eight Global Partnership working group
at a meeting in Paris, France, on 10 October.

The 1540 Committee has information on more
assistance requests made informally to it by national
authorities or where States have made requests through
other channels, such as in statements at meetings of
States parties of key non-proliferation treaties or
conventions, or submissions to other United Nations
bodies. Committee members currently have additional
assistance guidelines on match-making activities under
consideration that address procedures to conduct
match-making for assistance requests and to turn
informal requests into formal requests to the 1540
Committee.

With respect to cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations, since the last
briefing the 1540 Committee has engaged with many
of the international, regional and subregional
organizations that could provide assistance to it in the
implementation of resolution 1540. The Committee
continues to pursue its work with multilateral
organizations, such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.

In addition, the Committee received new
information on the status of points of contact from the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, along with a joint
appointment by the Pacific Islands Forum secretariat
and UNODC to a post that may help with the
implementation of the resolution in the region.

The Committee agreed to allow experts to assist
the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)
Implementation Support Unit in the development of the
BWC implementation guide. The Committee also
facilitated the development of potential
recommendations on combating proliferation financing
with the members of the Financial Action Task Force,
and contributed to the development of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central
Asia.

Further, 1540 Committee members and experts
participated in 1540 Committee-related activities with
other international, regional and subregional
organizations and entities, such as the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism of the
Organization of American States, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Caribbean
Community, and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs. The Committee has also received
a new commitment to its international efforts through a
United States-European Union joint statement on
resolution 1540 (2004), issued at a 23 October side
event on the resolution organized by the Government
of Poland on the margins of the First Committee.

With respect to outreach and transparency, the
Committee and its group of experts participated in
outreach events at the international, regional and
subregional levels to facilitate implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) over the past six months. These
included a regional workshop in Riyadh; an
international export control conference in Singapore; a
workshop on promoting the global instruments of
non-proliferation and disarmament in New York; the
meeting of the heads of special security agencies held
in St. Petersburg, Russia; a workshop on nuclear
safeguards and verification; a workshop on potential
nuclear security partnerships in South-East Asia in
Vienna; a counter-illicit trafficking workshop in
Tanzania; and an international symposium on
biosecurity and biosafety trends and solutions in Milan.
5
The 1540 Committee continues to develop its
media outreach strategy as well. During the country
visit to the United States, the representative of the
Chair made a press statement and participated in a
press conference about the visit. She also spoke at a
meeting with civil society organizations that included
participants from the media. This was done at the
request of the host country.

In order to promote transparency, the Chair
briefed a September meeting of the Africa Group on
the work of the Committee. Information notes on
events have been posted on the Committee website. We
have also begun to redesign the Committee website this
month, with the support of UNODA and the
Department of Public Information.

In conclusion, the Committee is discussing two
important tasks in line with resolution 1977 (2011).
The Committee intends to present recommendations
for the Committee and the Group of Experts in
accordance with paragraph 5 (b) of resolution 1977
(2011). The Committee remains engaged in discussions
on these recommendations, which will help define the
support capabilities available to the Committee with its
new 10-year mandate. The Committee also has begun
the process of drafting an annual report to review the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in line with
the requirements of operative paragraph 9 of resolution
1977 (2011). The completion of these two tasks will be
a major focus of the work of the 1540 Committee over
the next few months.

Permit me to make a few remarks in my national
capacity.

Much success has been achieved in the first
10 years since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001),
which, among other things, established the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) as the custodian of the
resolution. We also avail ourselves of the exceptional
support provided by the CTC and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. South
Africa welcomes the commemorative event held on
28 September, which took stock of the first decade of
resolution 1373 (2001). The political declaration
adopted at that event is forward-looking and seeks to
address those areas that remain a challenge to
countering the scourge of terrorism globally. The event
further served as a useful means of exchange between
the Committee and the entire United Nations
membership on the work carried out by the Committee.

South Africa welcomes the introduction of sunset
clauses in resolution 1989 (2011), adopted in June.
South Africa welcomes the recommendations that were
proposed by Mr. Emmerson, the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on human rights and counter-
terrorism, in particular concerning the provision of
concrete evidence as a requirement for the listing of
individuals and entities.

South Africa reiterates that any unauthorized
access to weapons of mass destruction (WMDs),
materiel and facilities by non-State actors, including
for terrorist purposes, is a threat to international peace
and security. We should all be concerned over the
existence of networks dealing in the illicit transfer of
WMD-related technology that could be used in the
manufacture of such weapons. South Africa is therefore
pleased that, in resolution 1977 (2011), not only was
the mandate of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) extended for a period of
10 years, but the Council also recognized the risk that
non-State actors may acquire, develop, traffic in or use
nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons and their
means of delivery. In short, we are hopeful that it is
a small contribution to the fight against the belief that
WMDs are legitimate instruments.

