Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation wishes warmly to welcome the
participation of the heads of States of so many African
countries; the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), Mr. Salim Salim; and Sir Ketumile
Masire to the Security Council's consultations on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the
same time, we would like to thank you, Sir, for the efforts
you have made and for this innovative arrangement.

-V "Mu-MMJ A-tuvv
 

To help the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo free themselves from the sufferings of war and
to bring peace to that country poses a serious challenge to
the international community, especially the Security
Council. The Chinese delegation has made repeated
appeals to the international community and the United
Nations to commit the necessary financial and human
resources as soon as possible to resolve the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, so as to avoid paying
an even higher price in the future. To resolve this
conflict, African countries and the international
community made unremitting mediation efforts and
brought together the various sides to the conflict to sign
last July's Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. Regrettably,
however, the Agreement has not been effectively
observed or implemented. The long-awaited United
Nations peacekeeping operation has yet to be put in place,
even though the issue has been the subject of lengthy
discussion in the Council.

We are gratified to see the detailed report that the
Secretary-General has prepared on United Nations action
in the next phase. In the report, the Secretary-General
proposes that military observers and troops be sent to the
region. We hope that the Council will make full use of
this rare opportunity, while heads of State of the African
countries concerned are gathered here in New York, and
move promptly. We support the adoption by the Security
Council of the presidential statement before us and hope
that it will mark a new starting point for the support of
the international community for the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation there.

The Chinese delegation has listened with great
interest to all previous speakers, including the heads of
State of African countries, Secretary-General Kofi Annan
and the Secretary-General of the OAU, Mr. Salim Salim.
I now wish to take this opportunity to emphasize the
following points.

First, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be fully
respected and safeguarded. This is a prerequisite for
resolving the conflict.

Secondly, the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, as the
basis for resolving the conflict, should be implemented in
full and scrupulously. The Agreement is a worthy attempt
by the African people to resolve their conflicts. The
mediation efforts made by President Chiluba, the OAU

 
and the Southern African Development Community should
be respected and supported by all sides.

T hirdly, the timely deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is an essential guarantee for resolving the conflict.
Having listened to the Views of relevant African countries,
the Council should accelerate its consideration and
implementation of the Secretary-General's proposal to send
up to 500 military observers and 5,500 troops to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The peacekeeping
mission should be given an appropriate mandate. This is
crucial under the current circumstances and will be a
critical test of the Security Council's political will and
determination.

Fourthly, all-inclusive national political dialogue is an
effective means to realize national reconciliation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same time,
internal dialogue within the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will not be possible without a stable external
environment. The peace and reconciliation processes go
hand in hand. We welcome the appointment by
Secretary-General Annan of Sir Ketumile Masire, former
President of Botswana, as the Facilitator. We wish Sir
Ketumile every success.

Fifthly, eradicating poverty and ensuring economic
development with international assistance are the
fundamental way for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to achieve lasting peace and stability. In this connection, we
support the proposal that an international conference on
peace, stability, democracy and development in the Great
Lakes region be convened.

The road to peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will not be smooth, but we are confident that, so
long as the international community seizes its opportunities
and makes concerted efforts, and so long as the various
sides to the conflict engage in genuine reconciliation and
honour their commitments, an era of peace and stability
will soon begin for the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Great Lakes region.

