Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea thanks you, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting. We also thank
Ms. Ursula Mueller for her informative briefing.

The Second World War is said to have ended in
1945, following 2,194 days of conflict. The war in
Syria has already surpassed that time frame. More than
3,000 days have passed since the start of the crisis on
15 March 2011. To date, the conflict has lasted eight
years and six months and continues owing primarily
to hostilities among the warring parties and to the
actions of the Security Council, which is responsible
for ensuring international peace and security.

For Equatorial Guinea, the situation in Syria, and
in particular in Idlib, is completely unacceptable. Our
position remains unchanged. We cannot continue to
sacrifice the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people
for prosperity and well-being at the altar of political
or geostrategic interests. In the current atmosphere of
tension, the Security Council should remain united and
spare no effort to promote and ensure the definitive
end of hostilities in north-western Syria. In that regard,
we welcome the new unilateral ceasefire imposed by
Syrian Government forces on 31 August and call for
the moratorium on hostilities to be maintained so as
to ensure the speedy normalization of the situation
in Idlib. Actions that jeopardize the ceasefire in the
de-escalation zone must also be avoided.

Furthermore, we strongly welcome the third
round of humanitarian aid, made possible by the
United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, to
approximately 15,000 residents of the Rukban refugee
camp, whose living conditions are approaching the
level of a humanitarian disaster. We urge United
Nations humanitarian agencies to continue to provide
aid to those who intend to leave the camp.

We reiterate that, even in the fight against
terrorist remnants in Syria, respect for international
humanitarian law must always be ensured. In order to
avoid causing further harm to civilians and damage to
infrastructure during counter-terrorism operations, the
parties must be fully resolved to cease indiscriminate
attacks and to apply the principles of distinction and
proportionality. It is within that logic that, as on other
occasions, we reiterate our strong condemnation of any
act of violence by any of the parties involved in the
Syrian conflict that results in the loss of civilian life
and damage to the infrastructure that provides basic
services to the population, such as medical facilities
and schools. Indeed, attacks on and the destruction
of medical facilities and schools whose locations are
known to the warring parties demonstrate the gravity of
the violations of international law and of international
humanitarian law, as well as the lack of respect for the
rules of the game in the context of the Syrian conflict.

In conclusion, I reiterate the firm conviction of the
Government of Equatorial Guineathat the Syrian conflict
can be settled only through political and diplomatic
means, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

