Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation on the ground, in the light of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/251).

We heard with deep concern the details concerning
the dramatic deterioration of the situation, alerting us to
the dangerous direction in which the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is headed, while systematically eroding the
prospect ofsustainable peace at a criticaljuncture. As we
have been well warned, the taking of unilateral measures
in flagrant violation of international law, continuous
violence, incitement, provocation, financial pressures
and the lack of internal reconciliation in the midst of
a major humanitarian crisis are elements undermining
the conditions necessary to achieving peace. Given the
interrelated nature of conflicts in the Middle East, with
the Israeli-Palestinian as perhaps the most emblematic
and persistent of all time, the consequences of inaction
entail the risk of fuelling violence and extremism in the
region, while destabilizing it further and increasing the
suffering and despair of millions of people.

As we recently discussed, we must revitalize
our collective efforts and strengthen international
consensus, as we are aware that we share common
threats and challenges with regard to humanitarian
issues and to regional and international security, while
relying on international law, multilateralism and the
peaceful resolution of conflicts, and recognizing the
important mediation role played by the United Nations.
In that regard, over the past quarter we have noted
with dismay the continued expansion of settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, with the advancement, approval or tender of
more than 3,000 units and measures geared towards the
potential legalization of several outposts and homes,
including through steps to legalize them retroactively.

We also strongly condemn the violence of the
past several days directed against protestors in Gaza,
including women and children, just as we condemn the
violence throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the continued use oflethal force and the firing
of rockets, mortars and incendiary devices from Gaza
into Israel, including the events of yesterday in which
two children were injured and force was used against
medical personnel carrying out their tasks.

At our most recent meeting on this item (see S/PV.8466), we expressed concern about the gap left
by the absence of the Temporary International Presence
in Hebron (TIPH), given the key role it played in
conflict prevention and the protection of Palestinians
in that sensitive area. Reports of an increase of violence
and harassment by settlers in the H2 area of Hebron
following the withdrawal of TIPH on 1 February justify
our collective concern.

We remain concerned about the fragile humanitarian
and economic situation that persists in Gaza, including
the acute energy crisis, and acknowledge and commend
the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in its
efforts to alleviate the suffering of the population. The
recent freezing of fiscal revenue collected on behalf of
the Palestinian Authority is an additional destabilizing
factor that could further exacerbate the situation. We
appeal to the leadership and political will ofthe parties to
urgently direct their renewed efforts towards achieving
a peaceful resolution to this perennial conflict through
fair negotiations, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions and previous agreements and initiatives,
based on the two-State solution and the best interests
of their people - Israelis and Palestinians, who for
too many years have endured the suffering caused by
the conflict.

