Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing.
I will begin with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The
United States continues to work vigorously with the
parties, the Quartet and our international partners to
resume negotiations on the basis of the 23 September
Quartet statement. That statement provides a clear and
credible path back to the negotiating table, which is the
only path to achieve the two-State solution we all seek.
The Quartet statement reaffirms President
Obama's vision for peace, as laid out in his May
remarks. President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu have each agreed to send negotiators to
Jerusalem for preparatory meetings with the Quartet
envoys on 26 October. Thus, our focus remains on
laying the groundwork for these and subsequent
meetings leading to the two parties' exchanging
comprehensive proposals on territory and security by
the end of the year, as outlined in the Quartet's
timeline.

We urge all members of the Council and all
Member States to unite to help to create a positive
climate for resuming negotiations. Ultimately, it is the
Israelis and the Palestinians who must live side by side.
Only they can reach agreement on the painful issues
that divide them: borders and security; refugees and
Jerusalem. We have been very clear that we believe
Palestinian efforts to seek Member State status at the
United Nations will not advance the peace process, but
rather will complicate, delay and perhaps derail
prospects for a negotiated settlement. Therefore, we
have consistently opposed such unilateral initiatives.
We will continue, at the same time, to exert every
effort to bring the parties back to the negotiating table.

Like every American Administration for decades,
the Obama Administration does not accept the
legitimacy of continued Israeli settlement activity. The
fate of existing settlements is one that must be dealt
with by the parties along with other permanent status
issues, including the status of Jerusalem. For that
reason, steps by the Government of Israel to advance
significant new construction in Givat Hamatos are
deeply disappointing.

The illegal trafficking of weapons in Gaza
continues to pose a serious threat to civilians in Gaza,
in Israel and in Egypt. It must be stopped.

With regard to Hamas, we reaffirm the
importance of fulfilling the Quartet's principle's
commitment to non-violence, recognition of Israel's
right to exist and recognition of previous agreements.
We call again on Palestinians and Israelis to take
constructive actions to promote peace and to avoid
actions that complicate this process or undermine trust.

The United States is very pleased that Gilad
Shalit has finally been reunited with his family after
five long years in captivity.

I will now turn to the crisis in Syria. For more
than seven months, ordinary Syrians have taken to the
streets to demand respect for their most fundamental
human rights. The Al-Assad regime has met those
peaceful protests with brutal and escalating violence.
According to the United Nations, the death toll has
surpassed 3,000. It is tragic that Al-Assad's barbaric
acts have recently been met by silence from this
Council.

The United States welcomes the Arab League's
renewed efforts to stop the violence to allow the Syrian
people to exercise their rights to freedom of expression
and assembly and to bring about a peaceful transition
to democracy.

We are very sceptical, however, that the A1-Assad
regime has any intention of allowing the opposition to
meet in an environment free of intimidation. We again
call for full and unfettered access by credible,
professional observers, including human rights
monitors, the United Nations Human Rights Council's
commission of inquiry and international observers.

In addition, we strongly deplore the violent
incursions and raids into Lebanon by Syrian security
forces that have resulted in death and injury.

Turning to Yemen: We welcome the Council's
adoption on Friday of resolution 2014 (2011)
addressing the grave situation there. Each day that
passes without a peaceful and orderly transition of
power is another day that the Yemeni people are forced
to live in danger and instability. We again urge all
parties to cease violence and exercise maximum
restraint. We will continue to work intensively with the
international community to support the Yemeni
people's aspirations for democracy and protection of
their basic human rights.

We are pleased that the Government of Lebanon
has reaffirmed that it will uphold Lebanon's
international commitments, including Lebanon's
agreement with the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. We
believe it is of utmost important that Lebanon fulfil its
funding obligations to the Special Tribunal within the
coming weeks. We remain deeply committed to the full
implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006). The United States continues to
support the Lebanese Armed Forces' ongoing efforts to
assert control and maintain stability in southern
Lebanon.

Finally, the United Sates congratulates the
Tunisian people on the reported high turnout in
Sunday's elections for a constituent assembly. This is a
milestone on the Tunisian people's path from
dictatorship to a democratic Government founded upon
respect for the will of its citizens.

We look forward to working with the people and
Government of Tunisia, including the new Constituent
Assembly, over the next phase of their country's
historic transition.

