Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to express my country's gratitude to
Chile for having included this open meeting in the
programme of work of the Security Council. This is a
debate that we had been hoping for since last
November, to follow up on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Council mission which visited
West Africa in mid-2003.
The Council has maintained constant attention on
the situation of insecurity and instability that prevails
in the subregion because of the threat it represents to
international peace and security. Mexico has insisted
on the need to tackle the causes of African conflicts
from a comprehensive perspective ranging from
prevention to measures for peace-building. We have
participated in Council decisions in support of peace
processes, implementing programmes for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of former combatants, combating the recruitment of
mercenaries and child soldiers and preventing and
eradicating trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, which contravenes the arms embargoes
imposed by the Council.

Mexico supports the Security Council in
maintaining a regional approach to these problems, and
we thus agree with what the Secretary-General has said
about the need to adopt additional measures to confront
the factors leading to destabilization, in particular
along the borders between Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Cote d'Ivoire. In that respect, Mexico will continue
promoting the implementation of a regional strategy,
including the Mano River Union, for peace, security
and attention to the humanitarian situation, with the
assistance of United Nations agencies and regional and
subregional organizations.

The lessons learned from the reintegration
process in Sierra Leone must serve as guidelines for
overcoming the obstacles that arise in reintegrating
young Liberians into civil life. We hope that, at the
donor conference for Liberia to be held next month,
adequate financial resources will be channelled into
reviving the country's economic and social
development and into preventing a situation in which
the only alternative open to those young people is to
return to warfare under the orders of the highest bidder.

We also support the trend promoted by the
Security Council throughout 2003 to strengthen
machinery for coordination and cooperation among the
offices of the United Nations on the ground. We
believe, however, that there should be a balance
between the mandates endorsed and the availability of
human and financial resources. The prevailing situation
in Guinea-Bissau is not radically unlike those in
Liberia and cote d'Ivoire, but the United Nations true
capacity to assist the people of Guinea-Bissau is
limited to the goodwill of the donor countries. We
believe that the situation should be considered and
redressed by the Council.
We eagerly await the report of the Secretary-
General on cross-border issues, with recommendations
for practical measures for making the optimal use of
the comparative advantages of the United Nations and
the subregional and regional organizations with
influence in West Africa. We feel that it should include
recommendations on confidence-building measures, in
particular the revival of the Rabat process, to bring
together the leaders of Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia.

Finally, I wish to reiterate Mexico's position in
favour of the establishment of a peacekeeping
operation in C6te d'Ivoire in response to appeals from
the Government of that country and from the Economic
Community of West African States. We very much
hope that the negotiations to be held among the
members of the Council will give priority to the well-
being, peace and security of the people of cote
d'Ivoire.

