Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): I wish to thank the
Republic of Korea for organizing this timely celebratory
meeting and to congratulate you, Madam President, on
your excellent stewardship both today and during your
presidency of the Security Council .

Romania fully aligns itself with the statement made
earlier in this meeting by the observer of the European
Union, but I would also like to underline a few points of
national relevance.

Romania's policy on promoting non-proliferation
is an important part of its foreign and security policy.
As a State party to the international non-proliferation
regimes, Romania remains committed to contributing
to regional and international security and stability by
fully implementing its non-proliferation commitments
and promoting transparency and responsibility in its
export-control decisions.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is widely recognized as
complementing the multilateral non-proliferation
regimes. Romania co-sponsored it and humanitarian
actively supported its implementation by all States,
including during its chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in
2004 and 2005. We recently reaffirmed our strong
commitment by signing the joint statement on promoting
full and universal implementation of Security Council
Resolution 1540 (2004) at the third Nuclear Security
Summit in The Hague.

A decade after the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), we are encouraged by the steady progress that
Member States have reported in enacting national
measures to implement its provisions. The 1540
Committee and its Group of Experts play an important
role in advancing the implementation of the resolution,
and they need to be supported to continue their
important work ahead.

While there has been progress in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), challenges still remain,
as some Member States continue to need additional
assistance to consolidate their national implementation
capabilities. Implementation remains a long-term
objective that requires continuous interaction and
cooperation among States and between States and the
Committee and its experts. All States in a position to
provide assistance should continue to do so. Romania
has provided technical assistance to countries in our
region to help develop export-control legislation, and
it is willing to continue to do so, upon request. State
ownership of the implementation process remains
essential.

The requirements under resolution 1540 (2004) are
too diverse to be addressed by one national authority
only. During the past 10 years, Romania has organized
more than tens of national seminars dedicated to the
implementation of the resolution, in cooperation
with several international and regional organizations
and with the participation of the 1540 Committee
and United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
representatives. The seminars have been attended by
Government experts and representatives of industry
and research institutes.

Romania's experience has developed and
strengthened as we have adhered to various international
non-proliferation instruments, which has required, inter
alia, enacting national legislation for implementation and
establishing the necessary regulatory infrastructure.
We are ready to share our experience in that regard,
and we have done so recently in the context of several
regional training courses on nuclear security, organized
in cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency.

In a globalized world, the risk of the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction is more often associated
with transnational organized crime, illicit trafficking
and corruption. That reality requires integrated efforts
and approaches to address such risks in a comprehensive
manner, at national, regional and international levels.
Integrated approaches are also necessary given the
scarcity of resources at the national and international
levels to prevent and respond to such risks.

A similar coordinated approach by the 1540
Committee is very welcome. Forging partnerships and
increasing cooperation among the Security Council's
committees and with international institutions and
organizations will support the further promotion of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In addition,
developing means and ways to better coordinate and
integrate the goals pursued by the resolution, with the
objectives that other assistance-oriented international
structures are following, is most welcome. Ultimately,
the responsibility for implementing resolution 1540
(2004) remains with national Governments, but
better targeted and more coherent and coordinated
support of the international community would have a
significant impact in improving the effectiveness of the
increasingly limited resources with concrete results at
the national level.

In conclusion, Madam President, I wish to express
our gratitude for all the efforts by the Republic of Korea
to advance the goals of resolution 1540 (2004), to wish
you great success in your endeavours and to assure you
of Romania's constant support.

