Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Let
me begin by thanking you, Madam President, for
providing us with the opportunity of this debate. Your
presence underlines your personal commitment and
that of Chile to this very important issue. I should like
to join others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2003/1053) and for the work of his Special
Representative. I am thankful also for the work of the
many organizations involved - especially the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations - for all their
contributions. I should like to associate myself with the
remarks to be made later by the Irish Presidency of the
European Union.

Today's debate on children and armed conflict is
very important for my Government, as for others
around this table. It is an issue that causes the United
Kingdom to work hard to support, at all levels in the
United Nations system and beyond, the efforts made to
arrest this grim problem. As today's interventions
show, children and armed conflict is a highly complex
issue, intertwining political, legal, social and
institutional issues. But we have an obligation to find
answers and to resolve those issues on behalf of
children.

Today we have heard two simple messages. The
first is about the history that underpins the
consideration of this issue in the United Nations. That
provides a benchmark for measuring the progress that
has been made, and we should be pleased about that
progress. But the second message is self-evident: we
are still not doing enough. Even as we speak, children
throughout the world continue to suffer. It is time to
focus on results and on action.

Graga Machel's study (A/51/306), submitted in
1996, was a watershed - a watershed for the United
Nations and for the international system's
consideration of children and armed conflict. That
study set out in very explicit terms - which are every
bit as relevant today - the impact of conflict on
children's lives. It remains a touchstone for our
collective effort to improve the lives of children in
conflict regions.

We have made commendable progress. At the
international level, in 2003 we recognized and
applauded the establishment of a strengthened
normative framework for the protection of children in
armed conflict. The Secretary-General then rightly
called for - and Mr. Otunnu this morning emphasized
the need for - an era of application. But today, as we
engage in this debate, others have expressed - and let
me repeat - the extreme regret that, at the national
level in many situations today, we have barely
scratched the surface of this challenge.

In Burma, it is estimated that up to 70,000
children, some as young as 11, are forcibly recruited by
the State army, where they are used in armed conflict.
Children also suffer abuse inflicted by ethnic armed
groups. In northern Uganda, we continue to witness a
situation that deserves a far higher profile: the horrific
kidnapping of children by the Lord's Resistance Army.
These children are used to beat and kill civilians, to
kidnap other children and to fight against government
forces. The further tragedy is that these children -
intimidated, forced to take such actions - have
nowhere to go. They are rejected by their families and
their communities because of those actions and are
increasingly locked into a cycle of terror. Ms. Bellamy
already referred to the situation in West and Central
Africa, among other areas.

I was quite horrified when, in a discussion at the
end of last week, someone referred in very matter-of-
fact terms to a colonel aged 17. The logic of that was
inevitable: if your privates are all aged 10 to 12, by the
time they are promoted, they can become colonels at
17. A harsher indictment I cannot imagine. Situations
like those, in which thousands of children suffer
egregious violations of their rights on a daily basis,
must be the focus of our highest priority and of our
actions.

Such situations stand in stark contrast to the
internal disturbance in Northern Ireland - covered in
the report - where there is not and has not been a
situation of armed conflict and where, in addition, there
has been real progress in addressing the issue of
children's rights. In addition to the Northern Ireland
Human Rights Commission, there is now a
Commissioner for Children and Young People for
Northern Ireland with a broad remit and significant
powers to ensure the protection of children's interests.
Those developments take place against the background
of an established and increasingly successful political
process.

When we come to this debate next year, we need
to be talking about tangible, positive outcomes for
children in conflict regions. To do that, as others have
said, we now need to establish a plan detailing practical
steps to achieve measurable progress by the time the
next report is written.

Last month, when the Security Council debated
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, I set out
three interconnected themes that, in our view, the
United Nations system should collectively address, and
they are just as relevant to today's debate.

First, we must end abuse. We should establish
incentives and define what actions perpetrators should
take to end their abuse of children, including by setting
out indicators for progress and the consequences of
inaction.

Secondly, knowledge: we need to know about the
situation on the ground and the responses that we are
getting to the incentives that we provide. That is what
we understand by effective monitoring, reporting and
evaluation: knowing the outcomes and assessing the
situation against the objectives of the international
community and the basic rights of children.

Thirdly, we need action to tackle continuing
abuse through an effective United Nations system-wide
response, working with Governments and civil society
organizations, with the right people in the right place
with the right skills at the right time. This is what we
mean by "mainstreaming", a dimension which we
should, as a matter of course, cover in Security Council
resolutions addressing conflict and post-conflict
situations.

An institutional road map should set out who
should do what and when, and then set out core
responsibilities. Changing the way things are done can
sometimes pose tough questions, but we can no longer
afford to duck them, so we require vision and strong
and effective leadership at all levels. That is why we
strongly support the Secretary-General's assessment of
response to children in armed conflict the United
Nations system as a whole. If our debate next year is to
focus on those tangible outcomes for children, it is
vital that the report before us today lead to concrete
actions at all levels.

Member States have a responsibility as well, a
responsibility to ensure that we provide sufficient
human and financial resources to support disarmament,
demobilization, and reintegration programmes that
address the very specific and challenging needs of
child soldiers, including their education. My
Government stands ready to offer its support.

Finally, I am struck that Graca Machel's words in
1996 remain as relevant now as they were then.
Describing her report as a call to action, she said:

"It is unforgivable that children are assaulted,
violated, murdered and yet our conscience is not
revolted nor our sense of dignity challenged. This
represents a fundamental crisis of our civilization.
The impact of armed conflict on children must be
everyone's concern and is everyone's

responsibility- Governments, international
organizations and every element of civil
society.

"Let us transform our moral outrage into concrete
action. Our children have a right to peace".
(A/51/306)

That message should underpin our work.

