Mr. Takasu (Japan): I express to Chairman Spirie
a warm welcome to the Security Council this morning.
I also wish to congratulate Mr. Valentin Inzko on his
assumption of the position of High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Knowing personally his
professional competence and deep knowledge of the
region, I am convinced that Mr. Inzko will fulfil his
responsibilities with distinction and will make a
significant contribution to achieving stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

I am also grateful for the efforts made to prepare
the comprehensive report (see S/2009/246) and for this
morning's valuable briefing. We agree with the
assessment that only limited progress was made during

the reporting period. We acknowledge that some
progress has been made regarding the five objectives
and two conditions, including issues on the legal status
of the Brcko District. However, the political situation
has remained unstable due to continuing exchanges of
ethnocentric rhetoric. We have serious misgivings
about a failure of coordination among Government
agencies and major political parties, which has left
many issues unresolved. Japan believes that all parties
should maintain a constructive attitude in order to
develop Bosnia and Herzegovina into a vibrant and
sustainable State.

We were somewhat disappointed to hear that the
Prud process has lost momentum. We should extend
full support to complete the Prud process. Continuation
of that process is indispensable if Bosnia and
Herzegovina is to become a full-fledged member of the
European community. We urge all political leaders to
accept that fact and to maintain active engagement in
the process to address constitutional reform.

Japan continues to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina
to achieve its integration into the Euro-Atlantic
community. For that purpose, necessary progress has
been made, including on implementation of the five
objectives and two conditions and on the transition
from the Office of the High Representative to the
European Union (EU) Special Representative. High
attention must be paid towards urging the international
community to work as a strong driving force towards
achievement of the Prud objectives.

The recent visits to Sarajevo by the EU troika of
Foreign Ministers and by the EU High Representative
for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and
United States Vice-President Biden demonstrated the
determination of the international community to jointly
strengthen engagement in the region. We welcome
those initiatives to advance the reform process and to
stabilize the situation.

Consolidation of peace in the country is the
cornerstone of peace and prosperity in the Western
Balkan region as a whole. Japan believes that the
human security perspective helps to consolidate
coexistence, reconciliation and stability in a multi-
ethnic society. Based on that belief, we have been
actively contributing to community reconciliation,
stability and development in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
through bilateral programmes. We have also been an
active member of the Peace Implementation Council

(PIC) Steering Board, since the beginning. Early this
year, we decided to support a new project on demining
in Banovici and processing war crimes cases, with a
View to enhancing human security. We will extend
additional support to Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
efforts to establish a sound base for sustainable
development and to consolidate peace.

In conclusion, the role of the High Representative
will continue to be important in the light of the still-
unstable situation. As a member of the PIC, we
encourage Mr. Inzko to make full use of his authority
as High Representative, including the exercise of his
Bonn powers in the event that necessity so demands.

We urge Bosnia and Herzegovina to accelerate
stabilizing efforts and its integration into the Euro-
Atlantic community. I reiterate my country's firm and
continued commitment to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina in advancing that process.

