Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is
a pleasure for me to sit next to our brother and good
friend, Mr. Annabi, as well as next to the delegation of
Colombia.

The Council is meeting today to celebrate a
unique event - an event in which the international
community has participated with a View to fulfilling
the principles and purposes of the United Nations
Charter and to achieving peace, equality and justice
among peoples. The independence of East Timor will
complete a very important political process in that
territory - a process of reconciliation to which many
influential actors have contributed, in particular
Indonesia and many national Timorese leaders. That
effort has resulted in independence, and has made it
possible for the Timorese people to overcome a very
difficult period in its history and to build a new State in
a climate of good relations and peace with its
neighbours.
We agree with the Secretary-General's logical
analysis, as expressed in his recent report on East
Timor, which refers to the numerous challenges that
could be faced in the post-independence period. There
is thus a need to act quickly in order to guarantee
stability and efficient development for the new State.
The Secretary-General's report lists those challenges as
border demarcation, the return of refugees, the
regulation of commercial activities in the border area,
the strengthening of nascent governmental structures,
including law enforcement and the judicial system, and
the consolidation of the framework for economic and
social development.

However, all these factors have to be
accompanied by the complete respect of the
international community for the independence of East
Timor, for non-interference in its internal affairs and
for the guarantee of freedom of action and freedom of
choice for the Timorese people represented by its
elected leadership. The international community must
also respect East Timor's free choice of its future and
the model it will follow in its international relations.
This independence will, without a doubt, safeguard
stability and the achievements of the Transitional
Authority.

The security situation continues to represent a
clear challenge vis-a-vis the achievement of complete
stability in East Timor. Consequently, we support the
principle of continuing the United Nations mission and
reducing its size after independence. This would help
provide the most appropriate conditions to guarantee
security for the new, emerging State.

My delegation subscribes to the mandate set out
in the Secretary-General's report, namely, to give the
administrative support and assistance necessary for the
establishment of legal structures so that the country can
maintain internal and external security.

The success of the efforts by the international
community in East Timor clearly reflects what success
is possible when there is the international will. That is
the will to promote and strengthen the principles of the
United Nations Charter, namely, saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, respecting human
rights and the rights of the individual, establishing
justice and complying with obligations under
international law.

Egypt attaches special importance to East Asia,
with which we enjoy strong relations due to our long-
standing diplomatic relations with that region. We
welcome warmly the emergence of a new, friendly
State joining the international community, a State
whose people have worked hard to ensure peace,
equality and justice, and whose will has finally
triumphed.

