Mr. Benomar: As we heard today, there is
resounding international support for the remarkable
efforts made and led by the Yemeni people to move
their country forward. I would like to reiterate that the
transition in Yemen is largely on track. Yes, there are
challenges in the security, economic and humanitarian
fields, but the transition is moving forward.

I would like to make special mention of the young
people who courageously took to the streets, opening the
way for the people's aspirations to be realized. We should
not forget how we got here. It all started with young
people peacefully demanding change. I am pleased to
see Security Council members acknowledging the role
they played and their commitment to supporting the
people's aspirations.

I would also like to pay tribute to Yemen's political
leaders, who have had the courage to pull their country
from the abyss; Yemeni leaders who negotiated face
to face, constructively, in my presence in November
in Sana'a, and who concluded an agreement that made
this unique, peaceful transition possible. Yemenis have
developed, through a Yemeni-led process, a Yemeni
road map for change and recovery. Our role was, and
continues to be, to support their efforts and facilitate
agreement at their request, with Yemenis always in the
lead.

I am pleased to see Security Council members
unanimously commending the leadership and efforts
of President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour. He
has led the way with strong and effective stewardship,
steering the country towards a more stable, prosperous
and bright future.

I am very pleased to see the Security Council
speaking with one voice in support of the Yemeni
transition. The National Dialogue definitely represents
the beginning of a new Yemen. It provides an opportunity
to broaden the political process, ensuring inclusion
by allowing Yemenis, men and women, from north to
south, from across the political spectrum, to engage
in dialogue and collectively shape the future of their
country. Let us continue our innovative cooperation in
support of Yemenis in their efforts to forge ahead.

We have all emphasized the importance of a
timely start to the National Dialogue. In that regard,
it will be important for Yemen's partners to contribute
financially to the United Nations trust fund that has
been established to support the National Dialogue. I
would also like to reiterate the importance of delivering
in a timely fashion on the pledges that Yemen's partners
have made in the meetings of the Friends of Yemen in
support of Yemen's economic recovery.

