Mr. Oshima (Japan): Let me state at the outset
that we are shocked and appalled by the fact that yet
another high-ranking Lebanese official - Minister of
Industry Pierre Gemayel - has been killed. Japan
strongly condemns that brutal act of violence, which
can only destabilize the already volatile situation in
Lebanon. We express our deep condolences to the
family of the deceased, and we expect that the
perpetrators of this crime will be brought to justice, as
should the perpetrators of other heinous acts of
political violence in that tormented country. For the
sake of the country's stability, in our View, the sooner
that is done, the better.

I join other members in thanking Under-
Secretary-General Gambari for his comprehensive
briefing on recent developments in the Middle East.
The picture that Mr. Gambari presented to us of the
situation in the Middle East is indeed a grim one. It is a
matter of deep concern that the cycle of violence
between Palestinian military groups and the Israel
Defense Forces and the political deadlock in Palestine
continue to plague the region and drive it deeper into
crisis. Of further concern is the resultant continuing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian population, in particular the heavy toll
registered among innocent civilians, including women
and children.

The vicious circle will have to be broken. That
can be achieved only if political leadership and the will
to settle differences are mobilized by the leaders of all
the parties concerned.

Japan wishes to make clear that, under the new
Government led by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, it
remains deeply committed to encouraging and
supporting all such peaceful and political endeavours
in the region. To that end, Japan will continue to
provide all of the support and assistance necessary to
address the Middle East peace process in a constructive
and proactive way.

On the political front, in recent weeks we have
witnessed certain efforts being made by the parties
concerned, including in particular some Arab countries,
to help establish a new government of the Palestinian
Authority. It is our strong hope that those efforts will
continue and that they will produce results acceptable
to all.

To break the current stalemate, we urge
Palestinians to find ways of overcoming their
differences, achieve a breakthrough and support a new
Palestinian Authority government that would resume
the work previously begun to achieve coexistence and
mutual prosperity with Israel. At the same time, we
expect that Israel, on its part, will support the efforts of
President Abbas, who is striving to achieve such a
breakthrough in the deadlocked situation.

If a new Palestinian Authority government, once
established, makes clear that it would pursue the
realization of peace and peaceful coexistence through
negotiation with Israel, then the international
community should respond positively and support such
a new direction as most welcome. In order to resolve
the problems that exist, especially at this critical
moment, nothing is more important than direct talks
between the parties at the highest level. We therefore
strongly hope for an early resumption of the long-
delayed direct talks between the leaders of the two
parties, Israel and Palestine.

There can be no military solution to the Middle
East peace process. All parties concerned should
exercise the maximum restraint, refraining from
military action and violence on both sides.

Japan strongly deplores the incident that took
place on 8 November in Beit Hanoun. We strongly urge
the Government of Israel to refrain from taking any
military action which may lead to civilian casualties.
We also hope that the Government of Israel will make
serious and expeditious efforts to determine the causes
of the incident in Beit Hanoun and to prevent the
recurrence of such tragic events by ensuring that the
panel of investigation established within the Israel
Defense Forces carries out its work promptly. Japan
renews its call upon Israel to release the Palestinian
ministers and others held in custody.
At the same time, we urge the Government of the
Palestinian Authority to take credible, effective
measures to rein in the violence of Palestinian
extremist groups, including launching Qassam rocket
attacks into Israeli territory. We also renew calls on the
Palestinian Authority to bring about the safe return of
the Israeli soldier abducted in June.

The deteriorating humanitarian situation
afflicting the Palestinian people is a matter of deep
concern to the entire international community. To
resolve this crisis, the international community should
continue to provide the humanitarian relief and
assistance that is urgently needed. In this regard, we
stress once again that an early Israeli resumption of the
transfer of tax and customs revenues to the Palestinian
Authority, as well as the full implementation of the
Agreement on Movement and Access concluded in
November 2005, are matters of utmost priority. Japan,
as a major donor of assistance to the Palestinians for
many years, will make every effort to continue to
provide such assistance.

On Lebanon, serious efforts by the parties
concerned and the continued support of the
international community are needed to address the
issues referred to in Security Council resolution 1701
(2006), including a permanent ceasefire and a long-
term solution. On the other hand, Lebanon is going
through major domestic political upheavals, which we
strongly hope will be resolved by the parties concerned
peacefully, through dialogue.

We wish to reaffirm the importance of Syria's
role in achieving stability in Lebanon and peace
throughout the region. Japan fervently hopes that Syria
will positively and constructively engage in the
political process and cooperate with the efforts being
made by the international community to this end.

Japan will continue to be engaged in the process,
working with all concerned countries in the region with
a view to defusing tensions, restoring stability and
nurturing a spirit of cooperation, which we believe will
lead to a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East region.

