Mr. Lubbers: I wish to express my gratitude in
general for the positive reactions. I will try to respond
to some of the questions put forward.

I will respond to the last question first - a
general one. Yes, it is true that, when I took office, I
had to face the consequences of the fact that the
budget, as decided by my governing body - the
Executive Committee a was substantially higher than
the funding. Therefore we had to face a gap of $125
million, or 13 per cent of the budget. I saw no other
way to close that gap than to reduce the organization.
That was a painful operation, both in terms of our
advocacy role in countries and of the assistance aspect.
We were a bit concerned that we really went to what
one might call the rock bottom, the absolute minimum.
That is where we are.

This means also that each additional challenge
has to be met by additional funding. Here, Afghanistan
is a prime example. Let me give the Council an
impression of the numbers. The budget of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for 2002 - its annual budget - is $828
million. The Afghanistan operation costs about $18
million a month. If we deduct some $5 million, which
was already part of the annual budget in the whole
region, we are speaking of about $13 million a month,
which is about $170 million - roughly 20 percent over
our funded budget. From that, it becomes clear, of
course, that we can carry out the Afghanistan operation
only with additional funding from countries. As the
Council is aware, generous pledges were made earlier
in a broad forum event in Geneva, and more recently,
in a broader context, in Tokyo.
As for the budgetary consequences, let me turn to
one of the questions posed by the representative of
Colombia - the third question. It is not easy to define
and calculate the cost of repatriation. That is related to
the question: what is the role of UNHCR in that
respect, and at what point do we hand over to other
agencies and development actors?

Let us take the example of Afghanistan, which is
an interesting example - it is not Africa, it is not
Europe, it is a specific situation. Let me now relate this
budget of $271 million for 15 months - $18 million a
month - to the one and a quarter million whom we
bring back in a year. That is all on paper, of course. We
have to see what the exact numbers will be. But at least
this gives the Council an indication of the shortage of
money in terms of what is needed for the specific role
of UNHCR.

Let me explain once again the specific role of
UNHCR. Council members all can relate to
Governments; maybe the easiest example is to say that
refugees and internally displaced persons are people
who do not have a government that takes care of them.
But they have UNHCR. It functions, in effect, as a
Minister for the Interior. It registers people, knows
where they are, makes profiles of them and asks where
they can go back to. This is our type of work.

Because there is no government taking care of
these issues, when needed, we also provide protection
and assistance, together with other bodies such as the
World Food Programme. We are a coordinating force
with other departments - other ministers - for those
people without a government.

When we bring them back, in the beginning we
go with them. We try to assist them with their initial
needs - travelling and settling in. Sometimes we go
somewhat further. Take the example of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, where we helped
people go back to their villages and assisted them in
repairing their houses, in order to ensure their
successful return. If they are farmers, we can go as far
as providing the first seeds.

Of course, we try to do this in partnership with
others and to hand things over, as soon as possible, to
development agencies, through the interface of
humanitarian assistance and reconstruction and
rehabilitation. It is very difficult, therefore, to define a
precise budget in terms of this type of durable solution.

There are, of course, other solutions. In the
context of repatriation, there is also local integration in
the first countries of asylum.
I would like to take this opportunity to say a few
words about the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD). I spoke with President Mbeki
and with Prime Minister Chretien, whose country is a
member of the G-8, about the need to use this
important new initiative also in connection with
refugees in terms of return and local integration. In
response to another question, we see that refugees are
often a burden to the local population in host countries.
We do hope that, as part of this new plan for Africa,
new ways and means will be found to address needs in
those regions where there are large refugee
populations, not only to meet the needs of refugees but
also to meet the needs of the local population so that
there is less antagonism in the host countries and so
that the populations of the host countries can see that,
although they may have a lot of refugees, they are not
only a burden but also represent prospects for
development activities - for building roads,
establishing hospitals and so forth. Such a change in
paradigm * that is, that there is not only humanitarian
assistance for refugees but also assistance for affected
and burdened regions and host countries - is a very
important change indeed towards striking the balance
called for by the representative of Colombia. The
representative of the United States also made
comments about that challenge.

Let me now turn to the intriguing question of the
French Ambassador, about setting the agenda for the
humanitarian segment in the meetings of the Economic
and Social Council. I think that this indeed presents an
opportunity. As the Council is aware, the Economic
and Social Council's work by definition complements
the work of the Security Council, while at the same
time being totally different from it. From the outset,
there has been a Security Council and an Economic and
Social Council. But I hope that I made it clear in my
intervention this morning that they are not totally
separate, especially when it comes to finding durable
solutions. In that instance, organizations related to the
Economic and Social Council are very important, as
are the deliberations of the Economic and Social
Council. To the extent that they are successful - in
that connection I also mentioned the upcoming
Monterrey Conference - they are an investment in
security for the future.

To put it another way, if those investments in
durable solutions are not made, we will again see
desperate refugees turning to criminal networks and
undergoing all sorts of problems to arrive in countries
with mature economies. If we do not have solutions for
protracted situations, then we will again see that
refugees - especially young people in camps - will
be vulnerable to the extent that they can be attracted by
those who practise violence, including warlords and the
like. In my opinion, there is therefore a connection
between investing in security and the work of the
Economic and Social Council. So I do hope that,
perhaps during this year's humanitarian segment, there
will be room and opportunity to debate and analyse this
further. I must of course say to the representative of
France that I am not in charge. I am just asking and
pointing out that it might be important. But I hope that,
with the assistance of the members there, it will be
possible.

Another question pertained to security in the
camps and the separation of armed elements and
refugees. This is indeed a very important area. Allow
me to say that we are making progress compared to a
number of years ago. Practices have been developed to
separate armed elements from refugees more
thoroughly and fundamentally. We can see this in
practice. IfI were to take the members of the Council
to the border between Angola and Zambia, they would
be able to see people coming in and to observe how we
work together with the officials of Zambia to separate
the people. I mean literally separate, as armed persons
are brought a long way to other camps where there are
other armed elements and where they are totally
separated from other refugees. Were I to take members
of the Council to camps for Burundian refugees in
Tanzania, they would see that there is quite an effort
under way by the military and the internal police in
those camps to curb the existence of arms in the camps
and try to keep them out. This is of course our ideal: to
have arms-free refugee camps. So there is progress.
This involves the famous "ladder of options" that we
use to try to improve the situation in the camps through
separation.

Vulnerability in the camps is not limited solely to
armed elements. When we speak about vulnerable
women in refugee camps we are talking about other
types of problems, as the Council may imagine. Ijust
wanted to flag this for the Council as well. It is a very
important element.

I would like to take a couple of minutes to
respond to questions raised by members of the Council
regarding the security of humanitarian staff themselves.
This is a very important part of my responsibility and
that of my colleagues. Almost every month, I either
write letters to colleagues or receive letters from them
due to there being a new victim. The numbers are
rising. This is a tragic situation that we are trying to
improve by training staff to be aware of risks and by
giving them necessary communication equipment,
which helps a lot in improving the level of security. As
the Council is aware, we also work with the United
Nations Security Coordinator system.

But what is painful is that all these investments
we must make represent financial resources, money
that we ourselves must pay. I sometimes have to say to
the poor refugees in camps that I am sorry there is so
little for them, but that we have to pay for security. I
sincerely doubt that the United Nations as a whole can
afford not to pay for this out of the regular budget. I
want to repeat that here once again. It is known that it
can, but it is not done. It is a very strange situation, that
the international community and the United Nations
allow the existence of a situation in which the security
of humanitarian staff is not considered part of their
core responsibilities.

The representative of Guinea had kind words for
me, and he was right in asking me how I am now
carrying out the process of repatriation - in particular
with regard to refugees in Guinea returning to Sierra
Leone. We are going to try to do this in a way similar
to what was done in Afghanistan. Now that the security
situation is improving, we are moving towards a
repatriation plan. I have spoken with my people. I have
come under a certain amount of pressure to increase the
number of returnees, also as a political signal. We are
trying to do this. We know how important it is for the
political process itself. But in this case as well, I am
convinced that there must be sustainable returns of
refugees. We must therefore assist refugees to
reintegrate into their villages so that they can start once
again to earn their own living. As the Council knows,
most of them will do so in agriculture. We will do this,
and maybe not too long from now we will come back
to the Council with a more comprehensive plan to
clarify what we are doing in Sierra Leone.

A number of other remarks were made, but I shall
try to be selective in responding to them. One question
I must certainly answer is that of the representative of
the United Kingdom, about the security, or lack of
security, in Afghanistan. I have no precise figures, but
my people tell me that at the beginning it was very
rewarding to see the intensity with which people
spontaneously wanted to go home. They took a risk;
they were heading, as it were, to a new Afghanistan
with acceptable conditions. At this very moment, we
see two clouds in the sky. One is that there have been a

at

number of incidents where, even in the new
Afghanistan", people, especially Pashtuns, are now
fleeing from certain regions where there is obviously a
lack of tolerance and respect - a lack, if you like, of
security. The second cloud, we fear, is that enthusiasm
will wane if there is not sufficient security in the
countryside. I am not in a position to make an estimate
of what that means in numbers, but the signals should
encourage us to look seriously at addressing this
security problem. That, of course, is not my first
responsibility, but I have to mention the point. I am
fully aware of the dilemmas here: to what extent this
has to be done by the international force, and to what
extent the process towards an Afghan army and an
Afghan security force can be speeded up. The only
thing I can say is that, one way or another, there is a
real need. Otherwise, the process will not develop in a
good way.

I think it is fair that I should stop here, having
answered a number of questions and not speaking too
long.

