Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to welcome the presence among
us today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa
Rica and the new Permanent Representative of
Belgium. I should also like to join speakers who have
preceded me in welcoming Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
as well as to thank him for his briefing.

There is no need to emphasize my country's
commitment to combating impunity and its rejection of
compromising with perpetrators when it comes to
enforcing the law. However, we know how difficult it
is to achieve those goals, as we are aware of the
delicate and confidential responsibilities entrusted to a
prosecutor's office required by a legal mandate and
professional obligations to carry out a sober
prosecution that avoids condemning prior to trials,
presents findings immediately following thorough
investigations and closely scrutinizes diverse pieces of
evidence, whether corroborating or exculpatory in
nature.

The report that has been presented to us refers to
ongoing investigations. Many paragraphs of the report
contain diverse legal and political accusations against
the highest organs of a State and its military and
security machinery. In many cases, those accusations
are based on press and political reports. To date, there
have been no findings or conclusions with regard to
investigations into the practices of the rebel
movements. In short, the issue has been presented as if
it had to do with the pattern of behaviour of a State
obsessed solely with the destruction of the basis for its
existence, namely, its people and their tribal and social
fabric.

My country's experience has taught us that the
intensity of the language used in the statement
invoking resolution 1593 (2005) will undermine the
environment of cooperation and assistance called for
both by the resolution itself and the report that has
been presented to us. It also risks undermining
opportunities to strengthen cooperation in our work in
the context of the Council's current mission to the
Sudan. We know that, by its very nature, cooperation is
a dynamic process that can take place only through
calm dialogue and mutual confidence, regardless of
differences with the Sudan and its positions or the
Sudan's commitment to the Rome Statute and its
application. There is no hope that mutual confidence
will prevail while national legal proceedings are being
marginalized. In conformity with the Rome Statute, the
competency of the ICC complements the national legal
system.

Along with the Sudan's cooperation, we had
expected that the Court and the Office of the
Prosecutor would have made additional efforts to
promote the rule of law, protect human rights and
combat impunity in Darfur. The resolution encouraged
it, highlighting the universality of the ICC and its
proceedings and furthering its goals.

The Council's referral of the Darfur case to the
Court, in our View, was not prompted by political
motivations or with the intention of interfering in the
Sudan's affairs through a technical legal process, the
politicization of which is in no one's interest. That is
particularly true since the referral was not made at the
expense of a comprehensive consideration of the
situation by the Council that would take into account
the balancing of its numerous political, security and
humanitarian priorities.

We agree that peace and justice are indivisible.
Yet how can justice be achieved? How will the
Sudanese people view such justice, meted to all its
factions, without exception, including the victims of
the rebel movements? It is a political process led by the
United Nations, which respects the sovereignty of
Member States, that will achieve harmony, stability
and security by addressing in all earnest the underlying
causes before the symptoms.

The strong message expected of the Council
today must, in our view, focus on that process and its
progress by all means and inclusive of all parties. That
is what my country has tried to achieve in the course of
recent years; it is what we are trying to achieve in
Geneva in the framework of noble regional and
international efforts, which we hope will succeed and
bear fruit.

