Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I want to begin
by joining the Secretary-General in the tribute
contained in his report to the work of Jean Arnault and
warmly to welcome Tom Koenigs to the job. I
personally, and my delegation and Government, look
forward to working with him very closely.

I associate myself with the statement to be made
by the representative of Austria later in this debate on
behalf of the European Union and I want to say right at
the outset that the United Kingdom fully supports the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
another year, including the adjustments to the mandate
proposed by the Secretary-General.

Under the Bonn process, Afghanistan made really
tremendous progress, as the Secretary-General's report
highlights, but as that report also indicates, more
remains to be done - inevitably, since this is a long-
term task that is going to require sustained
international commitment.

The London Conference in late January provided
an opportunity for the international community to re-
emphasize its commitment to Afghanistan for the next
phase. The United Kingdom was proud to host the
Conference and was grateful to the United Nations, and
the Secretary-General in particular, for their support.

The Afghanistan Compact agreed at the
Conference demonstrates the international
community's firm continuing support for Afghanistan's
reconstruction and also, and importantly, for increasing
Afghan ownership of the process. The Compact aims to
encourage and address Afghanistan's development over
the next five years, with a clear set of benchmarks and
goals designed to deliver reform on the ground and to
show the people of Afghanistan the fruits of
international cooperation. The $10.5 billion pledged at
the London Conference provided encouraging evidence
that the international community remains determined to
underpin its political support with the practical
assistance needed to achieve the Compact's ambitious
goals.

We welcome the solidity of that international
support for the Government and people of Afghanistan
in their courageous commitment to an open society and
the support that the Conference reflected for UNAMA's
mission, but we do have to move quickly to maintain
the momentum of the London Conference. We
welcome the United Nations commitment, repeated this
morning by Tom Koenigs, to playing a leading role in
coordinating efforts to deliver the Compact. The
United Kingdom supports the early establishment of
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board to drive
forward the ambitious Compact agenda.

I want to highlight just two of the numerous
challenges which lie ahead.

First, with regard to security, I want to begin by
recognizing UNAMA's own security concerns. Of
course, improving security remains critical to the entire
enterprise, particularly in the South and the East. The
phased expansion of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) is a key part of that agenda,
and the United Kingdom is proud to be playing its part,
with Canada, the Netherlands, Denmark, Estonia and
other partners, in enabling ISAF's third stage to role
out in the South of the country. ISAF's core tasks do
not, we believe, need to change as it expands into the
South. Those tasks, of course, are helping to extend the
authority of the central Government, facilitating
security-sector reform and helping to create an
environment in which Afghan governance and the rule
of law, as well as development, can prosper.

The second challenge I want to highlight is the
corrosive threat presented by the narcotics industry.
Working to eliminate opium poppy cultivation,
production and trafficking is absolutely vital to the
long-term security, development and effective
governance of Afghanistan.

None of us is under any illusion about the scale
and complexity of this problem, but we do need to be
clear that, unless we can provide effective support to
President Karzai and his Government in their efforts to
address this problem in a sustainable way, all that we
and the Afghan Government and people are seeking to
achieve risks being undermined.

This is a significant challenge, because
sustainable drug-elimination strategies take time,
particularly when the challenges are as severe as those
in Afghanistan. There are no instant solutions; there
are no shortcuts to success. The Afghan Government
and its friends have a lot of work ahead; they, and we,
are in this for the long haul.

But progress is being made. The year 2005 saw
the passage of vital counter-narcotics legislation, the
conviction of more than 90 traffickers, an increase in
drugs-related seizures and a 21 per cent reduction in
land under opium poppy cultivation.

However, the international community still needs
to increase its support to help the Government of
Afghanistan build on those successes and deliver on its
long-term counter-narcotics goals.

My Government will be spending over 270
million pounds - that is, nearly half a billion
dollars - over the next three financial years in support
of the Government of Afghanistan's updated national
drug control strategy. We have also helped the
Government of Afghanistan to create a counter-
narcotics trust fund to mobilize international donor
support. That fund is central to building Afghan
counter-narcotics capacity, planning and resource
transparency, and we will channel over $50 million
worth of counter-narcotics assistance through the fund
over a three-year period.

The updated counter-narcotics strategy, which
was presented at the London Conference, represents a
more sophisticated approach to counter-narcotics. We
believe that the focus on the four key priorities -
targeting the trafficker, strengthening livelihoods,
reducing demand and developing effective
institutions - will help to make a greater impact on
the trade. Finally, on counter-narcotics, the United
Kingdom is also supporting the Ministry of Counter-
Narcotics in its efforts to mainstream counter-narcotics
activities within the Government of Afghanistan's
overall national development strategy.

The drugs trade is not an isolated, self-contained
problem. Tackling it will require substantial progress
across the broader reconstruction effort. The inclusion
of counter-narcotics as a cross-cutting theme in the
Afghanistan Compact and in the Government of
Afghanistan's Interim National Development Strategy
recognizes the need for a broad-based approach to the
problem.

The London Conference sent a clear signal that
the international community will not desert
Afghanistan; and, by extending UNAMA's mandate,
we reinforce that message and underline the centrality
of the role of the United Nations in this task.

