Mr. Al-Kadhe (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Once
again, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for your
prompt response in holding this emergency meeting of
the Security Council to consider the increasingly grave
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem.

On 30 March 2002, the Council adopted
resolution 1402 (2002). Despite the fact that the
resolution was weak and not commensurate with the
war crimes and other inhuman crimes committed by the
Zionist entity against the Palestinian people, the
representative of that entity criticized the resolution
and publicly rejected it as soon as it had been adopted
by the Council. Later that day, the Zionist forces of
occupation launched a wide-scale offensive, which is
still continuing, against the Palestinian people and its
leadership. It has also detained a large number of
Palestinian leaders and other Palestinians. It has
launched aggression against Christian and Islamic holy
places.

The theoretical position of the representative of
the Zionist entity towards the Security Council
resolution and the bloody practical position of
aggression by his Government reflect the following:
the Zionist entity's lack of respect for Security Council
resolutions; a lack of commitment to the provisions of
Article 25 of the United Nations Charter; total
disregard and disrespect for all appeals addressed to it
by numerous States to put an end to its acts of
aggression; total disrespect for commitments and
international agreements and lack of commitment to
any form of civilized moral behaviour; the total
exposure of its real face as a terrorist, racist entity.

The Zionist entity and the United States of
America attempt to justify the criminal actions of the
Zionist entity by claiming the right of self-defence.
That ill-informed justification does not have any legal
basis and runs counter to International Court of Justice
interpretations of the conditions under which that right
can be exercised by States individually or collectively.
By this attempt, they seek to transform this legal
principle into a political means to justify acts of
aggression, which are exactly what is daily committed
by the Zionist entity with total insolence, in front of the
eyes of the entire world. It continues killing,
butchering and starving the Palestinian people, on the
pretext of self-defence. The result is that the entity is in
fact destroying the basic legal principles set out in the
United Nations Charter and other established principles
of international law.

Certain Western countries, foremost among them
the United States of America, have for three years put
forward the idea of humanitarian intervention to justify
their military actions in a number of areas in the world,
with or without the approval of the Security Council.
They justify such action as protecting human rights and
the basic rules of international humanitarian law.

Today, the Zionist entity is violating all
international human rights instruments and is crushing
with its tanks the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
and its two Additional Protocols of 1977. That entity
has murdered hundreds of civilians, has executed
scores of others in cold blood and has detained
thousands of Palestinian youths, the fate of a large
number of whom is still unknown. It has imposed a
siege on Palestinian civilians to starve them and to
launch a war. It has also totally destroyed the
infrastructure of the Palestinian Authority. It has
persisted in its recklessness, met with total silence on
the part of the international community. It has gone so
far as to destroy hospitals and places of worship,
Muslim and Christian alike, to the extent that
Palestinians cannot even bury their martyrs.

The question that arises now is why those
countries have not intervened in order to protect the
basic rules of human rights and international law that
have persistently been violated in Palestine. Is this not
categorical proof of the policy of double standards
adopted by those States - the same policy that is
adopted by the Security Council?

The Zionist entity is a selfish and racist regime
that is not interested in world peace. It seeks to destroy
what human civilization has built at all levels - legal,
economic and social. It bears the historic responsibility
for having planted the seeds of terrorism in the Middle
East since the beginning of the last century. It persists
to this day in a policy of terror in all its forms.

There is a historic opportunity for the Security
Council to prove that it can force the Zionist entity to
show respect for the Charter. The Council is
therefore called upon today to shoulder its
responsibility vis-a-Vis that entity with a View to
implementing resolutions of international legitimacy
and putting an end to the escalating Zionist aggression
and immediately and unconditionally to lift the siege of
the Palestinian people and its struggling President,
Yasser Arafat.

