The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Brazil, Cuba, El Salvador, Germany,
Guatemala, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Norway,
Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, Uruguay and Viet
Nam in which they request to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached among Council members, I am
pleased to invite the following participants under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council: Mr. Nobuaki Tanaka, Under-Secretary-
General for Disarmament Affairs; Mr. Rogelio Pfirter,
Director General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons; Mr. Gustavo
Zlauvinen, Representative of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency to the United
Nations; and Mr. Michael Schmitz, Director of
Compliance and Facilitation of the World Customs
Organization.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
2
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw attention to document
8/2007/84, which contains a letter dated 12 February
2007 from the Permanent Representative of Slovakia
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

Allow me to start the deliberations by making
some introductory remarks. It is an honour and a
privilege for me to open, for the second time this week,
a Security Council debate convened by Slovakia -
this time on the issue of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, which is at least of the
same importance as the debate on security sector
reform that took place on Tuesday.

Based on the experience we acquired in holding
the chairmanship of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), our underlying
motivation for organizing this open debate on the issue
of cooperation between the Security Council and
international organizations in the implementation of
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006) was to create
an opportunity for States Members of the United
Nations and the relevant invited organizations to share
experiences and lessons learned in the areas covered by
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006).

Establishing and enforcing sound and effective
measures to prevent the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons and their means of
delivery is a challenge that requires the international
community's ongoing attention. Our intention is to
concentrate on the most urgent issues which are
discussed in particular at the meetings of the 1540
Committee.

We expect that today's meeting will be used to
look at the possibility of providing assistance to those
States which have not yet submitted their national
reports. Given that some countries still have gaps in
their national legislative systems controlling sensitive
goods and technologies, we also anticipate a discussion
about areas of cooperation with those invited
organizations that are mentioned directly in resolution
1540 (2004) and regularly participate in the outreach
activities of the 1540 Committee.

It is therefore my pleasure to welcome among us
Mr. Nobuaki Tanaka, Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs; Mr. Rogelio Pfirter, Director
07-24806
General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons; Mr. Gustavo Zlauvinen,
Representative of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to the United
Nations; and Mr. Michael Schmitz, Director General of
Compliance and Facilitation of the World Customs
Organization.

Finally, I should like to welcome all delegations
that will be speaking today, and I look forward to a
fruitful and productive discussion.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I should like to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. Speakers with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in the
Chamber and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking. I shall now give the floor to the Under-
Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, Mr.
Nobuaki Tanaka.


