The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Uruguay.

Since we joined the Security Council last year, our
delegation has maintained that, as elected members
of the Council, it is our responsibility to provide our
opinion before the membership at all briefings. This is
why we are very pleased that, this afternoon, all the
other members of the Security Council chose to speak
in public about the situation in Syria. I must confess
that we were left with a bitter aftertaste when this
morning (see S/PV.7954), as we discussed Yemen - a
humanitarian tragedy that in terms of scale is of even
greater magnitude - only two delegations expressed
their opinion before the membership.

We thank Under-Secretary-General Mr. Stephen
O'Brien for his comprehensive briefing, and we
recognize and thank him once again for his continued
efforts and those of his entire team deployed in the field
in difficult conditions, who risk their lives on a daily
basis to try to help the civilian population of Syria.

There is little left to say about the Syrian conflict
that has not been said previously in this Chamber.
Uruguay's position has been clear and consistent since
we became elected members of the Council last year; if
members pay attention, they will recognize phrases and
expressions that have already been used on numerous
occasions in the past. However, our primary objective
is and must continue to be reaching a political solution,

which will make it possible to put an end to this crisis
and put a peaceful transition on track in Syria, one that
is negotiated by all Syrians and with the support of the
international community.

To that end, we trust in the good offices of Special
Envoy Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in order to pursue the
rounds of intra-Syrian negotiations in Geneva, which
will gradually make it possible to reach common points
to give shape to a new political chapter in Syria. We
believe that the Astana process is also critical as we seek
to reduce the levels of violence in the Syrian territory.
We support the guarantors' efforts to consolidate the
ceasefire and gradually extend it to other parts of the
country. However, we are concerned that the United
Nations is not participating in this initiative, which
would provide guarantees of respect for essential
principles of international humanitarian law, such as the
prohibition of forced displacements and the freedom of
movement to enter and leave the so-called safe zones.

Of course, the political process and the end of
hostilities are only two of the steps to ensure that
the page is turned in Syria. The third and equally
important step is the humanitarian aspect. Despite
some improvements in access, we are still very far
away from an encouraging result, which would make it
possible to allieviate the suffering of the Syrian civilian
population. We must not forget the millions of refugees
and displaced people who sooner or later will have to
return to their homes or what is left ofthem, We continue
to call for immediate, sustained and unimpeded access
to all besieged and hard to reach areas. However, the
priority objective should be the lifting of all sieges,
which is unjustifiable in the twenty-first century.

For Uruguay, the protection of civilians in Syria
and in any other conflict is an absolute priority. It is
immoral to distinguish between civilians because they
support one side or other another or because they are
located in a certain area controlled by one or another of
those parties. The provision ofjustice for the hundreds
of thousands of innocent victims of this conflict is
essential for lasting peace in Syria and for this country
and all its people to overcome the horrors of this war.
As long as we cannot ensure accountability for the
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, which have been committed by all
parties to the conflict since 2011, those responsible
will feel that they can continue committing them with
impunity. This applies both to Syria and Yemen.
That is why Uruguay supported the creation of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, and hopes that it will soon
be able to begin its work. We also support the request
of the Secretary-General for the situation in Syria to be
referred to the International Criminal Court. Similarly,
my delegation believes that the same thing should be
done with the situation in Yemen.

April was a particularly difficult month for Syrian
civilians, first with the chemical weapon attack in
Khan Shaykhun and a few days ago with the brutal
attack on civilians being evacuated in the framework
of the four towns agreement. We still do not know who
was behind both incidents, which were war crimes. We
trust that those reponsible will be quickly identified so
that they may be brought to justice. With regard to local
ceasefire agreements, we reiterate that any evacuation
that takes place must ensure the security of civilians,
the provision of humanitarian assistance and create the
conditions for people who wish do so to return to their
homes as quickly as possible.

One year after the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), we continue to witness the destruction of
hospitals and health centers in Syria. It is outrageous
that the parties have flouted its provisions, depriving
thousands of people of the right to medical care and
leading to hundreds of victims among medical and
health-care staff. This practice is repeated in schools,
markets and all kinds of civilian infrastructure. We
condemn these attacks in Syria, Yemen and wherever
they may take place. They are war crimes and those
responsible must be identified and brought to justice.

In conclusion, Uruguay affirms that the full and
effective implementation of some measures, such as
the consolidation of the cessation of hostilities, the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure, and
the casing of bureaucratic processes for humanitarian
access, which can make a great difference in the life
of the Syrian people for whom the Council has been
demanding concrete action to be taken on a monthly
basis. We trust that, as on previous occasions, the
Council can overcome its differences and take its
responsibility for international peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

