Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like at the outset, Sir, to welcome
you and your delegation and to congratulate you on
Brazil's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. We are also grateful
to Ambassador Adechi and the entire delegation of
Benin for their work presiding over the Council in
February.

We are glad to welcome the participation in
today's meeting of Mr. Rupel, Chairman-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Slovenia.

Russia has supported the basic priorities which
the Slovenian chairmanship has proposed in the
Permanent Council of the OSCE aimed at reforming,
revitalizing and restoring balance in three areas of that
organization's activities: security, the economy and the
humanitarian field. We take particular note of the
indicated need to enhance the role of the OSCE in the
security sphere. For, in order for the OSCE fully to be
able to realize its original purpose as a forum for broad
dialogue among equals on the most important issues,
there is a need to overcome artificial functional and
territorial imbalances that have arisen in that
organization's work.

Our delegation has consistently favoured
comprehensive development and improvement of
cooperation between the United Nations and its
Security Council and regional and subregional
arrangements based on the firm foundation of the
United Nations Charter, in particular Chapter VIII,
duly taking into account the comparative advantages of
those organizations.

We note with satisfaction that, as a regional
mechanism, the OSCE has established close and
productive cooperation with the United Nations in a
considerable number of key areas - first and
foremost, those linked to security and to the settlement
of regional conflicts. To cite examples solely from the
Security Council agenda, we can refer to Abkhazia,
Georgia, and to Bosnia and Herzegovina. We take
particular note of the contribution of the OSCE in the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) on Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro. The OSCE
mission in that region, which is a component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, is playing an important role, in particular in
observing and promoting compliance with human
rights and in monitoring local mass media.

In that context, I would like to ask Mr. Rupel two
questions. First, what additional steps must be taken to
ensure truly equal protection of human rights for all
inhabitants of Kosovo, first and foremost, members of
non- -Albanian minorities? Secondly, in the light of the
negative experiences of March 2004, what steps is the
OSCE planning to undertake in Kosovo - in
cooperation, of course, with the United Nations - in
order to prevent a recurrence of extremist
manifestations on the part of local mass media and
civil society organizations?

