Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The tragic course of events in Yugoslavia since
24 March last has shown convincingly that it is precisely
the military action against that sovereign country - which
is being conducted by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in circumvention of the Security
Council and in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and other generally recognized norms of
international law - that has caused this humanitarian
catastrophe and has created a real emergency situation in
the Balkans region.

For more than a month and a half now, an
unprecedented campaign of air strikes by NATO against
Yugoslavia has been taking place, whose victims, with
grim regularity, are innocent civilians - more than 1,200
so far. There has been much testimony about the severe
humanitarian damage caused by the NATO bombing,
which dispels the myth that the Alliance is conducting its
military operation in the name of high humanitarian
ideals.

It is hard to contradict well-known facts. The
number of civilians and refugees killed or wounded
continues to grow. Systematically and deliberately, the
civilian infrastructure of Yugoslavia is being destroyed,
and very serious damage is being done to its economy.
The whole region is threatened by a huge environmental
catastrophe. The material basis for the return of the
refugees and the displaced persons to their homes is being
destroyed, though NATO proclaims that the resolution of
the problem of refugees is one of its main tasks.

It is difficult to remain indifferent in the face of the
escalating humanitarian catastrophe in and around
Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It is clear,
however, that this is a consequence, not a cause, of the
crisis situation. It is precisely with regard to the causes of
the humanitarian catastrophe that the Security Council
should have spoken out, as a matter of priority, as the
organ bearing primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.

Unfortunately, because of the well-known position of
a number of its members, the Council was unable to take
a stand on NATO's illegal military action and to demand
an immediate halt to the bombing and the return of the
Kosovo crisis to the track of a peaceful political
settlement. Upon the initiative of the Russian delegation,
the draft resolution submitted to the Council took on
board an important conclusion: that the humanitarian
situation would continue to deteriorate unless a political
settlement to the crisis could be ensured.

Just as important is the urgent appeal to all
concerned to make every effort to arrive at this
agreement. There is no alternative, and there is a growing

 

understanding of this fact, as was clearly shown by the
adoption by the Foreign Ministers of the G-8 of general
principles on a political settlement of the Kosovo crisis.
The draft resolution, however, did not take into account a
number of our other amendments, of which the main one
was an appeal for an immediate cessation of the NATO air
strikes on Yugoslavia, adamantly supported by Russia and
China.

A few days ago, the world was shaken by the barbaric
bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade and the death
of several of its staff members. Today we learned of
another terrible tragedy, which occurred in the Kosovo
village of Korisa as a result of NATO's use of proscribed
cluster bombs. At least 50 people died there, primarily
women, children and the elderly, and more than 100 were
wounded.

As was stressed in the statement published today by
the Russian Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Russia, which
repeatedly warned NATO's leadership about the dire
consequences of the military action against Yugoslavia,
strongly condemns this new crime by the Alliance and calls
upon the NATO strategists immediately to halt this insanity.
A settlement of the Kosovo problem is possible only at the
negotiating table.

Unless there is an immediate cessation to the illegal
military action by NATO, genuine progress will be
impossible, either towards a political settlement of the crisis
or to overcome this humanitarian catastrophe. Furthermore,
continued bombing could lead to that catastrophe's
spreading throughout the entire Balkan region.
Unfortunately, this obvious fact was not reflected in the text
because of the negative position adopted by a number of
Council members.

We must note here that once again, narrow national
interests and an unwillingness properly to assess and react
to real threats to the physical survival of an entire
population of a sovereign State and to the tragic fate of
hundreds of thousands of refugees have prevailed over the
Charter obligations of certain members of the Council.

Because of the principled nature of our position, the
Russian delegation cannot support this text. The Russian
Federation, together with its active efforts to promote a
peaceful political settlement of the Kosovo crisis, will
continue to give whatever humanitarian assistance it can on
an impartial, non-discriminatory basis to the needy civilian
population in Kosovo, other regions of Yugoslavia and
neighbouring States.

