The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and
Prosecutors J allow and Brammetz for their statements.

This year, we celebrated the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 827 (1993), on the creation
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). Political dialogue in the region
continues to advance under the auspices of the European
Union. The Tribunal has played its full role in these
developments. To be sure, all is not ideal. Prosecutor
Brammertz referred earlier to missing persons. The
political rhetoric, the denial of certain crimes, and
the lack of regional cooperation in bringing mid-level
criminals to justice remain matters of concern. But
the historic agreement of 19 April between Serbia and
Kosovo, achieved under the auspices of the European
Union, creates a context that augurs well for the region's
stability, the future of its people and the European
outlook for both States. Political dialogue, justice and
the fight against impunity should make it possible to
definitively turn the page on the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia.

The ICTY is handling matters of great complexity,

which accounts for delays in its schedule. We hope that
the Tribunal will conclude its activities as quickly as
possible, while ensuring that nothing undermines its
capacity to render justice.

The year 2014 will mark the twentieth anniversary
of one of the darkest periods in our collective history,
the Rwandan genocide. In memory of the victims, and
invoking our shared will, we hope to see the Great
Lakes region emerge once and for all from violence.
With respect to the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), I hope to be able to offer
the Tribunal some good news concerning the two cases
under French jurisdiction. Both Mr. Bucyibaruta and
Mr. Munyeshyaka have been indicted, and the French
authorities are devoting all their attention to the
questions raised by the Tribunal on those procedures.

Now that the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda is about to closing out its activities,
we should remain vigilant. Three high-level
fugitives - Fe'licien Kabuga, Augustin Bizimana and
Protais Mpiranya - remain at large, and their arrest is a
priority. They will be tried by the Residual Mechanism
as soon as they are apprehended. We must ensure that
the Mechanism is provided with sufficient resources to
successfully complete that mission.

The cooperation of all with the ICTR is an
obligation pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. It is important for the Council to
remind everyone of that obligation. With respect to
assistance for the Tribunal, the relocation of persons
who have been acquitted or served their sentences
remains a central concern. France was the first country
to welcome a number of individuals to its territory at
the request of the Tribunal. We hope that more States
will accept such persons on their territory.

The Tribunals have placed justice at the core
of our concerns. The International Criminal Court,
which is permanent and universal, has already taken
up the pursuit ofjustice. That is the case, for example,
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and I take
this opportunity to note that, two weeks ago, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo undertook the
arrest and transfer to The Hague of a suspect being
sought by the International Criminal Court. That is an
encouraging sign.

I also note the Secretary-General's resolute policy
on behalf justice and human rights, which excludes
all contact with persons sought by the International
Criminal Court. He has instructed his mediators not to
consider amnesty or immunity for the perpetrators of
serious crimes. He has done a great deal to reinforce
the impact of international justice. We commend his
activity in that regard along with that of Mr. Serpa
Soares, Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs.

Finally, I join previous speakers in thanking
Ambassador of Guatemala, Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, and his
entire team. Beyond his leadership of the Working
Group, Ambassador Gert Rosenthal has been an
unyielding and eloquent voice within the Council on
the fight against impunity, the role of the Tribunals and
the historical significance of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Croatia.

