Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
welcome this open debate, even though the subject before
us is sensitive for many. It concerns a country, a fellow
State Member of the United Nations, which desperately
needs international help; a region which has been too long
in crisis, with horrific humanitarian consequences; and a
continent whose tribulations must be successfully addressed
by the United Nations system as a whole, or that system
will show itself incapable of meeting the increasing
demands put on it. If we can turn the tide for Africa, we
can turn the tide for the United Nations.

The United Kingdom is prepared to make a special
effort to establish how non-Africans can best help Africans,
and specifically the Organization for African Unity (OAU),
to end the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Late last month British Minister of State Tony
Lloyd went to the region, as the Special Envoy of Prime
Minister Blair, to explore what scope there was for ending
the war.

The Minister encountered an overwhelming sense of
frustration. He found fatigue on all sides with the war and
common ground among the parties on what needed to be
done to stop the fighting. No one questioned the need for
dialogue among all parties in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including the rebels, to pave the way for a more
inclusive government. And it was widely acknowledged that
the security concerns of the neighbours of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo were genuine, that an end to the war
could come about only through some arrangement or
mechanism which addressed them.

But the Minister also found a startling lack of political
will and creative thinking among the parties to get the
building-blocks of a settlement into place. This is not for
want of external pressures and external offers of help.
Numerous envoys have Visited the region. Three Presidents
have been tasked by the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and the OAU to mediate. Fifteen
conferences, 10 of them at the Head of State level, have
been held. But the conflict, and its dreadful human rights
and humanitarian side-effects, goes on. Having met the key
leaders involved in the war, Tony Lloyd judged that they
could stop the war if they really wanted to.

The role of the international community, and this
Council, has to be to make them want to. The United
Nations system, other international institutions and
individual countries, through their bilateral relationships,
can all play a part. This is particularly the case with the
European Union, whose position will be made clear by the
German presidency later in this debate. We all have
diplomatic, political and financial resources which could
make a big difference to the Governments and
populations in the region. There are enormous reserves of
goodwill towards the peoples of these beleaguered
countries. We need to use these resources to construct a
motivation for peace and economic regeneration among
the regional leaders. They must together be persuaded that
a continuation of this war is not in their interests and that
there is a different way out. It is encouraging that there is
such a clear consensus among representatives who have
spoken today on the steps that need to be taken, not
excluding the Minister for Human Rights of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Let me try to summarize those steps. The first step
is a cease-fire agreement. The key to unlocking this is
direct talks with the rebels. A military solution, as so
often elsewhere in Africa, is a chimera. We must use
international experience to help President Kabila and the
Congolese people shape a framework in which a
constructive political dialogue can take place. The
innocent civilian population of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo deserves no less. The statement made this
week by the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo about the need for national reconciliation is
encouraging. Its intentions need to be implemented.

The second step is the withdrawal of foreign troops.
This will require a tough negotiation process among all
the parties, and some substantive, creative ideas. The
United Kingdom is fully committed to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We would not countenance any suggestion of
partition. But the bare fact is, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo's neighbours will have no incentive for
withdrawal unless some credible mechanism can be
developed which will bring about the disarmament of
rebel groups, particularly the ex-Rwandese Armed Forces
and Interahamwe, on their borders, and ensure border
security into the future. We must start mapping out the
potential arrangements for this. The United Nations and
certain Member States can help, but the principal
contribution must be African and regional.
The third step is coherent international involvement
to motivate, monitor and sustain these processes. We
applaud the efforts of SADC and the OAU, through
President Chiluba, to try to mediate this complex,
sprawling conflict. But the continued resistance of the
parties to these efforts demonstrates the need for further
inputs, leverage and pressure from outside the region.
 

As part of this process, the Security Council has
already indicated its readiness to consider how it could
assist in the implementation of a cease-fire and settlement.
The United Kingdom, with several partners, has already
done work on possibilities for a peacekeeping presence. We
must continue to refine and develop these ideas and feed
them into the negotiating process. What the United Nations
and the international community could do to make an
agreement stick will be a key factor in making it happen.

The fourth step is a framework for tackling the wider
and deeper problems in the Great Lakes region. The United
Kingdom fully supports the holding of an international
conference on peace and security in the Great Lakes. But
a conference of this kind will work only by careful
preparation, and preparation will take time. We should
begin this work now. Only by mapping out the paths
towards a more secure and stable region will the incentives
for ending the current conflict become clearer. They must
include arrangements for promoting and protecting human
rights and for the economic regeneration of the region.

Hence the fifth step: the economic angle. With
political understanding advanced and security arrangements
in place, development and investment resources will be
attracted in. We therefore need to plan for an economic
development conference for the Great Lakes, drawing
together major bilateral assistance partners, the United
Nations and its agencies, the European Union and the
international financial institutions, either as part of or in
parallel with a conference on peace and security.

The challenges and the burden for the international
community in each of these steps will be significant, but
none of these ideas will get even to square one without a
dramatic change in political will on the part of the parties
to this conflict, and above all the leaders of the sovereign
nations of the region who have its future in their hands. It
is they who must take the steps to bring this senseless war
to an end. If they do, the Security Council, the broader
United Nations and the international community will act in
immediate support. This is the conclusion which the
Governments involved in the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must draw from today's debate.

