Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to welcome Deputy President
Zuma, and to extend to the South African authorities,
in particular President Mbeki, our deep appreciation
and gratitude for their exceptional efforts to ensure that
Burundi returns to the path of stability and peace.
Those efforts round out those made by the heads of
State of Uganda and of Tanzania, as well as of many
other actors involved in the regional initiative for
Burundi.

France welcomes the agreements of 2 and 8
November. There is still much to be done. I am
thinking, of course, about the Forces nationales de
liberation (FNL), which has still not joined the peace
process. I took careful note of the comments made
earlier by Deputy President Zuma with regard to the
state of contacts with the FNL. Despite the
commendable efforts of the South African authorities,
little headway is being made. When Deputy President
Zuma spoke about that issue, however, he did raise our
hopes somewhat by saying that he looked to the future
with optimism, despite the difficulties encountered.

Peace and stability in Burundi will, of course,
also depend on an improvement in the economic and
social situation in the country. At this time it is crucial
for the international community to keep up its efforts
and stay abreast of developments. In this regard it will
be essential for the Economic and Social Council -
and I pay tribute to its President, who spoke earlier -
to fully play its role in the context of the donor's
conference, scheduled to take place in Brussels on 14
and 15 January.

Much progress has been made in the peace
process in Burundi, and it must be further consolidated.
France would be in favour, in principle, of a
peacekeeping operation in Burundi. It seems to us
necessary, in Burundi as elsewhere, for the
international community to take over from and
consolidate regional efforts, and to ensure an element
of coherence in United Nations actions. Right now,
however, we believe it essential that the international
community be able to provide its full support for the
efforts of the African Union. The European Union, for
its part, is providing considerable support to that
African organization in Burundi, with a contribution of
25 million euros.

