Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I begin by thanking
Jordan, which has assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January, for
organizing today's open debate on the theme "War, its
lessons and the search for permanent peace".

The founding of the United Nations was a reaction
to the horrors of the Second Word War and an expression
of the quest for permanent peace. That quest is ongoing
as we debate how to achieve an international system
that pushes war to the margins and invests in the pursuit
of peace.

In the days following the First World War, Sigmund
Freud concluded that war was inevitable because life
could not move beyond its original aggression. Whether
Freud was right or wrong is open to debate, but war
has been, and continues to be, a ubiquitous feature of
the human condition. Virtually all nations were formed
by wars or violence and, in the course of their history,
many have waged both defensive and offensive wars.

The frequency of wars and the casualties caused by
it have not yet diminished. In fact, the 100 years after
1900 were without question the bloodiest in modern
history and far more violent in relative as well as in
absolute terms than any previous era. By any measure,
the Second World War was the greatest man-made
catastrophe of all time. To prevent the repetition of such
catastrophes, the United Nations was established. That
was a watershed moment in efforts to avoid the scourge
of war and secure durable peace.

It is true that international relations following the
creation of the United Nations have not been marked
by ever-increasing violence. There have been no wars
among the great Powers since 1945 and no recurrence
of the events of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Once the
epicentre and cauldron of international conflict, the
European system is now settled and at peace. The end of
the Cold War in 1991 also greatly reduced the possibility
of conflicts between the great Powers. Still, in almost
all fields of United Nations activities, new problems
have emerged that keep challenging our imagination,
our wisdom, our prudence and our commitment as we
strive to find ways to ensure sustainable peace.

In the political field, we have seen that the use
or threat of the use of force, which are prohibited by
the Charter, have still not ceased sowing scepticism
in the minds of ordinary people regarding the true
effectiveness of the Organization. Although great wars
have been avoided, much violence on the periphery
of the international system and organized conflicts
of all kinds - civil wars, genocides, governmental
repression, third-party wars, power struggles and
terrorist attacks - continue to destabilize many parts
of the global South.

As the Secretary-General often mentions, one
of the main reasons for such continued violence
and instability is that the world is overinvesting in
armaments and underfunding peace. The accumulation
of excessive weapons and access to weapons create
tension, encourage arms races and reinforce a sense
of insecurity among all. More importantly, in a world
of finite resources there is an inverse relationship
between expenditures on armaments and economic and
social development. The hundreds of billions of dollars
and human, technical and technological resources
spent annually on the manufacture, maintenance and
improvement of weapons could be marshalled to tackle
the challenges of poverty and hunger and enhance
human dignity.

It is indeed imperative to find ways to reverse the
waste of scarce resources dedicated to non-productive
purposes and to channel the valuable resources thereby
saved towards saving millions of lives, addressing
pressing development needs and ensuring the timely
achievement of all Millennium Development Goals.
According to estimates, a total of $16 billion would
be required to educate all people. Unfortunately,
the global community cannot manage more than
$2 billion to that end, while it has spent, as per the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, over
$1,734 billion in 2012 alone for defence expenditures.
It is therefore a question not of scarcity of resources
but of priority and commitment. Are we ready to help
humankind? If we fail to meet our responsibilities,
future generations may not pardon us.

Obviously, wars are waged for many reasons, but
in our times hatred, ideology, religion, intolerance,
the illegal occupation of territory, territorial disputes,
unfairness, aggression and competition for scarce
resources are the primary sources of conflicts.
Concrete strategies and renewed commitments are
needed to resolve these issues. Bangladesh is one of
the top troop-contributing countries to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and we believe that all violence
and wars emanate from a mindset of intolerance, a
mindset of hatred and misunderstanding, a mindset of
aggressiveness.

Therefore, if we are to have sustainable peace and
stability, we need to inculcate and promote a culture of
peace. We need to promote a mindset of tolerance and
a mindset of love and respect for others irrespective of
race, colour, ethnicity or religion. The creation of such
a live-and-let-live mindset that respects and accepts
others' diversity will greatly help reduce violence
and contribute to global peace and security. It is also
equally important to solve many of the long-standing
conflicts, such as the Israeli-Palestine issue, which
remains a catalyst for violence and instability in many
parts of the world.

The world has undergone many transformations
over the past few decades. There has been an increase
in the number of democratic States and an ever-
increasing interdependence in trade and other forms
of peaceful interaction. The revolution in information
and communications technologies, although largely
beneficial to humankind, is also redefining the threats
we face and the security environment. As the challenges
of international security become increasingly complex
and intertwined, we must learn to make multilateralism
work to create a more secure world. To solve the problem
of an interdependent world, mediation and negotiation
should guide conflict resolutions.

It is also important to establish that force is an
unwelcome and invariably and distinctly unprofitable
means for the resolution of inter-State differences. It
is similarly important to recognize that economic
development should be the central object and
legitimating element for Governments everywhere.
Economic prosperity, the empowering of the powerless,
a culture of peace and a live-and-let-live mindset
would greatly facilitate sustainable peace, security and
stability across nations.

