Mr. Kolby (Norway): First of all, I would like to
thank Ambassador Valdivieso for his introduction and
for his energetic leadership of the Committee.

Secondly, I would like to thank Ambassador
Menkerios and the Committee of Experts for providing
us with a thorough and thought-provoking report.
I would also like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for holding this open meeting, which
enables the Council to hear the views of representatives
of countries whose efforts are crucial to the success of
our efforts to implement the sanctions against the
Taliban in the region.

My statement will be limited to the report before
us because later this month we are going to have a
discussion of the overall question of Afghanistan.

My Government regards the report and its
recommendations as an excellent basis for establishing
a monitoring mechanism with regard to the effective
implementation of resolutions 1333 (2000) and 1267
(1999). Norway supports the realistic approach taken in
the report. A mechanism should be based on
neighbouring States' national border control efforts and
be supported by small international Support Teams of
experts that would also monitor and investigate
violations. In the report it is suggested that such
Support Teams should be based at existing United
Nations offices in the region. In that connection, my
delegation would like to ask the Committee whether
the Committee of Experts has considered any
potentially negative consequences of co-locating the
Sanctions Enforcement Support Teams together with
United Nations offices and agencies operating inside
Afghanistan, including those involved with the
provision of humanitarian assistance.

We have noted the arguments presented for
locating the headquarters office in Vienna. We find that
there are also sound arguments for locating the office
in New York, including the need for close and
continuous contact with the Security Council, the
sanctions Committee and the Secretariat.

It is also necessary to see a sanctions monitoring
mechanism for Afghanistan in connection with the
discussions on the establishment of a permanent
mechanism for monitoring United Nations sanctions
regimes, including arms embargoes. The report has
raised important issues in that regard that need to be
studied further.

As for the question of financing, Norway's
position is that the mechanism needs secure and stable
funding and that it should thus be financed by assessed
contributions. We have also noted arguments in favour
of initial voluntary funding in order to ensure speedy
implementation of the recommendation. We are also
ready to consider that.

Norway is ready to consider the other
recommendations, including that aircraft turbine fuel
and special fuels for military use be specified in the
arms embargo, but with the provision that this does not
negatively affect the humanitarian assistance efforts in
Afghanistan.

