The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The international community and the
United Nations Security Council have made joint
and consistent efforts to promote peace and
security in Western Africa, particularly in the
Mano River Union region. Such efforts have
represented a major investment of resources and
capabilities. The peace process in Sierra Leone is
the tangible result of those efforts. The Council
will maintain its efforts and continue to promote
understanding and peace in the region in order to
guarantee that the peace process in Sierra Leone,
which remains fragile, takes root and benefits the
people of Sierra Leone and the entire Mano River
region.

"On the other hand, the Security Council is
deeply concerned about the situation in Liberia
and the threat it constitutes to international peace
and security in the region as a result of the
activities of the Government of Liberia and the
continuing internal conflict in that country,
including the armed attacks by the 'Liberians
United for Reconciliation and Democracy'
(LURD). The internal conflict and significant
violence in Liberia are producing widespread
refugee flows and displacement of people in
Liberia, exacerbating the humanitarian situation
and fuelling the movement of irregular
combatants and the flow of weapons throughout
the region. The Council condemns the failure of
the Government to comply with the Council's
demands in resolution 1343 (2001) of 7 March
2001, and the failure of the Government, other
States, and others, including the LURD, to
respect the measures imposed in that resolution,
including the continuing import of weapons in

breach of the arms embargo. All of these
developments threaten the peace process in Sierra
Leone, the stability of the entire West African
region, and, most tragically, are causing great
humanitarian suffering for the Liberian people
themselves.

"To address the situation in Liberia and the
threat it poses to international peace and security
in the region, the Security Council and the
international community should cooperate on a
comprehensive strategy that mobilizes
international efforts to reach a ceasefire, resolve
the internal conflict and establish an inclusive
peace process; promotes peace and national
reconciliation in Liberia and the development of a
stable and democratic political process; addresses
humanitarian issues; combats the illicit flow of
weapons into the country; and guarantees human
rights. The Council is committed to support the
efforts of regional and other international actors
to carry out such a strategy.

"Such a strategy must be based on two
fundamental principles. First, it must have the
input of key regional actors and be part of a
comprehensive approach to building an integrated
system of regional peace and security. Secondly,
peace and security in the Mano River Union
region requires the President of Liberia to engage
constructively with the international community
in working to achieve national reconciliation and
political reform in Liberia.

"With these principles in mind, the Security
Council's work on a coordinated strategy with the
international community will promote the
following objectives. In terms of the regional
perspective, the Security Council will maintain its
support for the Rabat Process, under the
sponsorship of the King of Morocco, and strongly
encourage Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia to
follow up on their commitments to undertake
confidence-building measures and the
establishment of security measures along their
shared borders. In this connection, the Council
considers that the initiative taken by the
Presidents of the three countries to hold a direct
dialogue in order to give impetus to the Rabat
Process is a most desirable development. The
Council urges the President of Liberia to actively
participate in those meetings.

"The Security Council expresses its strong
support for the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) moratorium on small
arms and light weapons in the region. The
Council encourages the ECOWAS countries to
implement these commitments fully and to
strengthen the implementation mechanisms in
order to stop the illegal trade of arms, in
particular the flow of small arms and light
weapons into Liberia.

"The Security Council commends the
efforts made by ECOWAS, and those of the
newly established International Contact Group on
Liberia, to promote peace and stability in Liberia
and in the Mano River region. The Council
considers that the active involvement of these
mechanisms is critical for national reconciliation
and political reform.

"In this regard, the Security Council
encourages the African Union and ECOWAS
member States actively to promote the full
implementation of existing security arrangements
as well as further initiatives designed to support
such arrangements among the countries of the
Mano River Union.

"The Security Council reiterates its
demands to the Government of Liberia to comply
with resolutions 1343 (2001) and 1408 (2002)
and to all parties to respect the measures which
those resolutions imposed and extended. The
demands referred to in those resolutions must be
met for these measures to be terminated in
accordance with those resolutions. The Council
takes note of the positions of the African Union
and ECOWAS on the sanctions regime in Liberia.
The Council will keep sanctions under review to
ensure they are consistent with this statement and
resolutions 1343 (2001) and 1408 (2002) and will
continue to monitor whether sanctions are having
any humanitarian impact on the population of
Liberia.

"The Security Council urges all States in the
region to honour their commitments to prevent
armed individuals from using their national
territory to prepare and launch attacks on
neighbouring countries. The Council again
reminds all States of their obligations to comply
with the embargo on the sale or supply of arms

and related materiel to Liberia imposed by
resolution 1343 (2001). The Council underlines
that the embargo applies to all sales or supplies to
any recipient in Liberia, including all non-State
actors such as the LURD.
"In terms of a constructive engagement in
Liberia, in particular by the President of Liberia
on achieving the objectives of ending the
violence and promoting national reconciliation,
the Security Council is committed to promote: an
expanded role for the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in Liberia (UNOL),
along with the more active participation of the
recently created United Nations Office for West
Africa. In this regard, the Council welcomes the
appointment of the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Liberia and urges the
Government of Liberia to cooperate fully with the
activities of UNOL. The Council would like
UNOL to carry out, inter alia, the following tasks:

"Offering assistance to the Liberian
authorities and to the public for strengthening
democratic institutions and the rule of law,
including the promotion of an independent press
and an enabling environment for political parties
to operate freely in Liberia;

"Contributing to and monitoring the
preparation of free and fair elections in 2003,
especially through the promotion of an
independent electoral commission;

"Enhancing and monitoring respect for
human rights in Liberia, including through
constructive dialogue with the Government of
Liberia, with particular attention to reaching out
to local civil society groups and to encouraging
the establishment of an independent and
functional human rights commission;

"Promoting national reconciliation and
resolution of the conflict, including through
support forinitiatives on the ground;

"Supporting the Government of Liberia in
the implementation of peace agreements to be
adopted;

"Engaging in an educational campaign to
present accurately United Nations policies and
activities regarding Liberia.

"The Security Council has written to the
Secretary-General recommending such a
strengthening of the mandate of UNOL and
requesting reports every three months.

"The Security Council considers that an
urgent effort is required to improve the serious
humanitarian situation in Liberia, especially to
address the needs of internally displaced persons
and refugees. In that regard, the Council urges the
Government of Liberia and the combatants,
particularly the rebel group LURD, to provide
unrestricted access to United Nations
humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations to areas where refugees need to be
assisted and human rights protected. Likewise,
the Council encourages neighbouring countries of
Liberia to continue to give access to international
humanitarian organizations and non-
governmental humanitarian groups to border
areas where refugees and displaced people are. It
calls on all States in the region to respect fully
international law on the treatment of refugees and
displaced persons.

"The Security Council urges all
humanitarian organizations and donor countries
to continue to provide humanitarian relief to the
refugees and internally displaced persons.

"The Security Council is committed to
support efforts to promote national reconciliation,
the restoration of peace and the creation of new
conditions for internal political stability. For that
purpose, the Council urges the Government of
Liberia and the LURD to conclude a ceasefire
agreement and a comprehensive peace process,
including provision for disarmament and
demobilization of combatants and comprehensive
security sector reform. In this regard, the Council
calls upon all States to refrain from providing any
military support to all parties in Liberia and from
any act that might aggravate the situation on the
borders between Liberia and its neighbours.

"The Security Council calls on the
Government of Liberia to work to create a
favourable environment so that a genuine national
reconciliation conference can succeed, with the
broad participation of all groups in Liberian
society, based inside the country and abroad.

"The Security Council also calls on the

Government of Liberia to implement the

necessary measures and political reforms which
are a prerequisite for universal, free, fair,
transparent and all-inclusive elections in 2003.
The Council stresses the importance of a broad
and overall participation in this process by all
political parties and the return of all political
leaders to the country.

"The Security Council calls upon the
international community to consider how it can
support through financial and technical assistance
any disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme that may be established
as part of the cessation of hostilities and
commitment to political reform in Liberia.
Special attention and resources should be given to
assist women and children in the process of their
reintegration and to provide opportunities for
young ex-combatants and child soldiers to be
fully reintegrated into society.

"The Security Council recognizes that the
success of a comprehensive international strategy
for Liberia rests on the direct and active
involvement of the African Union, ECOWAS, and
the International Contact Group, working with the
United Nations Offices in the region in
accordance with their mandates.

"The Security Council calls on the
Government of Liberia to cooperate with all these
efforts as a means to find a peaceful solution of
the conflict, reform its political processes and
fulfil its humanitarian, social and economic
responsibilities to the Liberian people. Liberia's
cooperation is also essential to restore fully
relations with its neighbours and to normalize its
relations with the international community.

"As the Government of Liberia makes
progress working with the international
community in achieving the objectives set out in
this statement, the Council calls on the
international community to consider how it might
help future economic development in Liberia
aimed at improving the welfare of the people of
Liberia.

"The Security Council will remain engaged
with the Liberian Government and its people,
given the Council's conviction that peace in that

country will put an end to the suffering of the mission to the region, including to Liberia, to
Liberian people and find a basis for lasting peace assess the situation during the first half of 2003."

in the region.

"The Security Council requests the the Security Council under the

Secretary~General to monitor the situation in S/PRST/2002/36.
Liberia and to keep the Council informed of
developments to fulfil the objectives described
herein. The Council is considering sending an
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.35 pm.

This statement will be issued as a document of

The Security Council has thus completed the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
