Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to express our
deep gratitude to you for having convened this
important meeting and for the outstanding work done
by your delegation, which holds the presidency of the
Council for this month. It is also my great pleasure to
express our appreciation to the Government of France
and to Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sabliere, whose
commitment to this issue is solid and praiseworthy. He
has brought vigour and vitality to the deliberations of
the Working Group.

I should like also to pay tribute to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her outstanding efforts. Indeed,
her Office has undertaken various and commendable
tasks. I should like also to commend Ms. Ann
Veneman, Executive Director of UNICEF, and
Mr. Oling Olang of Save the Children for the efforts
they are making in that respect.

The issue of children and armed conflict is now
on the radar of the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Peacebuilding Commission as well
as on the agenda of UNICEF and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and other key United Nations agencies and entities.
This global focus is indeed heartening and
encouraging, and concrete steps have been taken. We
are acutely aware of the fact that this vital issue is one
of unprecedented scope and depth.

We have raised the visibility of perpetrators.
There now exist concrete and time-bound action plans
to put an end to the recruitment of children and to
ensure their release, as well as national legislations
criminalizing the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
There have also been initiatives aimed at ending the
detention of and trafficking in children. Special
attention has also been given to rape or other forms of
serious sexual violence, especially against girls. We
welcome all of those achievements. In that regard, we
would like to commend UNICEF and the Special
Representative for their persistent efforts to implement
resolution 1612 (2005).

Although we are pleased at all those results and
the progress made, we are not yet fully satisfied. I am
confident that we all believe that more needs to be
done. Thousands of children in many countries
continue to be the victims of unspeakable atrocities,
deplorable suffering and abhorrent violations. We
certainly owe them all a better future.

The intense suffering of many of the world's
children requires that we move beyond the question of
child soldiers and address the nefarious violations that
befall children of all categories and in different types
of situations. In that connection, the plight of children
in the Middle East, especially in occupied Palestinian
territory and Lebanon, comes to mind, in particular
because the dynamics of those situations are unique.

The State of Qatar is heartened by the strategic
plan of the Office of the Special Representative,
especially the rights-based approach to protection
issues regarding children in armed conflict. We also
applaud the various monitoring, reporting and
compliance actions taken by the parties concerned.
However, we firmly believe that, along with such steps,
it is essential that there be an integrated approach that
includes vital social and economic programmes.
Reintegrating vulnerable groups of children requires
paying serious attention to such issues as the
generation of jobs, the provision of skills training,
access to education and health care.

There is also a need for a stronger collaborative
relationship with the Peacebuilding Commission, in
particular with respect to addressing needs regarding
the protection of children, demobilization and
reintegration within the overall context of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations. We also
need to develop and expand a stronger partnership with
international and regional organizations working on the
protection of children and armed conflict.

