The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Guinea-Bissau, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Guinea-Bissau to participate in the consideration
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Qaeta
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency Mr. Adelino
Mano Queta.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mutaboba to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Her
Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, in her capacity as Chair of the
2
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/20lO/335, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, and Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Luisa
Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil, in
her capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.

I now give the floor to Mr. Mutaboba.


