Mr. Balarezo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I want to congratulate Argentina on the
leadership it has demonstrated in the presidency of the
Security Council this month and also to congratulate it
on this initiative, which enables us to specifically
address a most important issue, which is one of the
complex crises faced by the region. I should also like
to welcome the presence of Juan Gabriel Valdes,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), and to thank him for his report,
which has informed us in greater detail about the
progress made.

As our heads of State reiterated at the Rio Group
Summit last November, the stabilization,
reconstruction and development of Haiti are regional
priorities. That is why we welcome the strong response
from countries of the region in support of Haiti, which,
in the specific case of Peru, is expressed in the
contribution of a military contingent to MINUSTAH.

But complex crises like the case of Haiti also
highlight the new challenges to international security
that confront the United Nations. Therefore, our
commitment to international peace and security is
regional, but it is also universal. That is why Peru
participates in five peacekeeping operations in Africa
and Cyprus.

For Peru, restoring the Transitional Government's
control over civil order throughout the country is a
basic element of stability in Haiti; nothing is more
important than that aspect. However, in the case of
Haiti, the insecurity arising from the persistence of
illegal armed groups requires a special political and
inclusive effort. We see that the consolidation of a
sustainable security environment requires simultaneous
action on various fronts, especially in the political,
institutional and social development of the country.

We must resolutely support the reconstruction of
national capacities to strengthen the rule of law and the
exercise of civil rights and to help the people overcome
poverty. Peru is paying particular attention to the

development and implementation of the electoral
timetable planned for this year in Haiti. We also need a
transparent, robust and independent judiciary. That will
permit full respect for human rights and a resolute fight
against impunity and corruption. Strengthening the
judiciary is paramount.

The political and institutional development of
Haiti is closely linked to economic and social
development. Therefore, it is essential to adopt a
comprehensive, long-term strategy that will take into
account the many challenges facing the country. Peru
believes there must be a firm commitment on the part
of the international community to the reconstruction
and development of Haiti.

Certainly, the Haitian Government has a basic
responsibility to carry out the domestic efforts
necessary to lay the foundations for sustained growth
and poverty reduction. But the fact is that Haiti does
not have the resources to address the great challenge of
development on its own. Haiti requires international
cooperation in terms of financial and technical
assistance. Therefore, it is very important that
MINUSTAH devote special attention not only to the
humanitarian aspect, but also, and above all, to the
dimension of long-term development. Haiti requires
resolute support from the United Nations, the donor
community and the international financial institutions.

In its short period of existence, MINUSTAH -
thanks to the troop contributors, the Mission authorities
and the Security Council - has made progress in
implementing its mandate, including the civil
component, security and the preparation of the
forthcoming elections. But additional efforts are
needed in terms of contributing military and police
staff, disarmament, stabilizing the political system and
rebuilding Haiti.

Therefore, we must continue to provide to
MINUSTAH all the necessary means so that, at the end
of its mission, we will have a successful experience. A
good sign for the future would be to establish a longer
mandate period when MINUSTAH's mandate is
renewed. In addition - and this is a fundamental
aspect - we need to ensure that the funds pledged to
Haiti are disbursed.

In conclusion, we have the opportunity to create
the conditions for a promising future in Haiti. And, as
the Minister for Foreign Relations of Chile said, we
must not fail in that effort.

