Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
meeting to consider the humanitarian situation in
Angola.

We would also like to thank Mr. Kenzo Oshima,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his detailed and
candid briefing, which illuminated the humanitarian
situation in Angola. I became acquainted with his
humanitarian spirit during the humanitarian segment of
the Economic and Social Council in Geneva last year.

We would also like to thank Mr. Georges Chikoti,
Vice-Minister for External Relations of Angola, for
clarifying his Government's role in seeking peace and
security in Angola.

I was under the impression that UNITA's ability
to continue waging a conventional war had been
greatly diminished. However, the fighting in Angola
continues. As a result, the activities of UNITA groups
in several parts of the country are still having
devastating effects on the humanitarian and social
situation in Angola and the Angolan people.

In this regard, we would like to express our
concern over the dark humanitarian picture drawn for
us by Mr. Oshima and the Vice-Minister for External
Relations of Angola, and also by the reports of
humanitarian agencies indicating that large numbers of
the population have been displaced by the war.

We all heard Mr. Oshima's statement and saw his
maps illustrating the number of internally displaced
persons in 2001. The statistics indicate that some
500,000 people can be expected to be displaced in 2002
if the increase continues at the present rate. Many
people are dependent on food aid, and the situation of
children is extremely critical: it is feared that measles,
polio, tuberculosis and other diseases could spread.
What makes the situation worse is the how difficult it
is to gain access to those in need because of the poor
security situation in provinces where the Government
is unable to guarantee security, particularly in urban
areas under UNITA control. Another factor is the poor
state of repair of transport infrastructure, roads, bridges
and airstrips. All of this is an obstacle to the delivery
of humanitarian assistance, as borne out by the maps
that Mr. Oshima showed us this morning.
UNITA must stop threatening the security of
humanitarian assistance convoys and must facilitate the
delivery of such assistance throughout Angola. Here, it
is worth noting that the sanctions have resulted only in
an escalation of UNITA's attacks against civilians in
Angola; the Council must therefore seriously consider
ways and means to put pressure on UNITA and on the
sources of its military supplies, with a view to putting
an end to the provision of such supplies and to
UNITA's attacks against the Angolan people, and with
a view to compelling UNITA to move towards
reconciliation as a basis for ending the war and
establishing the stability that Angola needs. UNITA
and Jonas Savimbi bear responsibility for the
deteriorating situation in Angola. This reflects that
group's lack of commitment to the peace process and to
the Lusaka Protocol. UNITA's escalating military
activities run counter to efforts to find a peaceful
settlement of the conflict.

My delegation welcomes the Angolan
Government's renewed commitment to the Lusaka
Protocol, its initiatives to enhance the peace process
and its intention to find a solution to the conflict, as
stated today by His Excellency the Vice-Minister for
External Relations of Angola. That solution would be
built around a peace plan based on a number of points,
which he enumerated in his statement. Such a plan
would stabilize the situation in Angola.

We welcome the special measures taken by the
Government of Angola to fulfil provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol that remain to be implemented,
including disarming UNITA armed groups and
extending State authority throughout the national
territory in order to protect the Government of national
unity and reconciliation and to create a climate
conducive to the reestablishment of order, to the
establishment of a constitutional order and to
preparations for elections.

We appreciate the efforts of the Organization of
African Unity and the Southern African Development
Community to bring peace and stability to Angola. We
join the Vice-Minister for External Relations of Angola
in urging the international community, especially the
donor community, to provide generous assistance to the
Government and the people of Angola, and to put
pressure on UNITA with a View to establishing the
stability that is so earnestly desired. Here, we support
the efforts of the Secretary-General and of his Adviser
for Special Assignments in Africa, Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, in the search for peace and stability and for
an end to war in Angola.

I have two questions for His Excellency the Vice-
Minister for External Relations of Angola. His
Government has a plan for resolving the conflict in
Angola; in the light of his statement that UNITA has
escalated its military activities and its weapons
purchases, how does he view the real prospects of
implementing the peace plan that his Government has
proposed? And what practical role does he feel the
Security Council could play?

I also have one question for Mr. Oshima. In his
view, what are the reasons for the 22-month delay in
repairing the Kuito airstrip?

