At the outset, we would like to thank France for having organized this important debate on children and armed conflict. We would also extend our thanks to the briefers for their interesting briefings delivered at the beginning of the meeting. Egypt believes in the importance of raising awareness regarding human rights issues and their linkage with the realization of peace and security, particularly as concerns issues relating to the protection and promotion of the rights of the child. Egypt strongly support all efforts to strengthen the protection of children and to put an end to violations committed during conflict, especially crimes committed by terrorist organizations. Armed conflicts deprive children of their right to life, physical integrity and mental health, as well as their social, cultural and educational rights. The strong negative impacts of armed conflicts on children have been aggravated by the impacts of the coronavirus disease pandemic. This requires greater international cooperation and stronger measures to urgently respond to those exacerbated impacts. In that regard, Egypt, at the highest level, has expressed to the United Nations its willingness to cooperate to the utmost possible extent in order to ensure the delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance. In 2002, Egypt ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. The provisions of the Protocol have been incorporated into our national legislation. Furthermore, respect for international humanitarian law, including the protection of children in armed conflict, is part of the curriculum provided by the Egyptian Ministry of Defence to its personnel, especially for those personnel participating in peacekeeping operations. The content of the curriculum is prepared in collaboration with the International Committee of the Red Cross and the National Council for Childhood and Motherhood with a view to ensuring the protection of the rights of the child. Egypt will continue its efforts nationally and internationally to ensure the protection of the rights of the child, especially for those trapped in difficult situations.
