Mr. Adom (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this open debate
on the linkages between international terrorism and
organized crime. By placing this issue at the heart of its
priorities in the Security Council, Peru is demonstrating
once again its ongoing commitment to promoting
activities aimed at countering those two scourges.

The briefings by Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime; Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate; and Ms. Tamara Makarenko, international
consultant - whom I commend for her relevant
comments e provide our Council with insight into the
scope and complexity of the phenomena. I also welcome
the presence of the new Permanent Representative of
France, Mr. Nicolas de Riviere. I assure him of my
delegation's resolve to work closely with him. I think
I also reflect the mindset of other members of the
Security Council.

In adopting resolution 2195 (2014), the Security
Council made its first call for the strengthening
international cooperation by securing borders
and the prosecution of illegal networks in order
to prevent terrorist organizations from benefiting
from transnational organized crime. Since then, the
convergence of views among Council members with
regard to the concerns raised by counter-terrorism
has been evident, in particular in the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2018/9 and resolution
2462 (2019). The exacerbation of these two phenomena,
which has been particularly acute in West Africa,
shows that, despite their different natures and modes of
operation, they feed on each other when the conditions
are right and are a serious threat to international peace
and security.

The resources derived in particular from drug and
human trafficking, the illegal arms trade, fraudulent
medicines and the illegal exploitation of natural
resources greatly fuel the cross-border criminal
networks and increase their ranks. Cross-border
criminal networks and terrorist groups take advantage
of the permissive security environment created by the
difficulties faced by some States in performing their
sovereign functions throughout their territories in order
to develop various forms of interaction.

Understanding the underlying causes and the
complex dynamics of those interactions seems to be a
necessary prerequisite, as reaffirmed by the presidential
statement adopted in 2018. It invites us to promote
research in order to better understand the nature and
the scope of the linkages between terrorist groups and
criminal organizations. My country therefore thinks
that States and regional organizations must take all the
necessary measures to reverse the trend towards the
expansion and gradual hybridization of their criminal
activities. That approach naturally falls under the
primary responsibility of States, which are responsible
for investing in security tools in order to generate
national human and logistical capacities to control land,
sea and air borders, whose porous nature is exploited by
criminal networks and terrorist groups.

It is therefore necessary to ensure that there is
coordination and complementarity among national
institutions that deal with security, intelligence, justice
and financing to optimize their activities. Furthermore,
in order to track and dismantle criminal networks
States must bring national legislation in line with
international legal standards and instruments to combat
terrorism and its sources of funding. States must
strengthen the capacity of their judicial institutions
to enable them to effectively carry out the necessary
investigations and prosecutions. However, national
border control strategies can be effective only if they are
well integrated into the legal and security mechanisms
put in place within the framework of subregional and
regional cooperation.

While the links between transnational criminal
networks and terrorist groups are undeniably a collective
concern, the repercussions of these phenomena are more
pronounced in the regions of the world that do not have
sufficient human, financial and logistical resources to
cope with criminal gangs, which very often employ
asymmetrical methods. That is the case in West Africa.
C6te d'Ivoire therefore urges the United Nations to
maintain its support for the States and organizations
of the region with a view to helping them build their
capacity to combat these phenomena, particularly
with respect to the gathering of information on legal
and security matters. In that regard, the Economic
Community of West African States Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and Implementation Plan to fight terrorism and
related criminal acts in West Africa deserves support,
as does the Nouakchott Process on the enhancement of
security cooperation and the operationalization of the
African Peace and Security Architecture in the region,
which advocate a holistic approach to dealing with
transnational threats.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire remains more
convinced than ever that the links between cross-
border criminal networks and terrorist groups pose
serious threats to international peace and security. That
is why our joint efforts should integrate the need to
resolutely achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
so as to enable our populations to finally live decent
lives and stop our regions from being the fertile ground
in which transnational criminal networks and terrorist
groups take root.

