The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam, I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary- General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, and Mr. Mathias Licharz for their briefings. Viet Nam would like to commend the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) for its efforts and determination. Taking into account the recent developments in Libya, I wish to make the following observations. First, on the political solution, Viet Nam stresses the importance of ensuring a Libyan-led and Libyan- owned political process as the only viable solution to finally put an end to the conflict in Libya. We welcome the outcome of the Berlin conference on Libya and commend the efforts of Germany, the United Nations and other relevant parties in that regard. We very much hope that this momentum can be maintained and built upon for a peaceful solution in Libya. The international community should and must meaningfully and constructively support that process. Viet Nam agrees that a draft resolution should be adopted to support the outcome of the conference and its implementation, especially to achieve a ceasefire and create the necessary conditions for the intra-Libyan dialogue. Furthermore, we call on all parties inside and outside of Libya to refrain from any act that could further complicate the situation. All measures need to focus on bringing about reconciliation, solidarity and progress for all, taking into account the position of all parties. We welcome the establishment of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and hope that it will soon contribute to a lasting ceasefire. Secondly, on the security aspect, we share the concerns raised by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General that despite the recent truce, attacks have continued to take place. The conflict in Libya has lasted for more than eight years, leading to great suffering for the Libyans and their neighbours. We condemn all attacks that have targeted civilians and civilian objects and urge all Libyan parties and armed groups to exercise self-restraint. The targeting of civilians and civilian objects must be stopped immediately, while security conditions must be created to allow humanitarian aid. We are also deeply concerned about the growing presence of terrorist groups in Libya, particularly the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We note the recent efforts of the Libyan parties in combating terrorism and violent extremism and stress the need for further efforts in addressing those challenges. Thirdly, on the role of the United Nations and regional cooperation, Viet Nam supports the work of the United Nations, UNSMIL, under the leadership of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and regional organizations and other countries in contributing to the peace process in Libya. We recognize the important role of neighbouring countries, which are directly affected by the Libyan crisis. Wetake note of UNSMIL's operational plan and support the contribution of UNSMIL to implementing the outcome of the Berlin conference, in line its mandate as set out in the relevant Security Council resolutions. Fourthly, on the issue of sanctions, we highlight the importance of fully complying with Security Council resolutions, including those on sanctions. We take note of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General's observation that the arms embargo has continued to be violated, and strongly call on all parties to respect the embargo. At the same time, we believe that sanctions must be rightly and well targeted at individuals and entities that threaten peace and security in Libya, in line with Security Council resolutions, and must not negatively affect the livelihood of the common Libyan people. Sanctions should be lifted once conditions and necessities warrant. In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates its support to the Libyan people in the pursuit of peace and stability. We are committed to working constructively with the United Nations, UNSMIL, regional organizations and relevant parties in contributing to the peace process in Libya. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
