Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes the update
provided by United States Secretary of State John Kerry
at the press conference held in Amman on 19 July as
to the agreement in principle to launch Palestinian-

Israeli negotiations on the final status of the Palestinian
territories. We welcome the planned contacts to be held
in Washington, DC, between Israeli and Palestinian
negotiators to develop a formula for renewing the talks.
We hope that, in future, the parties will shoulder their
full responsibilities towards their peoples. Only they
can, and should, agree on the parameters of a future
Palestinian-Israeli settlement based on the well-known
legal basis, including the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, the Madrid principles, including the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative,
the decision of the Middle East Quartet ofinternational
mediators and earlier agreements.

At this extremely important stage, both sides must
refrain from unilateral actions and take reciprocal steps
to establish a favourable atmosphere to reinvigorate the
talks. Confidence-building measures by both sides are
extremely important.

The arrangements that have been reached make
more relevant the convening of a meeting of the Quartet,
which continues to be the recognized international
mechanism agreed upon by the Security Council to
help achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting solution
to the Middle East situation. The Quartet should play a
leading role in supporting the peace process. The main
purpose of such a meeting should be to issue a message
of unified support in providing potential assistance to
Palestinians and Israelis in the extremely important
and responsible task of achieving a final settlement and
ending this protracted conflict.

We believe that Arab countries should be more
involved in peacekeeping efforts. In that context, we
would like to reiterate our recent proposal to invite a
delegation from the League of Arab States to the next
Quartet ministerial meeting to promote the Arab Peace
Initiative.

We continue to believe that overcoming the
internal Palestinian divide on the basis of the Palestine
Liberation Organization platform and the Arab
Peace Initiative will help to achieve peace between
Palestinians and Israelis.

Without achieving Palestinian national unity,
reaching a comprehensive Palestinian-Israeli settlement,
or even strengthening its outcome, will not be possible.
The relevance of inter-Palestinian reconciliation was
a particular point of focus during last week's visit to
Moscow by Fatah member Nabil Shaath.

Efforts to overcome the deadlock in the Middle
East peace process were discussed in Moscow at the
beginning of July, including with Israeli Minister of
Justice Tzipi Livni, who is the Government Minister
responsible for talks with the Palestinians. The
commitment to the two-State solution was underscored,
which is the only way to meet the genuine aspirations
of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. Any delay in that
regard is unacceptable.

We are convinced that progress towards a lasting
settlement to such a key regional issue as that of
Palestine will have a beneficial impact on the entire
situation in the region, whose countries continue to
undergo fundamental transformations.

The tragic events in Syria are of great concern
to all of us. Terrorism, humanitarian challenges,
aftershocks of the crisis in neighbouring countries,
violations of human rights and the worsening ethnic
and sectarian strife are all very dangerous threats
with regard to outbreaks of violence in the country.
They will only increase so long as a solution to the
Syrian crisis is put off. It is well known that such a
solution must be political and be achieved solely in the
framework of a comprehensive intra-Syrian dialogue
based on unconditional respect for the sovereignty,
independence, national unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic, as stated in the Geneva
communique (S/2012/523, annex) of 30 June 2012. All
of our efforts should support the main goals of swiftly
ending all violence and launching the transition process
in order to restore the country and eliminate hostilities
and blockades and meet the humanitarian needs of the
people.

The Russian Federation is convinced that a
genuine path to those objectives will be facilitated
by the early implementation of the Russian-American
initiative of 7 May on the convening of an international
conference on Syria without prior conditions and aimed
at the full and comprehensive implementation of the
Geneva communique. One of the main themes of that
event should be to consolidate the efforts of both the
Government and the opposition to expel terrorists and
extremists from the country. It is important that all
constructive opposition groups take part in the talks
and that the Syrian Government be willing to talk with
them, having already announced support for the ideas
of the conference.

It is unfortunate, however, that a significant
number of opponents of the central authority, including
representatives of the Syrian National Coalition, are not
yet ready to participate in the conference. Nevertheless,
we trust that the collective efforts of the international

community to swiftly convene the second Geneva
conference will continue.

Like other members of the Council, we are
extremely concerned about the risk of internal
destabilization in Lebanon as a result of the Syrian
crisis and related to the Shiite-Sunni confrontation,
as well as social imbalances in the State's ethnic and
religious structures - and all that against the backdrop
of the increasing flow of refugees. To safeguard the
country from those dangerous scenarios, all Lebanese
political forces must show full responsibility, ensure
a broad national dialogue and independently find a
common denominator on the parameters for a political
process, including by forming a Government and
holding elections.

