Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We join other
Member States in expressing our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, and the Chinese delegation for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestininian question.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

This year marks 50 years of Israel's occupation of
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. The vast majority of
Palestine's population have lived their entire lifetimes
under Israeli occupation. In the past 50 years, civilians
have been denied their dignity and fundamental rights
to free movement, education, health care and even
the right to life. With each passing day, the number
of Palestinians in need of humanitarian assistance
increases. The situation in Gaza is even more dire.
The conclusion in the report of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development that the area
could be uninhabitable in less than five years if current
economic trends were to continue is becoming all the
more real.

The Security Council has been seized of the
matter of the Middle East, in particular the question of
Palestine and Israel, for over 70 years. The people of
Palestine continue to look to the United Nations, notably
the Security Council, to help them realize their right to
self-determination. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has
become entrenched over the decades. It is long overdue
for the Council to assume its responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security, and to work to reverse the negative
trends that threaten peace and the two-State solution.
The Security Council must renew its commitment
to keep to its mandate and contribute to resolving
the conflict.

It has become clear that the conflict between Israel
and Palestine feeds into the wider regional dynamics
by having a negative effect on peace, economic
development, socio-political progress and security
throughout the entire region. The Middle East peace
process therefore remains one of the central issues
shaping international relations within the region and in
the world.

South Africa calls for the effective and immediate
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
reaffirms that Israeli illegal settlements have no legal
validity, that they constitute a flagrant violation under
international law and that they are a major obstacle to
the vision of two States living side by side in peace and
security, within internationally recognized borders. We
call on Israel to immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities, as demanded by the resolution, and
remind Israel that no changes to the 1967 lines will be
recognized, including with regard to Jerusalem, other
than those agreed by the two sides through negotiations.

My delegation is intensely aware that the
opportunities for a two-State solution are being
eroded The ongoing Israeli settlement activity in the
occupied territories is a fundamental obstacle to a
return to negotiations and a grave threat to the very
existence of a future Palestinian State, as well as to
a safe and secure Israel. Every settlement takes land
away from Palestinians, who need homes, farmland and
other infrastructure.

South Africa has a long-standing record ofsolidarity
with the Palestinian people and supports the Palestinian
cause. We firmly believe that the only just solution to
the Palestinian question is an independent, sovereign,
viable and united Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, functioning within recognized and secure
borders and living side by side in peace with Israel and
its other neighbours, as endorsed in the Quartet road
map, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

South Africa is concerned about the arrest and
subsequent imprisonment, without charge or trial, of
Palestinian Legislative Council member Ms. Khalida
Jarrar, who was arrested in Ramallah on 2 July by the
occupying Israeli military, and calls for her immediate
release. Israel is a signatory of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which stipulates the right to a fair trail and
the right of an accused to defend himself or herself. We
call on Israel to abide by, and respect the provisions of,
the Convention as an occupying force.

South Africa is also deeply concerned about the
escalating tensions and violent clashes taking place
in and around the Old City of Jerusalem. Given the
particular sensitivities surrounding the holy sites in
Jerusalem and the need to ensure security, the Quartet
have called on all parties to demonstrate maximum
restraint, refrain from provocative actions and work
towards de-escalating the situation.

We strongly believe that the situation on the
ground cannot be allowed to continue unchanged, as it
remains an impediment to the security, peace, stability
and development of the broader Middle East region.
South Africa believes that ending the occupation is
in the interests of both Israel and Palestine, and we
call on both parties to take concrete steps to that end.
The recent past has seen no movement on the peace
process. The international community must recommit
itself to restart the stalled peace process on the basis of
international legality and accountability.

