Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I wish to
welcome the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunals. We thank them for
their reports and for the extremely enlightening
information they have given the Council in their
briefings on the implementation of the Completion
Strategy for their work. We note with satisfaction the
tireless efforts being made to expedite the work of the
two Tribunals. The progress achieved in the
implementation of the Completion Strategies is most
welcome in that regard.

We welcome the judicious application of the
principle of the heaviest responsibility, the joining of
certain trials, and the training activities undertaken to
enhance the capacities of national jurisdictions so as to
ensure better handling of transferred cases. The
establishment of the Sarajevo War Crimes Chamber is
a significant example in that regard.

The productive cooperation with some States,
leading to the conclusion of agreements for the
execution of sentences in other African countries; the
appearance before the Tribunals, in particular the
Yugoslav Tribunal, of several fugitive accused; and the
establishment of working groups to research ways and
means of expediting the work are all measures
reflecting genuine commitment to doing everything
possible to attain the target set by Security Council
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). We consider
them to be the manifestations of real progress in the
international community's efforts to combat impunity
for crimes against international humanitarian law.

We have also noted the great care taken to ensure
that transfers to national jurisdictions of cases of lesser
responsibility do not take place to the detriment of
international standards for rules of proceedings and the
execution of sentences. We encourage the International
Criminal Tribunals to remain attentive to the way in
which national jurisdictions proceed with the cases
transferred to them, because that monitoring, in our
view, is a guarantee of the legal security of the
transferred indictees and encouragement to the national
courts concerned to follow good practices. In that
regard, we note the manifest transparency of the
Tribunals' approach to precisely identifying
uncertainties that affect the Completion Strategies. The
factors identified demand flexibility and creativity in
the management of timetables and deadlines.

We welcome the calm approach taken by the
officials of the two Tribunals in handling those
uncertainties. We urge them to continue to study those
issues so as to make specific proposals to the Security
Council at the appropriate time on measures to be
taken to address them. In that regard, we look forward
with genuine interest to the next reports of the
Tribunals, offering approaches to solutions and
estimates of additional costs referred to in the reports
before us.

At the same time, we wonder about the reasons
behind the low number of indictees pleading guilty and
the growing number of accused filing appeals. Those
two factors are likely to weigh heavily on the timetable
of the Completion Strategies and on the Tribunals'
budgets. Despite such concerns, we concur with the
Tribunal Presidents that the Completion Strategies
must not be implemented at the expense of the rules of
procedure and human rights. Law and justice must
prevail.

In the light of the situation of the two Tribunals,
and basing itself on full information, the Security
Council should fully assume its responsibilities for the
problems raised by the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the Tribunals. It is important to maintain pressure on
the States concerned to secure the arrest and transfer of
the accused to the Tribunals as quickly as possible. The
Council should also appeal for the mobilization of the
resources necessary to ensuring the best possible
operation of the two Tribunals in order to back up their
efforts.

In conclusion, we pay tribute to the Presidents,
Prosecutors, Registrars, judges and all members of the
team of the two International Criminal Tribunals for
their devotion to the service of international justice and
for their work to bolster national judicial systems, as
well as for their invaluable contributions to the
consolidation of international peace and security.
