Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their relevant and thought-provoking briefings. During my statement today I wish to focus on three issues: recent political developments, the latest report of the Group of Eminent International and Regional Experts and the importance of accountability in Yemen, and, finally, the ongoing saga of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Belgium, like its partners in the European Union, continues to support the efforts of the Special Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Griffiths, to secure a nationwide ceasefire, implement confidence-building measures and restart an inclusive political process. During our most recent meeting, in late August, Martin stated that he feared losing momentum for the joint declaration. Indeed, the negotiations cannot go on forever. Belgium is alarmed by recent reports of the suspension of all United Nations and humanitarian flights to Sana'a by the Houthis. The Houthis seem to be drawing a link between that suspension and the coalition's continued blockade of ships transporting fuel to the port of Al-Hudaydah, demonstrating onceagain the urgent need to agree on the outstanding issues in the negotiations on the joint declaration. Belgium also remains deeply concerned by the escalation of violence in Ma'rib and Al-Hudaydah, which threatens the already fragile political process. The only way to overcome the multiple crises in Yemen is to put an end to the war and resolve deep-rooted differences through dialogue. We urge all parties to remain engaged in the peace talks, under the auspices of the United Nations, and to implement the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements. In this war, as in so many others, it is civilians who are suffering the most. The war in Yemen has claimed the lives of tens of thousands of civilians. Mark outlined the terrible humanitarian catastrophe that is raging in the country. Famine is a real threat for millions of Yemenis. In its third report, released last week, the Group of Eminent International and Regional Experts on Yemen found that all parties involved in the conflict continue to commit violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law, noting a consistent pattern of attacks against civilians. This is occurring not only in the context of hostilities but also far from the front lines, and such violations are widespread. The report notes in particular the killing of civilians, torture, cruel and inhuman treatment, rape and other forms of sexual violence, the denial of a fair trial and the recruitment of children under the age of 15 to participate actively in hostilities. Such violations may constitute war crimes. Belgium therefore strongly calls on all parties to uphold their obligations under international humanitarian law, in particular with regard to the protection of civilians, in particular women and children, and their obligations under international human rights law. Ensuring justice for the perpetrators of all violations committed in Yemen remains vital. The importance of this has been underscored by the Council time and again. We have recently been informed of a new water leak, similar to that in May, in the engine room of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Apparently, the leak has been contained. But one day, and that day may come soon, we will not be so lucky. That incident demonstrates once again why it is crucial that a United Nations team of experts have full and immediate access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We urge the Houthi leadership to stop delaying the process. We must avert an imminent environmental, humanitarian and economic disaster.
