Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my thanks to Mr. Alain
Le Roy and Ms. Valerie Amos for their briefings on the
recent political and humanitarian developments in
Haiti. On this first anniversary of the earthquake, we
would like to reiterate our condolences to the
Government and people of Haiti and to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

My delegation views with great concern the
repercussions that took place following the
announcement of the results of the presidential
elections on 7 December 2010. We would like to stress
that any observations or objections with regard to the
election results must be addressed by the constitutional
institutions and in accordance with due process,
without any recourse to violence. We would also like to
appeal to political parties to take into account the
contents of the report prepared by the mission of the
Organization of American States.

In that context, we would like to stress the need
to conduct the second round of the presidential
elections in full respect for the standards of fairness
and transparency and in such a way as to promote
democracy and make it possible to continue the
constitutional reforms and reconstruction efforts. We
also call on all political groups to remain calm at this
critical juncture in Haiti's history. We reiterate that the
elections must reflect the true will of the people of
Haiti.

We would also like to express our concern about
the continuing spread of the cholera epidemic. We call
on the international community to provide immediate
assistance to control the epidemic. As the Secretary-
General said, "Without a massive and immediate
international response, we will not be able to overcome
this crisis. The lives of hundreds of thousands of
people are at risk." In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the Secretary-General's establishment of a
panel of experts to determine the cause of the
epidemic.

Finally, we would like to stress that every
possible effort must be made to promote the work of
Haiti's judicial institutions in order to prevent impunity
and ensure the proper functioning of the courts, prisons
and police, in full respect for human rights laws and
rules. We would also like to emphasize the need to
respect the will of the people of Haiti in determining
its future and building its national institutions.

Finally, we call on donors to fulfil the pledges
made at the donor conference without delay, since
development and reconstruction pave the way for
security and stability.

