Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of August.

I thank His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Foreign
Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Skender Hyseni for their
statements. I should also like to thank Mr. Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his update and for his efforts in promoting peace and
stability in Kosovo and the region.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/401) and note that the overall situation in
Kosovo has remained relatively stable, although the
potential for instability exists. We are encouraged by
the gradual return to tranquillity in Mitrovica following
last month's incident. We urge all parties to continue to
guard against a relapse into violence.

We commend the efforts by United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to facilitate dialogue among all the parties as well as
activities in the areas of the rule of law and human
rights. We appreciate the collaboration between
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in fostering cooperation and peace in Kosovo and the
region in general within the status-neutral framework
of the United Nations.

In spite of these positive developments, we share
the Secretary-General's concern regarding the slow
progress in addressing outstanding challenges related
to Kosovo, in particular in advancing regional
cooperation and finding solutions to issues of common
concern to the communities and between the parties.
These problems, if not addressed adequately, have the
potential to exacerbate the security situation in the
territory. There is a need for all actors to sustain efforts
to build confidence among the communities.

We also urge that the same importance be
accorded to efforts to locate missing persons from the
conflict. In this regard, we call on UNMIK to continue
to foster cordial relations among the communities and
the parties. The efforts to reconstruct Serbian Orthodox
sites damaged or destroyed during the violence in
March 2004 are an important step towards building
trust among the communities. We therefore urge
continued general support for these activities.

The relevant law enforcement authorities should
also ensure that all perpetrators of crime and violence
against minorities are brought to justice. This would go
a long way towards promoting safe returns, as well as
reconciliation and the long-term stability and
development of Kosovo. It is important to promote
voluntary returns and the viability of the conditions for
returns, such as access to public services, housing and
property rights and socio-economic activities.
Additional efforts and enhanced collaboration by law
enforcement authorities are needed to prevent
harassment and attacks against returnees.

