Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking Prosecutor Bensouda of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for her informative
briefing on Libya, and especially for her contributions
to ending impunity for the most serious crimes in Libya.

Three years ago, with the adoption ofresolution 1970
(2011), the Security Council called for accountability in
Libya. Today, we see real steps towards that at both the
international and domestic levels. We welcome reports
of collaboration between Libya and the Office of the
Prosecutor in connection with ongoing investigations,
and we note that they have signed a memorandum of
understanding that we hope will facilitate collaboration
going forward. Cooperation is key. We know, of course,
that the admissibility proceedings in the cases against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi are
ongoing. Those proceedings have presented novel and
important questions for both the Court and the Libyan
Government. As the proceedings continue in the Libya
situation, we continue to urge Libya to cooperate with
the ICC and to take steps to ensure that the perpetrators
of the worst crimes are held to account.

In addition to the Court's proceedings, we know
that Libya still faces many challenges in its efforts to
support justice and accountability. The Government
can only benefit from continuing to work with the
international community to bolster its own domestic
capacity in the justice system and to ensure that both
high-profile figures from the former regime and the
thousands of conflict-related detainees are held only in
accordance with the applicable international obligations.
All detainees should be promptly transferred to
Government-controlled facilities and must be treated
humanely. Within the context of a transitional justice
strategy, the Libyan authorities may have to prioritize
prosecutions focusing on those who bear the greatest
responsibility for the crimes.

Beyond prosecutions, we encourage Libya to
explore other accountability measures such as those
envisioned in its transitional justice law. Additionally,
we underscore how important it is that Libya conduct
domestic investigations and prosecutions in a
manner consistent with its international obligations.
Prosecutions that respect the rights of defendants,
including those who were members of the former
regime, and that provide them with proper guarantees
of a fair trial, will also contribute to strengthening
public confidence in the judiciary and the rule of law
in Libya.

As we look at the bigger picture, the United States
remains very concerned about the rising instability
in Libya. It threatens to undermine the revolution for
which Libyans fought so dearly, and to jeopardize
Libya's transition to a democratic and prosperous State
in which all Libyans can participate. Together we must
be clear about what is at risk. The United States will
continue to support Libya in its efforts to guarantee
security and protect all its citizens and democratic
institutions. We also applaud the seating of Libya's
Constitution Drafting Assembly. We remain committed
to supporting the Libyan Government and institutions
through this difficult phase.

Finally, we look forward to the ongoing work and
partnership with the United Nations, Libya and Libya's
international partners, and to exploring appropriate
ways whereby we can advance critical initiatives for
a peaceful democratic transition and vital national
reconciliation efforts, including the assistance pledged
in Rome at this year's Ministerial Conference on
International Support to Libya.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our thanks
to Prosecutor Bensouda and her Office for the work
they have done to advance the cause of justice for the
people of Libya.

