Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this vital debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also wish to
thank all the briefers for their invaluable insights and
significant contributions to this conversation.

Several speakers this morning have alluded to the
fact that civilians are often deliberately targeted in
armed conflicts and frequently subject to blatant abuse
of their rights under international humanitarian law.
The Security Council itself has since 1999 responded
to such threats by giving United Nations peacekeeping
mission the mandate to protect civilians. The
presidential statement adopted by the Council today
(S/PRST/2014/3) further reinforces its unflinching
resolve to tackle this problem.

Over the years, several methods have been adopted
to improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping missions
in protecting civilians in conflict areas. Resolution 1894
(2009), for example, calls for the allocation ofresources
as an indication of the priority the Council accords to
the protection of civilian activities. That underscores
the need to translate normative commitments into
concrete measures for the protection of civilians.

The task of protecting civilians in armed conflict
is a mandate that has posed enormous challenges to
peacekeeping operations, and one that requires more
than normative commitments or a conceptual shift in
policy. While the international community expects
peacekeeping missions to perform flawlessly when
protecting civilians in armed conflict, the challenges
they face are often overlooked or not adequately
appreciated.

The protection of civilians within the framework
of peacekeeping missions has been described by the
United Nations as extremely complex. That is attributed
to four key points. First, peacekeeping missions often
have to protect civilians in harsh conditions and
with inadequate resources. Secondly, peacekeeping
missions often have to operate with partners who may
lack the capacity or will to do their own part. Thirdly,
there is an unrealistic expectation that peacekeeping
missions will be able to protect all civilians at all times.
And, fourthly, peacekeeping missions often operate in
dynamic environments where security situations can
change very quickly. A critical examination of those
challenges would show that the protection of civilians
in armed conflict is indeed a task that cannot be seen as
the exclusive responsibility of peacekeeping missions.

Aside from those challenges, there is the issue
of the different operating methods of the mission
components - military, police and civilian - involved
in the protection of civilians. The autonomy to act and
make decisions differs greatly between components in
the light of their varying mandates, agendas, donors
and standard procedures. That has raised questions
regarding coordination for effective delivery on
the protection of civilians. A key proposal under
consideration for addressing the problem is the "One
UN" concept - the idea that all United Nations
activities in a given country should fall under a common
umbrella to provide coherence and credibility.

The development of strategic coordination among
the various mission components is crucial to success in
the protection ofcivilians, in particular in the light ofthe
number of actors charged with such mandates. That is
achievable through the development of comprehensive
training on strategic coordination of the protection of
civilians for all components. It should be understood
that a clear and common understanding of mission
mandates is fundamental to the efficacy of strategic
coordination among them.

No less significant is an understanding of the
protective measures adopted by the local population
in conflict areas. There is a need to develop those
populations by ensuring that threats are mitigated and
material assistance provided where most needed. The
strengthening of national institutions is also important
to enable them to discharge their primary responsibility
to enhance security and the rule of law in post-conflict
areas.

Missions in situations of active conflict, or where
conflict is likely to occur, may face a higher tempo of
protection of civilians activity. The need to anticipate
and promptly respond to threats to civilians in such
situations argues in favour of the timely funding of such
missions. That would convey the message to mission
leadership of the priority that the Council attaches to the
protection of civilians. It also appropriately addresses
the disparity between the objectives of meeting the
demands of protecting civilians and of doing so within
the resources available.

In terms of capacity and training to effectively
protect civilians, the concept note (S/2014/74, annex)
aptly states the critical importance of predeployment
and in-mission training for peacekeepers and civilian
staff. The United Nations Institute for Training and
Research (UNITAR) has been instrumental in offering
training to African countries as part of its Enhancing
Capacity in Africa project. Nigeria is reinforcing that
effort through its firm commitment to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, and emphasizes
programmes on the protection of civilians at all
levels of predeployment training of its peacekeeping
contingents.

In consonance with that commitment, the Nigerian
Army Peacekeeping Training Centre, in collaboration
with UNITAR, conducted a training course on the
protection of civilians in United Nations peacekeeping
operations in August 2013 for almost 25 Nigerian
military and police officers as well as civilians about to
be deployed to various United Nations, African Union
and Economic Community of West African States
missions. Nigeria will also host a United Nations-
sponsored training programme in Abuja from 3 to
7 March.

In the final analysis, we believe that the protection
of civilians in armed conflict is an arduous task that
involves multiple issues and stakeholders. While
they represent the main tool at the disposal of the
international community, it is clear that peacekeeping
missions alone cannot successfully accomplish that
task. What is required is an all-hands-on-deck approach
that recognizes the strengths and weaknesses of all the
relevant stakeholders and harnesses the strengths while
minimizing the weaknesses. Today's debate reinforces
this valid aspiration.
