Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Mr. President, I wish to
commend you for the efforts made to engage the wider
membership on this important issue of improving
the working methods of the Security Council, at a
time when the Council is perceived to be in a state of
paralysis in terms of finding a lasting solution to the
pressing events that are currently taking place in the
Middle East, in particular in the occupied territories of
Palestine and Syria. I wish also to align my statement
with the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Malaysia welcomes the efforts made by the Security
Council in enhancing the efficiency of its work, as well
as interaction and dialogue with non-Council members.
In that connection, the note by the President of the
Council (S/2010/507) and Japan's subsequent efforts
in 2010 as the Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions
in producing the Handbook on the Working Methods
of the Security Council, known as the "green book",
are landmark efforts. These are steps that are pushing
forward the reform process of the Security Council, to
which Malaysia stands ready to contribute.

Article 30 of the United Nations Charter stipulates
that the Security Council shall adopt its own rules
of procedure. On that basis, the Council adopted its
provisional rules of procedure (8/96) in 1946. The
provisional rules of procedure were later modified on
several occasions, with the last revision being made in
1982, through S/96/Rev.7. It has therefore been 30 years
since those provisional rules were last amended.

The provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council are in many ways a relic of the Second World
War and the days of the Cold War. While other major
organs of the United Nations have made their fair share
of changes to their rules of procedure, regrettably the
Security Council has refused to evolve with the times.
More positive changes could be made to the Council's
working methods if its members interpreted Article 30
of the Charter with a view to making the Council more

democratic and to further improving the efficiency of
its work. Members have to rise above their entrenched
national interests and move forward so as to make the
Council an organ that serves the wider membership as
a whole.

How can we further improve the working methods
of the Security Council so as to make it much more
effective in the current situation? While presidential
note 507 was indeed a positive move, the Council
should also consider favourably General Assembly draft
resolution A/66/L.42. Many, if not all, of the elements of
change proposed in that draft resolution could be taken
on board by the Council with a view to helping to move
the reform process ahead and without the need to amend
the United Nations Charter. It is time for the Council to
move beyond the weak arguments put forward by States
with the sole intention of maintaining the status quo
on working methods and indirectly ensuring that their
national interests continue to be protected.

The world today is extremely disappointed by the
fact that the Council has not been able to do what it
was mandated to do: maintain international peace
and security. Let us look at what is happening in the
Middle East today. Can the Council claim that it has
been at the forefront in dealing with the tragedies in
Palestine and in Syria? Has the Council moved beyond
national interests in stopping the ongoing violence
that has led to the deaths of 30,000 people in Syria
and a rising number of casualties in Palestine? Were
non-members of the Council, as responsible members
of the international community, allowed to present their
views during the Council's meeting on the attack on
Gaza held on 14 November (see S/PV.6863) and during
the one held on 21 November (see S/PV.6869)?

Unfortunately, the answer to all those questions
is a resounding "no". Why is that so? Clearly, it is
because the provisional rules of procedure and thus
the working methods of the Council have failed the
international community to the extent that there
was recourse to the format of a private meeting on
14 November and to restrictions on the speakers' list
for the open meeting held on 21 November, so as to
deny non-members the opportunity to condemn the
illegal occupier and aggressor in Palestine. We have to
search our consciences and ask ourselves ifthat was the
right thing to do. To get a clear answer, we have to put
ourselves in the shoes of the victims of that aggression,
be they children, women or the elderly.

In this debate, it would be remiss of me not to
address the issue of the use of the veto. Malaysia
has been consistent in its views on the veto. The use
of the veto has led us all into a deadlock on how the
international community should address the bloodshed
in various regions, especially in the Middle East. The
irony is that the veto is a double-edged sword. The
permanent members of the Council are finding that
the veto, time and again, is being used against them
by other permanent members. The adage "what goes
around, comes around" could not be more true in the
context of the current deadlock faced by the Council
on issues relating to the Middle East. The world is told
that country "X" is blocking action to resolve the crisis
in a certain country through the use of the veto, but the
complainant then does the same when action is taken in
another country in the region.

Let me reiterate once again that the use of the veto
should be prohibited in situations involving genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. If the reform
process can start with an agreement on this issue, then
the working methods of the Council will have actually
improved tremendously. Until such time, the working
methods of the Council are still the ones agreed in
1946. The Council today seems to operate in a time
warp, refusing to acknowledge the changes that have
taken place since the end of the Second World War.

In conclusion, it is clear and known to all that
the national interests of the members of the Council
and their close allies are hindering the improvement
of the working methods of this important organ. The
political courage should be found to move beyond
those entrenched interests and to make the Council
more democratic and bring it in line with the current
situation so as to make it reflective of geopolitical
realities. Only then would the Council regain the
respect of the international community, and the reform
process of the United Nations, including reform in the
working methods of the Council, would see some real
and meaningful improvements.

