Mr. Amorim (Brazil): The oil-for-food mechanism
established by resolution 986 (1995), and to be expanded
in accordance with the recommendations of the Secretary-
General through the draft resolution presented to the
Security Council today, is a central piece of the work of
the United Nations in Iraq.
The imposition of comprehensive sanctions on Iraq's
external trade should have been a short-term measure.
The expectation of the international community was that
Iraq would comply promptly with all the requirements of
resolution 687 (1991) and previous Security Council
resolutions, and that the trade restrictions would be lifted.

Unfortunately, this has not been the case. Seven
years later, we still face the problem of ensuring full Iraqi
compliance. It has become imperative to devise suitable
ways for satisfying the essential needs of Iraq's civilian
population, which was never intended to be subjected to
any form of collective punishment.

For this reason, Brazil has been supportive of the
oil-for-food mechanism. We endorsed the
recommendation for its expansion presented by Secretary-
General Kofi Annan on 1 February.

We share his conclusion, based on the extensive
experience of the Office of the Iraq Programme and
United Nations agencies in the field, that it is essential to
channel resources to the recovery of essential
infrastructure sectors in Iraq, including water and
sanitation, education, transportation and electricity.
Without urgent repair, the deterioration of Iraqi
infrastructure would substantially reduce the positive
impact of the supplies of food and medicine.

Therefore, we joined other delegations in the efforts
to prepare a technical resolution that, in accordance with
the recommendations of the Secretary-General, would
allow for the rapid increase of the volume of oil
authorized for export, with a view to using the additional
resources for addressing the basic needs of the Iraqi
people.

We strove for a resolution that would be credible
and practical. The Security Council's aim is not just to
send a message to the Iraqi people; rather, our objective
is to provide the essential supplies that the Secretary-
General considers indispensable to prevent a further

 

deterioration of the very serious humanitarian situation in
Iraq.

The text before us, even if it is not perfect, addresses
our basic requirements. The Secretariat will have to work
intensively with Iraq in order to overcome the remaining
technical difficulties. Such work should take place in a
spirit of flexibility and fairness, in accordance with the
Memorandum of Understanding signed between the United
Nations and Iraq.
We expect the Government of Iraq to present, as soon
as possible, a distribution plan which includes a description
of the goods to be purchased and which effectively
guarantees their equitable distribution. We call upon the
Government of Iraq to engage fully in the technical
discussions with the Secretariat in order to fulfil the
requirements for the entry into force of the expanded
mechanism.

Iraq should be assured of the temporary nature of the
mechanism. Once full compliance by Iraq with the pertinent
resolutions is assured, the Security Council will act in
accordance with its own resolutions, and the process of
lifting the sanctions can be started.

The Security Council and its sanctions Committee
should also be ready to work together with the Secretary-
General in the months to come, in which a number of
reports with specific recommendations on the oil-for-food
mechanism are to be expected, according to the draft
resolution we will be adopting today.

Finally, it is impossible not to mention the fact that
the outcome of the Secretary-General's current mission of
good offices to Baghdad is directly linked to the evolution
of the humanitarian situation in Iraq. By adopting this draft
resolution and approving the recommendations of the
Secretary-General, the Security Council will also be giving
a signal of its full and unanimous support for his mission,
in the firm hope that a peaceful solution can still be found
for the current crisis.

We still believe that a combination of firmness in
substance and flexibility in form can provide the diplomatic
solution we all agree is the best outcome. In the critical
decisions of the next few days, the Security Council will
again rely on the good judgement and advice of the
Secretary-General.

