Mr. Mahbubani: I thank you, Madam President,
for setting aside the time for this open meeting of the
Security Council on the report of the Panel of Experts
on Liberia. I convey this thanks most sincerely,
because, as you know, we were supposed to have this
meeting in October, but, as a result of various delays,
we are having it this month, despite your busy
schedule. We are glad that you have accommodated us.

I am also pleased to introduce the Chairman and
members of the Panel of Experts on Liberia established
by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 19 of
resolution 1343 (2001). They will present the report to
the Council today. The Chairman of the Panel is
Mr. Martin Chungong Ayafor, on my left, and the other
members of the Panel, behind me, are: Mr. Atabou
Bodian, from Senegal, an expert on civil aviation;
Mr. Johan Peleman, from Belgium, an expert on arms
and transportation; Mr. Harjit Singh Sandhu, from
India, an expert from INTERPOL; and Mr. Alex Vines,
from the United Kingdom, an expert on diamonds.

The report was to have been issued on 7
September, by an order to allow the Panel a full six
months for its work. Since the Panel was only set up on
15 April, the Council agreed to the report's being
submitted on 15 October. However, the issuance of the
report was further delayed until 1 November, because
of technical processing difficulties.

This report, along with the report (S/2001/939) of
the Secretary-General on the humanitarian impact of
possible sanctions on Liberia, was considered at two
meetings of the sanctions Committee, on 22 and 25
October. On Friday, 2 November 2001, I briefed the
Council members on the outcome of these meetings.

The report before us represents six months of
arduous work by the members of the Panel, who
substantiated their findings with extensive case studies
and clear descriptions of their methodology. They also
employed high standards of verification in conducting
their investigations. The Panel has provided
recommendations on all aspects of its mandate,
including transport, weapons, the use of revenue by the
Liberian Government, logging and wood processing,
diamonds, the maritime and corporate registry, the
travel ban, and the continued monitoring of resolution
1343 (2001). The Council is agreed that the report will
be further considered after this open meeting by the
sanctions Committee, which will, of course, study the
recommendations in greater detail.

At this stage, I would like to once again publicly
thank the Panel members for the professional manner
in which they have carried out their mandate. I
commend them for the clear and compelling rendering
of the report.

I will now, with your permission, Madam
President, turn the floor over to the Chairman,
Mr. Ayafor, to make his presentation.
