Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): We greet all those
who have spoken before me, as well as the Ambassador
of Uganda, who shall speak later. At the outset, on
behalf of the African Union, allow me to express our
sincere gratitude to the Security Council for giving
us this opportunity to speak at this crucial moment in
the history of Burundi. The full text of our statement
will be made available to Council members, given the
limited time at our disposal.

Itake this opportunity to reiterate the deep gratitude
of the African Union to the East African Community
and the leaders of the region, including those of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and all
our bilateral and multilateral partners.

We note with concern that, since April, the peace
that was hard won by Burundians is being put to the
test. Burundi faces a serious political and security
crisis, marked by increasing violence and serious
violations of human rights. In addition, more than
200,000 Burundians have taken refuge in neighbouring
countries, including Tanzania, Rwanda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda.

Even as the Security Council meets here, the
security situation continues to deteriorate. Initially
concentrated in the capital, Bujumbura, insecurity and
armed violence have spread recently to some localities
of the interior. Targeted assassinations of political and
military figures, extrajudicial killings, acts of torture
and other cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment,
arbitrary arrests and illegal detentions, clashes between
police and armed elements, the regular discovery
of corpses in the streets in some neighbourhoods,
among other manifestations, have become the almost
daily lot of the Burundian population. I also note with
deep concern the inflammatory statements issued by
political leaders. However such statements may be
explained away, they are simply unacceptable in view of
the painful past of the Great Lakes region, which, more
than any other region of the continent, has suffered the
pangs of mass violence.
The Government of Burundi has reported on its
efforts to restore security throughout nation, particularly
in the so-called protest districts ofthe capital. While the
Government estimates that it has recovered over 90 per
cent of the weapons held by civilians in the course of
its disarmament operations, it is clear that these efforts
have not yet succeeded in restoring calm on the ground.
On the contrary, we are witnessing, both on the part
of the Burundian Government and of some of those
contesting the President's third term, a hardening of
positions and methods, as well as a serious resurgence
of violence.

Faced with the growing deterioration of the
political and security situation, and the real threat of
a widespread confrontation in Burundi, the African
Union has stepped up its initiatives to bring peace and
stability to that still-fragile country. The Peace and
Security Council, at its meeting held on the sidelines
of the 25th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Head
of State of the African Union, held in Johannesburg in
June, agreed on a road map articulating actions that
it was important to take to resolve the tension, avoid
a spiral of violence and enable Burundi to preserve
the benefits of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, which is the very foundation of the social
and political pact between the various components of
the Burundian people.

In addition to her previous efforts, the President
of the African Union Commission, Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini-Zuma has repeatedly made similar calls on the
parties, particularly after the assassinations of General
Adolphe Nshimirimana and Colonel Jean Bikomagu.
These calls having not been heeded by all Burundian
stakeholders, our continental organization again met
in its Peace and Security Council on 17 October. On
that occasion, the Council decided, inter alia, to impose
targeted sanctions, including travel bans and asset
freezes against all Burundian actors whose actions
and words had contributed to the ongoing violence
and hindered the search for a solution to the crisis. It
also requested the African Commission on Human and
Peoples' Rights to launch a thorough investigation into
violations of human rights and other abuses against
civilians in Burundi.

In addition, the Peace and Security Council
decided to increase the number of military experts and
human rights observers deployed on the ground to help
contain the violence and create conditions conducive
to a political dialogue among the actors concerned.
Similarly, the Commission was requested to begin
drafting a plan for the possible deployment of an
African-led mission to Burundi. Follow-up actions are
being taken.

The escalation of violence and targeted
assassinations against high-ranking Burundians,
combined with political radicalization and rumors of
military activity, attest to the volatility of the situation
and highlight the already obvious need to work for a
political solution to the current crisis. In that regard,
let me echo the conviction expressed by the African
Union Peace and Security Council that only a genuine
and inclusive dialogue based on respect for the Arusha
Agreement would allow the Burundian stakeholders
to find a consensual solution, maintain the peace and
consolidate democracy and the rule of law.

The African Union strongly supports the efforts
led by President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda and
therefore welcomes the visit to Burundi undertaken
on 28 and 29 October by the Ugandan Minister of
Defence, Mr. Crispus Kiyonga, in order to discuss with
the Burundian authorities the modalities for resuming
dialogue.

In conclusion, I reiterate the call of the African
Union to the Government of Burundi and other
stakeholders concerned to weigh the gravity of situation
and rise to the challenge. The future of their nation and
the stability of the region depend on it.

For its part, as the Peace and Security Council has
pointed out, the African Union is determined to fully
assume its responsibilities under the Protocol relating
to the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union and other relevant African
instruments, in collaboration with the international
actors concerned.

