Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): The United States delegation welcomes
Minister Dlamini Zuma, Minister Adada, Ambassador
Imron Cotan and Commissioner Djinnit to New York
and to the Security Council.

I would like to thank the South African
delegation for having raised this important topic for
debate in the Security Council. The issue of peace and
security in Africa is of pressing concern for the
members of the Council, and the African Union (AU)
and its subregional organizations have played an
invaluable role in bringing many of Africa's conflicts
towards peaceful resolution.

The African Union has designed and is starting to
resource its own peace and security architecture to
prevent and resolve conflict and to respond to other
security challenges on the continent. Over the past few
years, the AU has made great strides in implementing
those designs, and it has done so with the support of
the international community. We recognize the efforts
of the African Union throughout the region, but
particularly in the conflicts in the Sudan and in
Somalia. The international community looks to the
African Union for leadership in preventing and
responding to conflicts in the region, through both
political mediation and peacekeeping.

For the past two years, the African Union Mission
in the Sudan (AMIS) has had up to 7,700 personnel in
Darfur to try to end the genocide and create conditions
conducive to a lasting political solution to the Darfur
crisis. The AU played a crucial role in brokering the
2004 humanitarian ceasefire agreement and the 2006
Darfur Peace Agreement and has worked hard to
implement it on the ground. AMIS has done an
excellent job, but its mission in Darfur is overmatched
by the challenges that it currently faces.

In Somalia, the AU stabilization mission stepped
into a difficult environment to provide essential on-the-
ground security for Somalia's Transitional Federal
Institutions as part of a wider political reconciliation
process for the Somali people.
Cooperation between regional organizations and
the United Nations is essential. The United States
supports continued efforts by the United Nations to
strengthen the AU's peace and security architecture
across the full range of the conflict-management
spectrum, from early warning and conflict prevention
to peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction.
International efforts cannot succeed if they are not
coordinated and complementary.

Coordination between United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in West Africa
has expedited transition from conflict to stability and
from authoritarianism to democracy. Effective AU-led
peacekeeping in Africa is not only about a consistent
funding base - and, of course, it is not the role of the
United Nations to provide funding for non-United
Nations operations; assessed United Nations
peacekeeping contributions must be used only for
Security Council-mandated operations under clear
United Nations command and control, with full
accountability, ensured through the financial and
administrative procedures of the United Nations.
Effective planning and mission management are also
essential for effective peacekeeping, and the United
Nations and the AU can and should work more closely
together on improving those areas of AU operations
and on building long-term institutional capabilities.

Advice and experts from other major partners,
including the United States, the European Union,
NATO, the United Kingdom, Canada and others, can
also provide valuable support to the AU. In the Sudan,
United Nations and partner personnel should be
quickly integrated into AMIS forces and sector
headquarters.

The United States contributes generously to the
operations of regional organizations, demonstrating our
support for their efforts to resolve regional conflicts.
We initially contributed almost $20 million to support
the AU Mission in Somalia, including support for the
rapid deployment of the Ugandan contingent as the
lead element that mission, which now has 1,680 troops
on the ground in Somalia. We expect troops from other
contributing countries to begin arriving in the coming
weeks.

We have also provided over $350 million to
AMIS over the past two years and are committed to
assisting it in its transition to a United Nations-AU
force. We call on others to generously contribute to
those critical efforts.

We will continue to assist regional organizations
by providing resources directly where they can be most
effective. We will also continue to provide capacity-
building assistance to the AU peace and security
architecture through training, equipment, advisers and
other logistical support.
