Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilisation
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the EFTA countries Iceland and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area,
align themselves with this statement.

The European Union enjoys a rich and deep
engagement with Africa, both directly and in
partnership with the United Nations. Our commitment
to Africa is a result of our belief that the promotion of
peace and sustainable development in Africa
constitutes one of the major challenges to the
international community today. A fundamental
principle of the European Union's relationship with
Africa has been to assess our engagement there on a
continental, regional, subregional, national or local
level, as called for by the issue at hand. Nowhere has
the need for a regional approach been more evident in
recent years than in West Africa.

West Africa has suffered years of violence,
population displacement, human rights abuses of the
most heinous kind and economic depression due to
conflicts exacerbated by regional rivalries and
insecurities. As peace begins to gain a foothold in West
Africa, we now recognize not only the regional origin
of many of the root causes of the conflicts there but
also the logic of a regional approach to their solution.
Challenges which demand this regional approach
include the reintegration of child soldiers, disarming
and demobilizing irregular and sometimes mercenary
forces that do not respect national borders, protecting
women and children from sexual violence, facilitating
the return and resettlement of displaced persons and
refugees, tackling the culture of impunity, restoring the
rule of law, overcoming environmental degradation and
stemming the proliferation of small arms.

In this context, the European Union welcomes the
Secretary-General's initiative in requesting the report
from the Special Representative for West Africa,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, on defining a holistic
strategy for addressing the regional problems in West
Africa. In particular, we welcome the report's focus on
providing practical action-oriented recommendations,
which provide us with much food for thought.
The Secretary-General's report we discuss today
calls for increasing the level of contact between United
Nations senior staff in West Africa. As we are
cognizant of the recommendations of the Brahimi
report regarding improved coordination within
multidimensional peacekeeping operations, it appears
logical that we also seek to improve coordination
among missions active within a subregion where
improved contact and information-sharing would assist
those missions to fulfil their respective individual
mandates with improved effectiveness. In that regard,
the European Union commends the efforts that have
already begun to develop a closer working relationship
among the United Nations missions in West Africa
with the series of meetings of the leaders of the United
Nations operations in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Cote
d'Ivoire.

A major theme running through the
recommendations of the report of the Secretary-
General is the need for improved regional integration
in West Africa. In this context, it is worth noting that
while the European Union continues to consider a
regional strategy for West Africa focused on conflict
prevention and resolution, one element of that strategy
is already clear: regional integration is a key factor in
addressing the overarching challenge in West Africa of
integrating short-term crisis-management activities
with a longer-term preventive strategy. That is and will
remain a central tenet of our engagement with West
Africa, not least of all through the offices of the
European Union presidency's Special Representative,
Mr. Hans Dahlgren.

The European Union has a close working
partnership with the Economic Community of West
African States, and the recent joint EU-United Nations
assessment mission to West Africa focused on ways to
increase cooperation with, and assist in strengthening
the capacity of, ECOWAS.

The report we consider today highlights
important areas where improved regional integration
and cooperation will be of significant benefit. These
areas include, inter alia, the need for ratification and
implementation by the countries of the region of all
instruments designed to address issues such as child
soldiers, small arms and mercenaries; the need for all
countries of the region to abide by these instruments
and for the international community to support national
capacities for their implementation; the need for
improved regional cooperation and dialogue through
existing regional and subregional mechanisms; the
importance of implementing disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in a
coordinated fashion and with the close involvement of
civil society; and the need for the careful planning of
security sector reform, drawing on lessons learned
from past United Nations missions in the region and
elsewhere.

In addition, regional integration will be all the
more successful if actors such as the United Nations
and its family of agencies, the African Union, the New
Partnership for Africa's Development, the European
Union and the donor community act in concert with
each other, with the countries of the region and with
ECOWAS.

The European Union believes regional
cooperation and dialogue will only strengthen the
security of West Africa. The chief responsibility for
fostering security and development in West Africa lies
with the West African States themselves. In this regard,
the European Union calls on all the leaders in the
region to engage in meaningful and constructive
dialogue on the bilateral and regional levels. We
believe increased coordination among United Nations
operations in the region and between all the actors in
West Africa can only underpin the efforts of the region
to emerge from a period of prolonged and bitter
conflict into a time of sustainable peace, security and
development. The European Union stands ready as a
willing partner to achieve this shared goal.

