Mr. Minor (Liberia): I bring you greetings, Sir,
from our President, Madam Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, who
was originally invited to be here. Unfortunately,
pressing matters of state prevented her from coming,
and she has asked me to sit in her stead. As you know,
the day after tomorrow we will be celebrating the
159th anniversary of our independence, and our people
require the President to be there.

This Council is at the apex of the international
community's search for peace and security. Today, as
we endeavour to seek peace in one corner of our world,
rupture is occurring in another. President Sirleaf and
the Liberian people are disturbed by the events in the
Middle East and wish to register support for the
exercise of restraint on both sides of the divide. In
pursuing a resolution to the crisis, we believe efforts
must be made to remove or eliminate threats to
sovereign States in the region and that the reduction of
hostilities and the pursuance of peace should be within
the context of the United Nations and this Council.

It is commendable that, in spite of the crises in
the Middle East and other burning issues around the
world, the Council has found it expedient to schedule a
debate on children in armed conflicts. That subject is
important to Liberia and to our entire region.

Children constitute almost one half of our entire
population and they unjustly suffered during the
continuous war we experienced in our country. It is
well established that far too many of them were victims
of brutal killing, rape, sexual assault, abduction,
torture, forced labour, or forced recruitment as fighters
in combat. Twenty-one thousand of them are known to
have been child soldiers, participating in murder,
mayhem, rape and the destruction of property.

Our war has ended, but our country is now
involved in the humongous tasks of reconstruction,
rehabilitation, reconciliation and renewal. In meeting
those challenges, our children are foremost in our
minds, our plans and our actions. The Government's
education programme, one of the most challenging, is
aimed at increasing the percentage of children in
school, especially girls; improving the quality and
practicality of the skills they acquire; and enhancing
the level of literacy and numeracy in the country.

We abhor the violation of the security and rights
of our children and vouch to exert every effort in their
rehabilitation and support of their security. Having
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
Government is now proposing to the national
legislature the ratification of the Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict and the
Optional Protocol on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography.

As we address the issues affecting children in
Liberia, we continue to be disturbed by conflicts in
other parts of our subregion. The reported recruitment
of Liberian children to cross the border and fight as
mercenaries in other countries is most disquieting.
While we certainly are doing and will continue to do
all we can within our means to curtail that problem, we
appeal for United Nations intervention not just in
condemning the practice but to bring to justice all
persons who flagrantly violate the rights of children by
maliciously and illegally recruiting them to kill or be
killed and thus destroy and violate the rights of
innocent people.

The Liberian Government is aware that although
we have been assisted in disarming and demobilizing
our combatant children, the transitional safety net
provided to them is inadequate. They must be returned
to their families and schools and be assisted in
developing the requisite skills to be fully rehabilitated
and to participate in civil life, gainfully. Continuous
support from the Council and from all of our friends in
the international community would help greatly in the
process.

Liberia remains grateful to the Security Council
for its role in helping to resolve the Liberian crisis. The
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has been
and continues to be our saving grace. We pray as the
Council considers its redeployment that the process
will be gradual, thus enabling us to restructure and

train our own security apparatus to ensure that the
peace we have won, with the Council's help, is
sustained.

The lifting of sanctions on Liberia forest products
is an important step in assisting our Government to
meet the challenges we face to improve the lives of our
children. In that context, we ask for continued support
to meet the conditionalities for the lifting of sanctions
on our diamonds.

I congratulate the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and commit our full support to the work she
does. I also wish to thank UNICEF and all those who
have been helpful in our programme to rehabilitate our
children. I thank the Secretary-General for his recent
visit to Liberia, and I assure the Council of our abiding
faith in the Organization and our commitment to its
goals and objectives.

