Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Since this is the first
formal meeting under your presidency, let me, first of
all, convey my sincere congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption as President of the Security Council
for the month of October. Let me also place on record
our warm thanks to your predecessor, His Excellency
Ambassador Tafrov of Bulgaria, for his wise
stewardship of the Council last month.
Heartiest congratulations go to Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), for the outstanding work he and his
team continue to do in the Committee. Despite the
demanding nature of the task, Ambassador Greenstock
has steered the work of the Committee not only with
resolute determination and unmatched professionalism,
but also with great openness and transparency. We are
pleased to learn that he will continue to chair the
Committee for the next six months. We will continue to
cooperate closely with him, and we assure him of our
full support.

Let me also express my deep appreciation for the
outstanding work performed by the team of the
counter-terrorism experts, whose contribution to the
work of the CTC has been extremely valuable and
positive. I seize this opportunity to wish Dr. Gehr,
Mr. Daoues and Ms. Broekhuis, who, I understand, will
be leaving us shortly, plenty of success in their new
endeavours. We will indeed miss them.

We welcome the opportunity to discuss the state
of implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) almost
exactly one year after it was adopted on 28 September
2001. It is a matter of great success for the United
Nations that 173 Members of the United Nations
community submitted their reports, as required by the
resolution. That shows the commitment of the
international community to tackle the problem of
terrorism in a serious manner. Mauritius fully
subscribes to the assessment made in this respect by
Ambassador Greenstock, the Chairman of the CTC. We
are pleased with the progress made, and we are
confident that Member States will continue to take all
necessary measures to comply fully with resolution
1373 (2001).

Immediately after the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001), Mauritius strengthened its legislative and
administrative mechanisms in order to address the
problems of terrorism. In our initial report, submitted
to the CTC in December, we highlighted the major
steps we had taken and which we proposed to take in
order to combat terrorism. In July 2002, when we
submitted our reply, we reported on the various actions
taken at the national level. Several pieces of
legislations were passed, among others the Prevention
of Terrorism Act, the Financial Intelligence and Anti-
Money-Laundering Act and the Prevention of
Corruption Act. The Banking Act and the Financial
Services Regulations, which govern our offshore
activities as well as our local banking sector, do not
provide for any hawala-type banking system. Since
1990, Mauritius has no foreign exchange restrictions,
and transactions through an informal banking system
are, therefore, neither convenient nor profitable.

Mauritius has also become a party to the United
Nations International Convention for the Suppression
of the Financing of Terrorism. Conscious of the threat
posed by terrorism to national, regional and
international peace and security, Mauritius has aligned
itself with all international and regional initiatives in
the fight against terrorism.

We recognize the difficulties many countries are
facing in effectively implementing resolution 1373
(2001). Those difficulties range from the lack of
necessary expertise to the total absence of regulatory
and legislative frameworks. We are pleased that the
CTC is paying particular attention to the question of
assistance, and we are grateful to all those countries,
institutions and agencies that have expressed their
readiness to extend assistance in the various areas. We
would therefore encourage those countries which have
problems to get in touch with the CTC or the experts in
order to discuss their specific problems. At the same
time, we renew our appeal to those Member States who
have not submitted their initial reports to do so as soon
as possible.

The cornerstone of resolution 1373 (2001) is to
develop a truly comprehensive and concerted approach
to robustly deal with the scourge of terrorism, which
manifested itself in the most disastrous and evil manner
on 11 September 2001. It is absolutely imperative that
all nations work individually and collectively to ensure
that the world does not witness a repetition of those
acts. The work of the CTC therefore remains extremely
relevant inasmuch as it can assist and monitor
legislative, judicial and administrative mechanisms put
in place by Member States to fight terrorism. The CTC
is fully aware of the fact that not all countries are or
can be at the same level of implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We therefore support the
gradual approach that the CTC is following and which
gives time to allow for capacity-building at the national
level and to respond to the obligations of resolution
1373 (2001).

We believe that the monitoring exercise should
continue until we are satisfied that each country has
been equipped legislatively and administratively to
create a terrorist-proof society. In this respect,
however, care must be taken to ensure that basic
individual human rights are not sacrificed in an
obsessive drive to fight terrorism. Here I would like to
recall the very insightful statement that the Secretary-
General has just made. The place of respect for human
rights in the fight against terrorism has, indeed, been
the object of extensive deliberations in many parts of
the world. There is, indeed, a very fine line between
the respect of fundamental rights and the need for a
country to take all necessary measures to prevent
terror-related activities.

While resolution 1373 (2001) does not contain
any specific provision concerning respect for human
rights, it is important that the concept be clearly
embodied in all national legislation governing the fight
against terrorism. We therefore welcome the idea that
the CTC will remain in touch with the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Sergio de Mello.
Likewise, it will be important for the international
community to reach agreement as quickly as possible
on an acceptable definition of terrorism. We sincerely
hope that work in that respect will continue in the
appropriate forum.

Finally, I take this opportunity to thank all the
Members for the support that they have extended to me
as Chairman of Sub-Committee B. I look forward to
enjoying the same trust and cooperation for the next
three months.

