Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Like
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani, I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for having chosen the
format of this meeting, which has enabled States that
are not members of the Council to participate actively
in this interactive dialogue with the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.

Allow me also to thank those delegations that
have reiterated their congratulations to us and
expressed their support as Guinea takes its seat in the
Council.

Let us recall that, immediately following the
tragic events of 11 September 2001, the international
community made clear its resolve to wage a battle
against terrorism. The spontaneous reaction of the
General Assembly and the Security Council clearly
indicates that the time has finally come to tackle with
growing determination the scourge of terrorism.

Guinea believes that terrorism poses a threat to
international peace and security and it fully associates
itself with the efforts under way to combat and
eradicate it. Guinea welcomes the victorious struggle
waged by the United States against the Al-Qaeda
network and its sponsors, the Taliban. It believes that
effective and vigorous measures must be taken by all
States effectively to combat international terrorism.
That is why my country unreservedly supports the
provisions contained in the resolutions of the Security
Council adopted since the deadly attacks of 11
September, in particular resolution 1373 (2001), and
calls on all States fully to implement them.

My delegation wishes to congratulate the
Counter-Terrorism Committee which, since its
inception, has done outstanding work. The elaboration
of rules relating to the work of the Committee, the
provision to Member States of the necessary guidelines
needed for the preparation of national reports, the
publication of a list of contacts, the drawing up, in
cooperation with the Secretary-General, of a roster of
experts in areas relevant to the work of the Committee,
and the submission to date of numerous reports by
Member States, demonstrate once again the will of the
Committee and of Member States fully to cooperate on
this matter.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and to
the other members of the Committee, for the high
calibre of the programme of work presented.

The dedication and personal commitment of Sir
Jeremy, as well as the transparency with which he
reports to representatives of Member States and other
institutions on the activities of the Committee, are
ample testimony of his resolve to cooperate with all
parties in discharging the mandate entrusted to the
Committee. We encourage the Committee to continue
its work and assure it of the full support of the Guinean
delegation.

We must now forge ahead and increasingly focus
on the assessments resulting from the review of the
various reports of Member States and, when possible,
make the most of comparative advantages on all sides,
in order to harmonize activities in the common fight
against terrorism.

My delegation, while welcoming the appointment
of experts, wishes to encourage the representation of
all regions within the group of experts, as this would
foster an understanding of the problems experienced by
States of different regions.

We welcome also the cooperation of various
entities with the Committee. My delegation would also
suggest that the Committee strengthen its cooperation
with regional organizations, as the rigorous
implementation of regional instruments against
terrorism could benefit the work of the Committee.

I would like to associate myself with the message
of thanks to Sir Jeremy Greenstock for the very
encouraging information he gave us this morning on
this subject in response to a question by Ambassador
Ryan.

In the context of assistance to be provided to
States, my delegation welcomes the forthcoming
establishment of a source list of consultative and
specialized services in the field of legislative and
administrative practices, as envisaged in resolution
1373 (2001). Special attention is to be given to the
States that have the greatest need for assistance in the
development of their initial reports. In this regard, we
encourage the prompt establishment of a special trust
fund.

My delegation appreciates the procedure laid out
by the Committee with regard to reviewing the initial
reports submitted by Member States. We believe that
the procedure thus proposed, and the experience drawn
from it in reviewing initial reports, will contribute to
improving the future work of the Committee.

The results achieved by the international
community to date testify to the resolve of all to
combat and eliminate terrorism. To achieve that
objective, the cooperation of all States is necessary.

In conclusion, allow me to thank Ambassador
Navarrete for the quality of his contribution to the
work of the Council. His soothing voice, full of
wisdom, will be missed by the Council, and we wish
him every success in the pursuit of his career.

