Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Wane
for his very detailed and focused briefing.

Today the Sahel region is dealing with a number of
major security challenges, including terrorism, illegal
trafficking and transnational crime, which have effects
that extend well beyond its borders and are a threat to
the region, to Africa and to Europe as well. The recent
tragic events affecting Burkina Faso and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) have reminded us how
serious the situation is, and we offer our condolences to
the families of the victims.

In the Mediterranean, Italy is witness daily to the
effects ofinstability in the Sahel in its continuing efforts
to combat the threats of terrorism, illegal trafficking in
human beings and the criminal networks that manage
them. Destroying these criminal organizations and
stabilizing the region as a whole are top priorities
for Italy. In that context, we believe firmly that close
cooperation with the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is crucial if we are to deal effectively with the
issue, which is why Italy has ramped up its initiatives
in the region. My country warmly welcomed the G-5
Sahel countries' decision to establish a joint force with
the help of the African Union. We are pleased that we
can count on them as partners in our shared concerns.
Their efforts have also been acknowledged by the
Security Council, which supported the joint force's
establishment through its adoption of resolution 2359
(2017) and has encouraged the international community
to back it as well. Italy will continue its support both
bilaterally and within the framework of its action
through the European Union and the Council.
I would like to focus on three aspects that we
consider priorities for cooperation with the G-5 Sahel,
and especially ones that we in New York are in a
position to pursue further.

First, I would like to emphasize the issue of
coordinating our cooperation. I think it is vital to ensure
that the G-5 Sahel joint force is harmonized both with
existing regional initiatives such as MINUSMA and
with international stakeholders in the Sahel such as, for
instance, the European Union, which has been involved
in the region for many years. In that regard, we urge the
G-5 Sahel countries to engage fully in deepening their
dialogue with the African Union.

Secondly, we need a political strategy for tackling
the region's problems. In that regard, I believe that
conceptually, the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel will continue to be a very useful tool, even
if its implementation has been lacking so far. In our
view, the Security Council should work to relaunch it
and include the G-5 Sahel in that effort, since their goals
and those of the Strategy are identical - governance,
security, resilience and development.

Thirdly, we think it is important to consider the G-5
Sahel joint force's financing. Their work deserves the
Council's full support, because they align perfectly with
the United Nations effort already under way through
MINUSMA. The European Union has already shown
its willingness to support the G-5 Sahel countries,
and in our view the United Nations should support
African countries' operations on both the financial and
political fronts.

Resolution 2359 (2017) marked a new stage in the
process of increasing the effectiveness of the interaction
between the United Nations and African regional and
subregional organizations in peacekeeping. We believe
that the concept of African ownership continues to be
a crucial element in this and we stand ready to pursue
a dialogue with the other members of the Council on
the subject of United Nations support to the G-5 Sahel

joint force.

