Mrs. Craft (United States ofAmerica): The turmoil
in Africa is, or should be, the distress of the world. It
is therefore very right that the Chamber consider and
seek to act on the most heartbreaking elements of that
turmoil f the conspicuous entrapment, for it is nothing
less than that, of its young people into the conflicts and
violence of that continent.

Here at the United Nations our countries are
separated by geography and distinguished by our
various cultures, but we share a fundamental and
inescapable commonality - we love our children, with
the greatest love. And so it hits home for me. When
the Council considers the plight of so many children
in Africa and, through the campaign of Silencing the
Guns, seeks a much hoped for harvest of a better future
for them, I think, on a personal level, of my own grand-
children. My mind right now is filled with thoughts of
them. They may be at home, at soccer practice or in
their classrooms, both of them dreaming and working
towards their futures. Those thoughts brighten me. At
the same time, I am saddened by that fact that it is not
the same for every child in every country of the world. I
am saddened by the fact that conflict and poverty leave
so many children open to spectacles of violence and,
worse, that they are drawn into Violence or conflict
and, even, in some cases, forcibly conscripted.

While reflecting on the universal emotions that
all parents share, I bring to this particular campaign a
real sense of urgency. The discussions about youth and
violence are not abstract. They are not some airy policy.
They strike at the very root of our humanity. The United
States lauds African efforts to reduce conflict through
Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the Silencing
the Guns initiative for the betterment of Africa's youth.
Far too often, we discuss peace and security in Africa
as a set of challenges, when what we really need to do is
to view those issues as an opportunity. Why is that? It is
because 60 per cent ofAfrica's population 4 750 million
people - are under the age of 25, with a median age
ofjust 20. Africa is brimming with potential - future
leaders, artists, engineers and entrepreneurs. We, all of
us, just need to find ways to unlock that potential.

Of course, African Governments and regional
bodies play a key role in achieving that goal. Nations
can improve security by adhering to sanctions regimes
that support peace and stability in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan. We urge all States Members of the United
Nations and, in particular, the countries of the region,
to uphold resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2471 (2019).
Preventing the illicit flow of weapons and restricting
the travel of sanctioned individuals will promote long-
term security. African nations should always look for
ways to include the voices of young people as they
build their futures. Unfortunately, some leaders have
demonstrated little willingness to do so. In recent
years, South Sudan's leaders have pursued policies that
benefit a political elite rather than create the conditions
in which young people can flourish. The United
States hopes a fragile peace agreement might improve
conditions for South Sudan's youth, while encouraging
them to exchange weapons for the tools that will help
them build a safer and more prosperous country.

Regional and subregional organizations can act
on their responsibility to aid young people by urging
Africa's leaders to consider their legacies. In turn, long-
serving political leaders must respect constitutional
limits on power, especially those that limit their
terms in office. In addition, the African Union and
the Economic Community of Central African States
should play a larger role in addressing the crisis in the
Anglophone region of Cameroon. For years, the crisis
has kept thousands of children out of school - and it
threatens to spread across a region already beset by
conflict. All parties ought to pay greater attention to
that matter.

But the actions of Governments and regional bodies
are not enough. We must also develop the abilities
that elevate the voices of Africa's youth, which starts
with moving beyond the flawed narrative that young
people are only passive victims or active perpetrators
in conflict areas. In reality, young Africans like Aya
Chebbi, Hafsa Ahmed and Victor Ochen already play
prominent roles, standing up for their political rights
and those of their fellow citizens.

I began my remarks with a reminder of our greatest
commonality - one as old as time and as deep as the
human heart: the love for our children, which feeds
the hope for our children. I will return to that point.
It is immoral to offer and a blot on humankind not
to intercept an inheritance of violence. What each
person in the Chamber feels for his or her own children
should be a guide for what we attempt for the children
of Africa. To protect and nurture a child is the most
noble of all endeavours. It bypasses all our rivalries
and differences.

It is my country's belief that, when young people
see a path to achieving personal dignity and when they
sense or know that they are needed, they find purpose.
Purpose aligned with a sense of dignity leads to both
the abandonment of violence and a chance for success.
Dignity banishes despair. Despair drives, or seduces,
them to violence and its instruments - all before their
lives have really begun.

I believe that every single child rescued from this
hard world is a great achievement. To rescue many, if
we work honestly and vigorously towards achieving
the goal of silencing the guns, will bring moral honour
to the Council. The United States already invests in
the infrastructure of Africa and offers aid. However,
there is the ultimate and primary infrastructure - the
children of Africa. If we reach out and speak to them
and point them towards a star of hope and dignity, it
will surpass any other contribution we may make.
In truth, that is what the Council is really here to
do - invest in futures. Not to help a child is a matter
of tears and shame.

Africa's youth has a leading role play in achieving
the goals of Agenda 2063. Let all of us invest in the
coolest generation so that it might one day see a world
in which the last gun has been silenced.

