Ms. Wensley (Australia): This debate on the
question of sanctions is very timely, coming during a
period of renewed attention both to the humanitarian
impact of sanctions and their effectiveness as an
instrument for dealing with threats to international peace
and security. I would emphasize that these are matters of
immediate interest to all Member States, and we
particularly commend Canada for its initiative in holding
this open debate.

The common criticism that sanctions can be a blunt
instrument is in some respects true. But it is equally true

 

that they remain a necessary instrument and an integral part
of the graduated set of responses available to the Security
Council in discharging its responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. It is a regrettable matter
of historical record that the Council has been forced to
invoke Chapter VII of the Charter on 14 occasions to
impose sanctions on States whose behaviour threatened
peace and security.

Important lessons can certainly be learned from the
United Nations experience with these sanctions regimes.
There is no question that more can be done to render
sanctions more effective, to minimize their humanitarian
impact on vulnerable populations and to target them more
effectively on the political decision-makers in target States.

It is a sad but inescapable reality that innocent civilian
populations will be affected to some degree by the
imposition of sanctions. But it is also important to
remember that much of the hardship suffered by such
populations can also be attributed to the policies of the
target regimes. The Secretary-General reminded us of this
in a recent Council debate when he noted that vulnerable
groups are often victims of their own Governments, as well
as of the measures taken against them by the international
community.

The critical conclusion is that the State in question
must return to full compliance with the decisions of the
Council, so that the sanctions can be ended quickly and its
people allowed to return to a normal life.

Extensive debate and analysis has been conducted,
involving Member States, academics, the business
community, non-governmental organizations and other
representatives of civil society on how to make sanctions
more effective. Many measures have been identified that
warrant careful consideration. These include more clearly
defining in Council resolutions the objectives of sanctions;
ongoing assessment of the humanitarian impact of sanctions
and of other unintended impacts, including on third parties;
more efficient administration of exemptions by the
sanctions committees; and periodic assessment of the
overall effectiveness of particular measures in changing the
behaviour of the target State.

So-called smart sanctions also warrant careful
assessment. In this regard Australia was pleased to
participate in the series of Interlaken seminars organized by
the Swiss Government on targeted financial sanctions,
which produced a number of practical recommendations for
developing and implementing sanctions that would more
effectively isolate the assets of target elites. These,
however, are untested and may not be appropriate in all
instances, but they should be looked at closely by the
Council.

It is axiomatic to say that sanctions can only be as
effective as their enforcement by Member States. But this
underlines two key points: the importance of assisting
countries where necessary with the implementation and
enforcement of sanctions, including drawing up
appropriate laws; and the importance of the Council
taking action quickly to investigate and act upon reports
of violations. There are obvious resource implications
here, and certainly my Government believes that
consideration should be given to augmenting the resources
of the Secretariat available to service the sanctions
committees.

The Security Council has of course already agreed
on a number of steps to improve the work of the
sanctions committees, notably those set out in the
presidential note adopted by the Council in January last
year. But much more importantly, the Council has started
to put these measures into practice. Most telling has been
the work of the Angola UNITA sanctions Committee
under the active leadership of Ambassador Fowler of
Canada, our President. While this is going to be the
subject of more detailed discussion in the Council
tomorrow, we would like to take this opportunity to place
on record our appreciation for the work of this
Committee. Its groundbreaking approach sets an
admirable example, and it offers important lessons for
other committees and for the administration of sanctions
in general.

Finally, Australia supports and indeed welcomes the
decision to establish a Council working group to develop
recommendations for improving the effectiveness of
sanctions. It is a crucially important issue that goes to the
heart of the way the Council discharges its responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We very much look forward to its report in due course.

As a final point, we trust that creative ways will be
found to engage non-Council members in its work. In this
respect I note the element in the decision that the working
group should benefit from all available sanctions
expertise, including by being briefed on case-by-case
basis by appropriate experts. I would simply like to note
that there may be other areas of relevant expertise that
could be called upon, particularly in relation to looking at
assisting Member States in implementing sanctions and in

 

the capacity of the United Nations Secretariat, expertise in
training and capacity-building and human resource
management, in financial and budgetary issues and how to
find the appropriate resources to service what might be the
recommendations emerging from this working group are all
areas where the working group might benefit from looking
beyond the immediate membership.

