Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for having organized today's useful
debate on the relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations. I also want to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing. The complexity of
current crises requires increasingly concerted action by
the United Nations and regional organizations, within
the framework provided by the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular Chapter VIII. In that regard, I
should like to make three observations.

First, regional organizations play an essential and
growing role in crisis management. Their precise local
knowledge and the networks they develop are an asset
in understanding conflicts. Their geographic proximity
allows faster deployment. And the special relationship
they have with crisis States can contribute to the
consolidation of fragile situations.

France encourages the already considerable
involvement of regional organizations in preventing
conflicts, as well as in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Today, African organizations whose efforts are
intended to be integrated into the African Peace and
Security Architecture are taking on more and more
responsibility. They are deploying more operations to
respond to crises. Besides their military involvement,
their political role in mediation and support has also
increased. That is of course an important development.

My second observation is that this mobilization
by regional organizations is even more effective if
undertaken with the various stakeholders, such as other
regional organizations, States, civil society and, first
and foremost, the United Nations. Two examples serve
to underscore this: the strengthening ofties between the
African Union and the United Nations, and the increased
cooperation between African organizations and the
European Union. France welcomes the strengthening
of links between the African Union and the United
Nations through the establishment of a United Nations
Office to the African Union, in 2010, the establishment
of liaison offices in New York and Addis Ababa, and
the institutionalization of annual exchanges between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council.

Regional organizations are also called upon to work
together and support each other. As the Ambassador of
Chad mentioned earlier, the European Union finances
a number of peacekeeping operations - such as the
African Union Mission in Somalia - as well as various
elements of the African Union Peace and Security
Architecture, including the African Standby Force and
the Continental Early-Warning System. To date, the
commitment of the European Union to contribute up to
€450 million to support the implementation of African
Peace Facility for Africa for the period 2014 to 2016 has
almost been fully realized.

Beyond the financial support provided, the
European Union also provides civilian and military
assistance - in Libya, the Niger, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia and Mali. The commitment in Mali, for
instance, shows the extent of the European Union's
efforts, namely, as part of the European Union Capacity
Building Mission for the Sahel and Mali, as well as
its military mission. In that way, the European Union
is helping the Government of Mali to reform and
restructure its security forces. In addition, the European
Union Mission on Regional Maritime Capacity-
building in the Horn of Africa is providing assistance
to several countries of the subregion, including surface
and maritime border protection in order to combat
maritime piracy.

With regard to my third observation, in the context
of increasing involvement by regional organizations,
France supports the recommendations of the Secretary-
General set out in his report of 2 January 2015, as
well as those of the High-level Independent Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations. With regard to
African operations in Mali and the Central African
Republic, the Secretary-General has highlighted
the complementarity of the United Nations and the
African Union. The transition from the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, and from the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
serves to illustrate the comparative advantages of the
two models of intervention - on the one hand, with
regard to the African Union, the rapid deployment of
armed forces capable of offensive operations, and, on
the other hand, with regard to the United Nations, the
establishment of a peacekeeping force equipped for a
longer-term operation with a different mandate.

With regard to the strategic review of peacekeeping
operations, the examples of Mali and the Central
African Republic have confirmed that it is essential
for the United Nations to fully invest upstream in the
definition of an overal framework for coordinated crisis
management, both from the perspective of political
and security considerations. That framework must be
established in close cooperation with other regional
stakeholders, so as to facilitate the implementation
of United Nations standards, the training of regional
contingents and to allow for better awareness on human
rights issues.

Lastly, the sustainability and financial viability
of military operations remain a major concern. Today,
the African Union is highly dependent upon outside
contributions to finance its operations. It would be
fitting for African organizations - as they have
expressed their intention to do - to consistently take
on increased responsibility for the financial burden
of their actions. France stands ready to continue its
efforts and cooperation with the United Nations and all
regional organizations along those lines.

