Mr. Carrera (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Thirteen years have passed since the United Nations
first established a peacekeeping operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My own country
has participated in that Mission as a troop contributor
since 2005; in fact, we lost eight troops in a well-
known incident in Garamba National Park in January
2006. I would like to honour their memory by reciting
their names here: Abelino Pop, Ramon Xi Che, Edgar
Morales Guzman, Valeriano Rax Hul, Calixto G6mez
Pe'rez, Mario Enrique Tee Caal, Teodoro Tilom Paau,
and Orlando Augusto Hernandez Alonzo. Five of those
soldiers were Guatemalans of Mayan descent - Mayans
fighting for peace and security in the Great Lakes
region.

In spite of this long history, the signing on
24 February of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region has opened the possibility of injecting
renewed momentum into the efforts to achieve peace,
stability and prosperity in the Great Lakes region in
general and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular. For that reason today's debate is timely and
relevant, and for that we are grateful to the delegation
of the United States, and in particular to Secretary of
State Kerry, for proposing it and for circulating the
concept note on the matter (S/2013/394, annex). We also
appreciate the gesture of Secretary Kerry of personally
presiding over today's meeting.

We also greatly value the presence of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and President of the World Bank
Jim Yong Kim, and we would like to thank them for
their presentations. We also appreciate the briefings
of Ms. Mary Robinson, United Nations Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region, and the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/387),
which serves as a background document to this meeting,
refers to the relatively encouraging expectations that
exist today that the protracted crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, especially in the eastern part of
the country can, be resolved in the broader context that
shapes the future of the Great Lakes region. Despite
the many obstacles to be overcome, which the report
also openly describes, we agree with the assessment of
the Secretary-General and with the words of Special
Envoy Robinson. I would like to underscore some of the
elements that undergird our cautious optimism.

First, although the Framework for Peace, Security
and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region involves commitments both
for the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and for the other countries of the region, as
well as for the international community, it is clear that
the primary responsibility falls on the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as it should.
That model, with the host country serving as the
main protagonist and the international community in
a complementary role, has emerged as a paradigm of
development in recent times, in particular since the
Paris Declaration.

Secondly, the commitment to address the root
causes of the conflict in a comprehensive and holistic
manner, including the economic, social, political,
governance and security issues, also appears to be
essential if we are to restore stability and overcome the
violence that afflicts the country.

Thirdly, it is encouraging to see the presence of
11 countries and four multilateral institutions involved
in the Framework for Peace, Security and Cooperation.
It is our view that the establishment of the so-called
ll+4 oversight mechanism shores up expectations that
commitments undertaken by all parties will be met.

Fourthly, we commend the partnerships that
the United Nations has built with the regional and
subregional entities of the African continent, in
this case with the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern
African Development Community. We consider the
synchronized and cooperative work of the multilateral
entities, each with its own specific purview, to be of
special importance.

Fifthly, along the same lines, we commend the joint
initiative of the Secretary-General and the President
of the World Bank to undertake a joint mission to
the Great Lakes region and to appear together again
before us. It is difficult to conceive of economic and
social progress without the involvement of multilateral
financial institutions. We are pleased that, in addressing
the problems in a holistic and comprehensive manner,
we are assigning the duties to be addressed, not only
within the United Nations, according to the speciality of
each entity, but also within the United Nations system
and between the latter and other multilateral bodies.
We also continue to hope that the new manifestation of
cooperation between the United Nations and the World
Bank will extend to the agendas of the Economic and
Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
General Assembly. We see the World Bank as not only
the financial arm of development, but also the financial
arm of peace.

Sixthly, as is known, my delegation has expressed
its reservations about the new trend of the Council to
assign peace-enforcement duties to missions conceived
under the cardinal principles that have shaped our
peacekeeping operations, including especially the
principle of impartiality. However, in spite of those
reservations, ultimately we accepted the incorporation
of the so-called Intervention Brigade into the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as the lesser of
two evils, given the imminent threat to the civilian
population by the Mouvement du 23 mars and other
militant groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and with the understanding that this would
be a stop-gap measure. In any case, it is important to
not forget that State-building, democracy building or
even more so with regard to nation building is not a
job for the international community; it is the job of
sovereign States.

In conclusion, I would like to refer to the fact that,
just a month ago, we met here in the Chamber to adopt
resolution 2106 (2013), on sexual violence against
women and children in armed conflict (see S/PV.6984).
In line with resolution 2098 (2013), that meeting, which
was held under the presidency of the United Kingdom,

was fundamental. We should not forget the words
expressed then, which would serve as a guide for peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I hope that we are now on the path towards peace and
that we will continue advancing towards the prosperity
and development of a region that truly needs it.

