Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to thank Under-Secretaries-General
Pascoe and Malcorra for their briefings this morning.
My thanks go also to the Permanent Representative of
Somalia for his statement.

The Security Council is meeting once again to
discuss the situation in Somalia. That situation
constitutes a tragedy that has persisted for nearly two
decades. During those two decades we have seen
fighting among brothers and unjustified bloodshed.
They have been two decades of chaos, with ordinary
Somali civilians dying either from weapons or from a
lack of food and medicine. They have been two
decades of continuous displacement and lack of
security, two decades of fighting fuelling further
fighting and of growing hatred among tribes, with
those able to work facing no alternative but to join the
ranks of the fighters.

These have been long years marked by human
rights violations and by the international community's
inability to intervene effectively and firmly.
Unfortunately, they have also been marked by
interference - whether with good or bad intentions -
from international and regional forces, which has
served only to intensify the conflict and increase the
number of victims.
What is happening in Somalia makes us wonder
why the international community has taken no effective
action. Where is the responsibility to protect, which
was endorsed by the 2005 World Summit? Does the
Somali people not deserve protection from its

tormentors? Does the legitimate Government resulting
from the Djibouti agreement not deserve the support it
needs from the international community? Does the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) not
deserve financial support and equipment from the
United Nations budget? How can the United Nations
fail to allocate the funds and equipment necessary to
help African States that are willing to contribute troops
to bring AMISOM. up to its goal of 8,000 troops? Why
do some States oppose this, even though they rushed to
deploy their warships to the waters off the Somali
coast - at a cost of hundreds of millions of dollars -
when they felt that their own interests were being
threatened, while no State has acted to protect Somali
fish stocks, which continue to be plundered under the
protection of international naval forces for the
enjoyment of restaurant- goers in wealthy countries?

What is happening in Somalia cannot be resolved
through small measures; these might salvage the
Government headquarters or repel an attack by the
opposition. No, this requires full and robust United
Nations engagement in support of the Government in
order to confront those seeking to undermine that
Government. That can be achieved only through the
Organization's regular budget, because the Government
and AMISOM. cannot wage this war on the basis of
voluntary contributions alone.

The international community had a golden
opportunity to resolve the problem of Somalia and
restore peace following the election of Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed as President of Somalia and the
formation of the Transitional Federal Government. But
unfortunately, hesitation in supporting the new
Government only encouraged the opposition to work to
topple it, and they almost succeeded in doing so.

The time has come for us to learn the lesson and
take the opportunity to restore peace to Somalia. To
achieve this, the Security Council must take the
necessary measures to prevent access by Somali
opposition forces to weapons, funds and foreign
fighters. Support must also be offered to the
Transitional Federal Government in order to establish a
national army and capable security forces and to help
the Government impose State control throughout the
country. We believe that this goal can be achieved only
by offering support to AMISOM. and transforming it
into a United Nations mission as soon as possible. At
the same time, we must continue with the political
process within the framework of the Djibouti

09-3985]
Agreement and draft a permanent constitution for the
country.

As for the issue of piracy, in order to eliminate
this phenomenon and enable the Somali people to
benefit from their marine wealth, the international
forces deployed off the Somali coast must protect
Somali marine wealth and combat illegal fishing
operations carried out by foreign companies in areas
under Somali sovereignty. These forces must help
Somali fishermen to carry out their marine activities
freely. There is no doubt that this would contribute to
resolving the hunger problem in Somalia.

In closing, I commend the great efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, in facilitating
the political process within the framework of the
Djibouti Agreement. I would also like to commend the
role being played by AMISOM. and to thank the troop-
contributing countries, namely Uganda and Burundi,
for their sacrifices and their continued commitment to
maintaining the presence of AMISOM. in Somalia.

