Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The candidate countries Bulgaria, Romania, and
Croatia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro
and the European Fair Trade Association countries
Iceland and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.

Allow me first to associate myself with the
condolences expressed here today concerning the death
of Bangladeshi members of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
Congo.

Since the Security Council last dealt with the
question of Timor-Leste, the overall political situation
has remained calm and stable. We congratulate the
Government of Timor-Leste on the tangible progress
achieved in adopting key legislation, in establishing
State institutions and in holding successful local
elections in two districts, the first elections ever
organized by the Timorese authorities. We also
welcome the Government's efforts to meet its human
rights treaty obligations under international law, and to
further improve the relationship between the armed
forces and the police through legislative measures
which are currently being prepared.

Lastly, the European Union would like to
welcome the steady improvement in the relations
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia. We hope that the
increased number of high-level meetings will lead, in
particular, to progress on the delineation of their
common land border.

While we note that a Truth and Friendship
Commission will shortly be established to deal with
human rights violations perpetrated in 1999, we remain
concerned at the lack of progress in the fight against
impunity. Those responsible for serious crimes
committed in Timor-Leste in 1999 must be held
accountable for their actions, in conformity with
Security Council resolution 1573 (2004). In that
context, the European Union welcomes the
establishment by the Secretary-General of a
commission of experts to assess the progress made by
the Indonesian and Timorese judicial authorities.
The European Union commends the invaluable
contribution of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) in ensuring a smooth
transition from peacekeeping to a sustainable
development framework. I take this opportunity to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, for his excellent
work.

While tangible progress has been achieved in
many areas during UNMISET's consolidation phase,
which started in May 2004, we nevertheless share the
assessment of the Secretary-General that significant
challenges remain, and that the provision of
international assistance beyond the expiration of
UNMISET's current mandate on 20 May 2005 will be
crucial for the long-term security, stability and
sustainable development of Timor-Leste. Factors such
as the rapid population growth, combined with a
stagnant economy, could endanger the long-term
stability of the country. Continued assistance from the
international donor community will therefore be
essential to strengthen the Government's capacity to
promote sustainable economic growth and employment
within a dynamic private sector.

For those reasons, the European Union supports
an adequate continued United Nations presence in
Timor-Leste after the expiration of UNMISET's
mandate.

The States members of the European Union and
the European Commission have provided vital
assistance to Timor-Leste, contributing half of the
external assistance given to the country since 1999, in
the amount of €638 million. The support provided by
the Union covers all sectors, and includes budget
support. The contributions of the European Union to
the Trust Fund for East Timor have represented almost
two thirds of the total financial envelope, while budget
support from the Union has represented one third of the
international community's total budget support. The
European Commission has committed €180 million to
support rehabilitation and development efforts in a
wide range of sectors, through the Trust Fund for East
Timor and international agencies and organizations, in
particular the United Nations.

Moreover, as a new member of the African,
Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) States, Timor-Leste, in
the near future, will benefit from the European
Development Fund, which supports members of the
cooperation agreement between the European Union
and the ACP - the Cotonou Agreement. In that
context, financial aid in the amount of €18 million has
been proposed for Timor-Leste for 2006-2007.

Let me conclude by reiterating the European
Union's great appreciation of Timor-Leste's efforts to
build a self-sustained nation based on the rule of law as
well as on a democratic and corruption-free society.
The European Union will remain a steady partner in
that endeavour.

