The Secretary-General: Mr. President, let me
start by warmly welcoming you to New York and to the
Security Council and expressing appreciation for your
having convened this open debate. It could not be more
timely.

A few weeks ago, in the General Assembly, I said
that reintroducing the rule of law, and ensuring
confidence in its impartial application, is an essential
part of resuscitating societies shattered by conflict.

That principle lies at the heart of the report before
the Council today - a report that reflects the
coordinated efforts of more than a dozen United
Nations departments and agencies, based on our own
experience over decades of involvement in this field.

The report reviews the tools at our disposal to
help administer transitional justice and rebuild the rule
of law in conflict and post-conflict societies - from
national justice systems to the support given by United
Nations peace operations; from the International
Criminal Court to ad hoc international and mixed
tribunals and truth commissions; from public-sector
vetting to reparations for victims.

As the report points out, the work of the United
Nations in this field has taught us many lessons.

The first is that, to be successful, peace-building
activities must reflect international norms and
standards. But that does not mean that we should
uncritically import or impose foreign models. One size
does not fit all. Our support needs to be carefully
tailored to the context and based on national
assessments, national participation and national needs
and aspirations.

Secondly, we must be provided with the resources
needed for a sustainable investment in justice. These
resources must help build local capacity, but simply
providing technical assistance is not enough. We must
also help foster and sustain political will at the national
level. We should therefore support domestic reform
constituencies and facilitate national consultations on
justice reform and transitional justice.

Thirdly, we cannot forget the political context.
Peace and stability can prevail only if the causes
of conflict are addressed in a legitimate and fair
manner - causes such as ethnic discrimination, gross
disparities in the distribution of wealth and social
services, abuse of power, and the denial of the right to
property or citizenship. Indeed, justice, peace and
democracy are mutually reinforcing. In fragile post-
conflict settings, our efforts must advance on all three
fronts. That requires strategic planning, careful
integration and sensible sequencing.

Fourthly, our approach to justice must be
comprehensive. We must address the police, courts,
prisons, defence lawyers and prosecutors, and we must
be sensitive to the needs of civil society, including
those of victims, women, children and minorities.

Fifthly, where transitional justice is concerned,
the best approach is usually not an "either/or" choice
between prosecutions and truth commissions. Instead, a
nationally determined combination of mechanisms will
generally work better - including, where appropriate,
traditional justice mechanisms.

In some cases, international or mixed tribunals
have been set up to address past crimes. Those
tribunals have helped bring a measure of justice to
victims, held at least some perpetrators to account, and
helped remove extremist elements from power. They
have also enriched the jurisprudence of international
criminal law. But they have been expensive, and they
have not contributed adequately to building sustainable
national capacities for the administration of justice.

The report notes that the establishment of the
International Criminal Court offers new hope for a
permanent reduction in the phenomenon of
impunity - a hope that will grow stronger with each
new ratification of the Rome Statute.

The recommendations of the report are grouped
together in section XIX. I hope it will serve as a
practical aide-memoire for the Security Council, to
help it pay due attention to the rule of law and
transitional justice as it addresses the conflict and post-
conflict situations before it.

I have not forgotten my own responsibilities and
those of the United Nations departments, agencies,
funds and programmes. The United Nations system is
working on important new tools to help strengthen our
capacities to support the rule of law and transitional
justice. Those include a justice sector mapping guide,
support for the development of model transitional
criminal codes and policy guidance for domestic and
hybrid prosecutions. The United Nations system will
continue to work in the coming months to implement
the recommendations in the report that are directed at
us.

We are ready to play our part and trust that the
members of the Council are ready to play theirs.

