Mr. Zalkaliani (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express my sincere gratitude to the Polish presidency
for convening today's debate. I also thank our briefers,
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General, Judge Hisashi Owada, President
Emeritus of the International Court of Justice, and
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union,
and I would also like to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.

International law and the rules-based international
order are the foundations of a peaceful, prosperous and
just world. The Charter of the United Nations, together
with the wider body of international instruments,
provides a framework for the conduct of international
relations and means to resolve disputes. The principles
of sovereignty, territorial integrity and sovereign
equality of States, the non-use or threat of use of force
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States
are at the core of the rules-based international order.
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations grants
the Security Council the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
on behalf of its Member States. That is why it is so
important that we discuss today, in this Chamber,
how international law is respected and its implications
around the world.

Justice and peace are inextricably linked. For the
past decade, sadly, we have been witnessing a series of
attempts to attack the international order, and at times
to dismantle it, by disregarding the main principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. In
that respect, let me speak to the challenges facing
my country.

Ten years ago, Georgia became the victim of an act
of aggression by a permanent member of the Security
Council following a policy of ethnic cleansing and
meddling in the internal affairs of a sovereign State
for more than a decade. In its decision on the situation
in Georgia, the Pre-Trial Chamber of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) confirmed the international
nature of the 2008 August war and concluded that
the campaign of violence against ethnic Georgians
constituted an attack on the civilian population within
the meaning of article 7, paragraph 2 (a), of the Rome
Statute, thereby attesting that crimes against humanity
had been committed. Notably, following the war, in
blatant disregard of the need to advance the peace
process and ensure an international presence on the
ground, the Russian Federation used its veto power
to dismantle the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia in order to avoid any kind of international
engagement on the ground.

Since the 2008 Russia-Georgia war, the Russian
Federation has been illegally occupying two of
Georgia's regions - Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South
Ossetia - and implementing a policy aimed at the
de facto annexation of those regions. To this day, the
occupying Power is conducting a process of so-called
borderization through the installation of razor-wire
fences and other artificial barriers to divide the country
and to impede the freedom of movement of civilians
living on both sides of the occupation line. Moreover,
the two occupied regions have turned into black holes
in terms ofthe rule of law and respect for human rights.
The recent brutal killing of two Georgian citizens,
Mr. Tatunashvili and Mr. Otkhozoria, is clear proof of
that. Moreover, right now, there are fully operational
Russian military bases illegally stationed in both
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia, each equipped
with sophisticated offensive weaponry.

Against that background, Georgia has persistently
pursued a policy of peaceful reconciliation, conflict
resolution and respect for international law. Consecutive
Governments have pledged not to use force and
reaffirmed their commitment to peace policy initiatives.
Georgia used all the international legal instruments to
seek justice at all levels, starting from the European
Court of Human Rights to the International Court of
Justice and the International Criminal Court. Just
recently, the Government of Georgia declared a new
comprehensive peace initiative - a step towards a
better future aimed at bridging the divided communities
by creating avenues for reconciliation in various areas
of life.

For all those efforts to be successful, international
law and its norms and principles need to be respected
by both sides.

First and foremost, it is vital to commit to
international instruments when we speak about
crimes against humanity. Georgia has declared its
full cooperation with the ICC and the Office of the
Prosecutor, as shown by conducting investigations
on an unprecedented scale and by interrogating more
than 7,000 witnesses. The Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICC opened a local office in Tbilisi last year,
and we are fully committed to supporting the Office
in all its endeavours. However, additional investigative
measures are hampered by the lack of access to the
regions due to the occupation. Once again, we call on
the Russian Federation to ensure the administration
of justice, instead of impeding the investigation and
access to the conflict-affected population.

The aggression against Georgia was not an isolated
incident. Similar patterns were identified six years later
in Ukraine and could be repeated elsewhere. Turning a
blind eye to violations of international law emboldens
the perpetrators anywhere in the world. That is why it
is so important to call a spade a spade.

This year we mark the seventieth anniversary of
the establishment of the International Law Commission
(ILC), with numerous events taking place, including
a special session of the Commission here in New
York. The contribution of the ILC to the development
of international law and the role that it has played in
strengthening the rule of law globally for seven decades
now is immense and of paramount importance.

Furthermore, on 17 July - the Day of International
Criminal Justice - we will celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute. We
will achieve yet another milestone by witnessing the
entry into force of the amendments on the crime of
aggression. In the volatile world in which we all live
today it is vital that we all unequivocally support the
international justice system. The Rome Statute created
essentially a permanent and global institution that
embodies the principles ofinternational law recognized
in the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal and in the
judgment of the Tribunal to fight impunity and to
prevent the most heinous crimes. It is time to reflect on
the challenges, take stock of the achievements and unite
in reiterating "never again".

Let me therefore conclude by calling on the
States Members of the United Nations, particularly
the members of the Security Council, to stand strong
in defending the Charter of the United Nations and in
upholding the principles and norms of international law.

