Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate on
the issue of the promotion and strengthening of the rule
of law. By all accounts, this is the fifth time that the
Council has conducted an open debate on the item -
and rightly so as the primary role of the United Nations
is to maintain international peace and security and to
promote economic development and freedom to live in
dignity. The occasion gives us the opportunity to take
stock of how far we have come and what needs to be
done in closing any gaps.

We have a come a long way. Notably, the Council
has adopted various resolutions on establishing
criminal tribunals, referring situations in certain
countries to the International Criminal Court, sanctions
regimes and resolutions managing the sanctions. In a
couple of months' time, the Secretary-General will
present his follow-up report on the rule of law to feed
into the September high-level meeting. We look
forward to that.

This debate is timely, as we are witnessing
unilateral actions slowly creeping into the international
environment, eroding and undermining our
international multilateral system. The use of force is
slowly replacing the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Operating in a globalized and rules-based world, the
threats that we face are interconnected. We must
uphold the Charter and international and humanitarian
law. Rules must not be used to pursue narrow political
and economic interests.

In looking at today's new and evolving threats,
we need to respond to them with a sense of urgency.
On climate change, which is a threat multiplier for
least developed countries (LDCs) and small island
developing States, a lack of multilateral action until
2020 will see more conflicts emerge over land, water
and food in the coming years.

We must now prepare for the consequences of our
inaction and the costs that come with it. It is even more
disappointing and of concern when Member States
withdraw from their multilateral obligations at a time
when collective security is most needed. My delegation
hopes that the Secretary-General will address that in
his forthcoming report.

As a post-conflict country, Solomon Islands is
assisted regionally by its Pacific neighbours. That
assistance is led by Australia, supported by New
Zealand and all our small island developing Pacific
neighbours, deploying police, legal, military and
civilian support. The assistance over a period of years
has allowed the economy of my country to grow and
enabled Solomon Islands to invest in peacebuilding
and nation-building initiatives. The Regional
Assistance Mission is currently undergoing a
transitional phase. Against that background, I would
like to make the following brief points.
First, just to reiterate what other speakers have
more or less alluded to in their respective statements,
the primary actor of the international system is the
State, of which the authority and legitimacy should be
respected.

The second issue is support for LDCs
implementing their national obligations under
international conventions and treaties. When we speak
of the rule of law domestically, we also refer to the
integration of international law within the country.

Thirdly, strengthening the justice system and
security institutions is critical only to a point if it is not
accompanied with economic development, without
which sustainability for peace becomes fragile.
Resources must be committed in a multi-year format,
thereby making support predictable and available.

Fourthly, there should be special support within
the wider United Nations system for countries that are
dealing with the underlying causes of conflict, as they
move from reconciliation to State-building.

Fifthly, transitional justice in post-conflict
countries should be managed in a flexible manner, so
that it can adapt to the changing situations in countries.

Finally, the United Nations should have a
stronger presence in the LDCs.

Let me conclude by stating that we must look for
new ways to assist countries on the periphery of the
international system and to integrate them more
meaningfully into the global economy. That would
ensure that there are no weak links in our collective
effort to create a safer world for all our peoples.

