Mr. Owada (Japan): At the outset, Sir, I wish to
offer the sincere congratulations of my delegation on the
assumption by Gambia of the presidency for the month of
March, as well as my hearty welcome to you, Mr.
Foreign Minister, to this Council.

I wish also to offer the gratitude of my delegation to
Ambassador Dangue Rewaka of Gabon for the exemplary
manner in which he conducted the business of the
Security Council for the month of February.

During recent weeks the Security Council and the
international community have been engaged in intensive
efforts to cope with the grave situation created as a result
of Iraq's non-compliance with its obligations under
relevant Security Council resolutions. In this regard, Japan
wishes wholeheartedly to welcome the breakthrough
brought about by the recent Visit of the Secretary-General.
Japan believes that the agreement the Secretary-General
secured in Baghdad constitutes a determining step on the
way to the solution of the crisis.

In the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the
Secretary-General and the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq
on 23 February 1998, Iraq has reconfirmed its acceptance
of all relevant Security Council resolutions and has
undertaken to accord to the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) immediate, unconditional and
unrestricted access, in conformity with relevant Security
Council resolutions.

 

This Memorandum of Understanding provides a
framework for the full and unconditional inspection of all
sites by UNSCOM, in conformity with all the relevant
resolutions. May I express the sincere hope that the
finalization of the procedures for presidential sites will be
worked out and reported to the Council as soon as possible,
and that UNSCOM. inspections, with immediate,
unconditional and unrestricted access, will be carried out in
practice.

What is most essential with regard to this whole
achievement secured by the Secretary-General is that all the
obligations contained in this Memorandum of
Understanding be implemented fully. In this context, the
Security Council has an extremely important role to play -
to declare its own position, in the light of its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security, on
the basis of the Memorandum of Understanding which has
been worked out by the Secretary-General in the exercise
of his own competence under the Charter of the United
Nations.

It is for this reason that today the Council, for its part,
is taking action on this draft resolution. We the members of
the Security Council are happy to make the position of the
Council clear in this draft resolution by commending the
initiative of the Secretary-General, by endorsing the
Memorandum of Understanding and by looking forward to
its early and full implementation.

As one of the sponsors of this draft resolution, Japan
wishes to register its position that the purport of the draft
is threefold. First, in endorsing the effort made by the
Secretary-General with the Iraqi authorities, it is the
intention of the Security Council to declare its united
position: that it is giving its full support to the achievement
of the Secretary-General. What is truly important now is to
see the obligations assumed on paper in the Memorandum
of Understanding implemented fully in practice.
Secondly, the purport of this draft resolution, and in
particular its paragraph 3, is to stress that compliance by
the Government of Iraq with its obligations, repeated again
in the Memorandum of Understanding, to accord
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to the
Special Commission and the IAEA is essential for the
implementation of resolution 687 (1991). Together with it,
the Council wishes to register its firm resolve that Violation
in this regard would have severest consequences for Iraq.

In this context, I wish to confirm what I have been
making clear through the consultations: that it is the
understanding of the sponsors that this paragraph is not
meant to address the issue of so-called automaticity. This
point should be clear from the purport of paragraph 3, as
I have explained, as well as from what this paragraph so
clearly states.

I wish also to draw the attention of the Council to
paragraph 5 of the draft resolution, which states that the
Council remains actively seized of the matter, in order to
ensure implementation of this resolution, and to secure
peace and security in the area. The draft resolution simply
is not designed to prejudge the issues of the future.

Thirdly, on the question of the prohibitions referred
to in resolution 687 (1991), the resolution makes
abundantly clear the intention of the Council to act in
accordance with what is prescribed in that resolution. In
this regard, it is the sincere desire of Japan that the day
will come as soon as possible when the sanctions
currently applied to Iraq will be lifted through Iraq's full
compliance with its obligations and other relevant
resolutions, so that Iraq can come back to claim its
worthy place within the international community.

As one of the sponsors of this draft resolution,
working in cooperation with its most competent partner,
the United Kingdom, Japan has spared no effort in trying
to work out a fair and dignified draft resolution that can
demonstrate the unified will of all the members of the
Security Council, in full consciousness of the heavy
responsibility incumbent upon it at this time of crisis.
Japan believes that we in the Security Council have
succeeded in achieving a united voice to seek the full and
unconditional cooperation of Iraq with UNSCOM. thanks
to the very positive and constructive cooperation of all of
its members.

Japan wishes to place on record its deep gratitude to
all its fellow Council members for their cooperation in
making this possible. We have succeeded in
demonstrating the unity of the Council on this most
important question relating to weapons of mass
destruction, which affect peace and stability in the region.

In the light of all these factors, Japan will vote in
favour of this draft resolution.

