Mr. Steiner: First of all, with respect to Obilic,
what took place there was an atrocious crime. A father
of 80 years of age, his wife of 78 years of age and their
son aged 53 were brutally mistreated and murdered. I
was at the site of the crime. I saw the sister of the
murdered son, who arrived on that exact same day
because she had the intention of coming back to Obilic,
where inter-ethnic relations are quite good. She had the
intention of coming back to that place from Serbia
because she was encouraged by the progress. Now she
had to come back under those circumstances. It was
atrocious, no doubt about that.

What has been done after Obilic? With the
support of the leaders of the larger parties, the next day
the community declared a day of mourning. The news
broadcast of the main television station, which is
normally from 7.30 to 8.00, dedicated 20 minutes to
that incident. Not one leader in Kosovo failed to
express himself clearly in condemning the crime.

On the same day, I established a special police
squad, with perhaps the best leader at its head - it
now comprises 16 police specialists - in order to
catch those who are responsible for the crime. But we
must respect the fact that the police can act only on the
basis of the rule of law. The police have to respect the
requirements we want to introduce into Kosovo. Of
course, it is sometimes difficult to get progress under
those circumstances. I hope that we get progress soon.
I can only say that 50 per cent of the work of the Police
Commissioner, Stefan Feller, is concentrated on that
specific issue. We have increased the 24-hour presence
of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I
have offered a reward of 50,000 euros for information
leading to the capture of the perpetrators. We are really
doing everything we can to catch the perpetrator, which
is also in our own interest. I would also like to appeal
to everyone present, specifically those from the region,
not to prejudge the outcome and to avoid any
politicization of that heinous crime.
Secondly, the Council of Europe was mentioned,
which in its most recent report indeed stated that the
political climate is very bad. But let us look at the
reasons that the Council of Europe mentions. The
Council of Europe says that the reasons for this
difficult political climate are, yes, statements in the
Assembly that are not within the mandate of the
Assembly; and yes, for example, the "war values"
resolution to which, as the Council knows, I have
reacted.

But then the report mentions other reasons why
the climate is so bad. It mentions an election campaign
in Belgrade, the withdrawal of the Kosovo Serbs from
the Assembly and the inclusion of Kosovo in the
preamble of the Constitution of Serbia and
Montenegro. It also mentions a change of policy in
Serbia, the constant demands for the partition of
Kosovo, divisive statements from politicians and
provocative language concerning the possibility of a
renewal of hostilities.

This is what we have to see: I think if we want to
have the right political climate, all the political leaders
have a responsibility to leave the past behind. I am
thinking along the lines of the statement on return that
we have mentioned here, and which so many Council
members have also welcomed.

I would like briefly to address three points that
were mentioned by Council members. The first was
Spain's mention of what we are doing about parallel
structures. In a functional way, parallel structures are a
problem mainly because they are still financed. When
we found out that the financing of the parallel
structures from the outside was occurring clandestinely,
the director of the tax administration wrote a letter to
his counterpart in Belgrade, making it clear that the
clandestine money coming over the boundary line into
Kosovo represented a violation of the money-
laundering provisions enforced in Kosovo. Therefore,
we must make it clear that if any more money comes in
that is not publicly declared to the UNMIK institution
- money coming in clandestinely, financing parallel
structures - we have to react in accordance with the
provisions of the money-laundering legislation.

Secondly, Mexico raised the issue of the policy
on privatization. Last year, at the rightful insistence of
the Council, after long negotiations, we finally agreed
on a concept for how privatization can work in Kosovo,
taking into account, first, the fact that the issue of
status has not been solved and, secondly, the fact that
no one knows who owns socially-owned companies.
There are all sorts of legal opinions from lawyers. Our
conviction was that if we waited until the question was
clarified, all assets in the form of socially-owned
companies would be stripped and there would no
longer be any assets. We had to react. We had to start
privatization.

We therefore had the legislation that was agreed
upon by lawyers from United Nations Headquarters,
the European Commission and the World Bank. We
have a concept that takes care of the interests of the
potential owners of socially-owned companies and
which respects the fact that the issue of status is not
solved. However, privatization must provide an answer
to the question of what happens to the land used by
socially-owned companies. There cannot be
privatization if no answer is provided on how land is to
be used, because that is the most valuable asset. We
have discussed this very difficult question with lawyers
of the European Commission, the World Bank and, of
course, United Nations Headquarters. We arrived at a
concept affirming that there would be no transfer of
land when carrying out privatization, but that it would
be done in the form of 99-year leases. Economically,
that represents the same value as a property transfer,
but it still respects the fact that the issue of ownership
has not been resolved and still respects the residual
property rights of the potential owner, whom we do not
know.

Privatization without addressing what is done
with the land on which a socially owned company is
sitting is not privatization. It makes no sense. No one
buys a company whose land cannot be used. It has no
value without the land. So we had to address that, and
we have addressed it in a way that, I think, is
satisfactorily under the legal requirements and the
ownership requirements of potential owners. Andy
Bearpark, the pillar leader, was in Belgrade; we
discussed this with the responsible minister of the
Government in Belgrade and there was agreement on
it.

The final concept, before we issued the
regulation, was voted on by the Board of the Kosovo
Trust Agency, which is responsible there. All
ethnicities are represented on that Board, including a
Kosovo Serb representative. They all voted in favour,
including the Kosovo Serb Minister for Agriculture,
who is the Serb representative. We did this in full
transparency and in a way that can work, if one really
wants to have privatization.

Let me also address the point mentioned by the
Russian representative concerning an article in Bota
Sot, one of the newspapers there. It was an atrocious
article, which alleged that Russia might be behind the
Obilic murders, which, of course, was absurd. We
reacted to that. We have a Media Commissioner. The
Media Commissioner called in the newspaper Bota Sot.
What has consequently happened is that the author of
the article is not writing anymore and has been fired
from Bota Sat, and the newspaper has officially
apologized for the article. So our interest is, of course,
if we have incidents like that - violations of
fundamental rules of behaviour - that the Institutions
should react; that there be an appropriate internal
reaction. We had that in this case; the person who
wrote the article was removed from the newspaper. The
newspaper has officially apologized for the attack, and
I hope that the representative of the Russian Federation
will take note of that action. We were concerned, as he
was. I also acted publicly when I saw that article.

At the end of my time in Kosovo and after this
remarkable meeting of the Council, whose support
from all sides I am very grateful to receive, let me
make one final point.

What are the lessons to be drawn from what we
are doing in these peacekeeping situations? What are
the lessons that we can draw from Kosovo over the past
four years? I think that the main lesson we can draw is
that, if we do it right, it can be done. It will take a long
time, but it can be done. One of the preconditions is
that the parties should see that if we try to stay the
course, despite the criticism from the various sides, we
are supported by the international community, and in
this case especially by the Security Council We are
confronted by centrifugal forces on the ground, which
is no surprise, because the parties have different views
on Kosovo's future. In that situation, it is absolutely
crucial for us to be able to say that we have the support
of the international community. One cannot
overestimate the power of general consensus coming
from the central organ of the international community:
the Security Council. That was my daily experience in
Kosovo and throughout the region. That is, in the end,
our real strength as a mission on the ground, because,
in the end, we are an instrument of the Security
Council and we are there to execute its policy and
attain its goals.

I think what concerns the international
community and those who guide us and who have
dispatched us-andlthink this is the most important The President (spa/[e in Spanish): I thank

lesson - is that, if you start to do something, you have Mr. Steiner for his clarifications and thoughts offered
to finish it. In that sense, I would be very grateful if the at the end.
Council would extend to my successor and to the
members of this mission, who work hard on the
ground - and no one sees what happens on Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, under circumstances that are not
the best, as is known - the support given to me during
this year and a half to my successor and the mission.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 11.711.
