Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Carmel
Agius, and the Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz, for
their briefings to the Council today.

At the outset, as this is the first meeting of the
Council which Judge Agius has attended as President
of the Mechanism, I would like to congratulate
him formally, on behalf of the United Kingdom,
on his appointment. We commend the priorities he
has identified for his presidency and welcome the
opportunity to work constructively with him, just as we
did with his predecessor, Judge Theodor Meron, whose
significant contribution as President we recognize.

Today, as has been noted, we mark the Day of
International Criminal Justice. Support for international
criminal justice and international humanitarian law is a
fundamental element of the United Kingdom's foreign
policy. We believe that justice and accountability for
the most serious crimes of international concern are
crucial to building lasting peace and security and to
ensuring protection of human rights for all.

In January 2018, the Residual Mechanism assumed
fully its responsibilities for the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), alongside it
responsibilities for the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR). Since then, the Mechanism
has continued to achieve commendable progress in

carrying out its mandate. It has delivered continuity in
a wide range of functions, including the trials of the
most senior fugitives from justice, the enforcement
of sentences of those convicted - in this respect, the
United Kingdom was pleased to voluntarily assist the
Mechanism by enforcing one of these sentences - the
protection of victims and the preservation of archives.
In doing so, it has guaranteed the legacy of the ICTY
and the ICTR.

Yet, the Mechanism continues to operate under its
revised and significantly reduced budget for the 2018-
2019 biennium. As has been highlighted previously,
that has led to reduced staffnumbers and resources, and
utility and service cuts. Nevertheless, the Mechanism
has been determined to continue to fulfil its mandate
effectively and efficiently, and we are pleased that
it continues to take the necessary steps to make
this possible.

We would recall the introduction of the Mechanism's
expenditure reduction plan and downsizing policy,
both of which the Registry is continuing to develop and
implement so as to ensure that the Mechanism remains
on track to deliver its mandate in a fiscally responsible
way in the face of budgetary constraints. However,
we do need to remind ourselves of the breadth of the
functions the Mechanism properly carries out. Along
with its judicial functions, the importance of its other
functions must also be recognized, and we therefore
must to be mindful of the need to balance cost-savings
with effectiveness. The United Kingdom remains
committed to supporting the Mechanism for the
remainder ofits mandate and calls on others to continue
to provide the support the Mechanism needs, whether
financially, logistically or politically.

We are following the developments in the Arusha
branch with interest, including the ongoing contempt
case of Turinabo et al., as well as awaiting the outcome
in the Ngirabatware review. We note that a number of
Rwandan fugitives are still at large, and we call on all
States to cooperate with the Prosecutor in his bid to
have those fugitives transferred to the Mechanism. We
also hope that States will assist with a solution to the
problem of relocating the nine released and acquitted
persons in Arusha.

Turning to The Hague, we welcome the outcome of
the Karadzie appeal earlier this year. The increase in
Karadzie's sentence for crimes that include genocide,
from 40 years to life in prison, sends a powerful
message that those who carry out such atrocities will
be held accountable for their actions and sentenced
accordingly. We also note the progress made in the
Mladic and Stanisic and Simatovic' cases, and are
pleased that these are due to conclude by the end of
next year.

While some progress has been made, the limited
regional judicial cooperation between the countries of
the former Yugoslavia still thwarts access to justice for
many victims. The Mechanism can completely fulfil
its mandate and deliver justice to victims only through
the collective efforts of those countries. The joint
declaration on war crimes, signed at prime ministerial
level at the London Western Balkans Summit last year,
underlined the importance of supporting and removing
impediments to effective regional cooperation, while
strengthening cooperation with and seeking the
assistance of the Residual Mechanism. We urge the
countries concerned to work closely with each other
and the Mechanism, in particular the Office of the
Prosecutor, to ensure accountability through effective
cooperation. The United Kingdom is proud to support
that objective with projects in the region.

Lastly, but perhaps most importantly, April marked
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide
and next year will see the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Srebrenica genocide. The anniversaries of these
two devastating atrocities should lead us to reflect on
the great contribution of the ICTY and the ICTR, and
now the Mechanism, to ensuring that the perpetrators
and instigators are held to account. While completing
these trials will not bring back the thousands who were
killed or erase the grief oftheir families, it sends a clear
message that there will be no impunity for those who
commit such crimes.

Twenty five years on, however, genocide denial for
both atrocities continues. This is unconscionable and
reprehensible. It is a direct threat to the maintenance of
stability in both regions. We therefore hope that Council
members and Member States will join the United
Kingdom in supporting the Mechanism's measures to
fight genocide ideology and its zero-tolerance approach
to genocide denial in all its forms.

