Mr. Annabi: I believe that the first question was
asked by the Ambassador of Bulgaria, who inquired
about whether or not the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has a
mechanism to monitor the way in which the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government are
discharging the responsibilities that have already been
transferred to them. Such a mechanism does in fact
exist, as there are UNMIK staff working within the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. Of course,
as responsibilities are transferred some of those staff
become redundant, and there is an ongoing reduction in
their numbers. But we do maintain sufficient staff to
perform the residual functions that have not been
transferred, as well as to perform oversight and
monitoring functions on a continuing basis in order to
assess the way that transferred powers are being
discharged and to enable UNMIK to intervene where
necessary.

I believe the President asked the second and third
questions. They related, first, to the freedom of
movement and the impact that the reduction in military
and police escorts has had. UNMIK and KFOR believe
that the reduction in police and military escorts has not
led to a deterioration in security conditions. At the
same time, we are aware that there is a perception on
the part of some minority community members of an
increased possibility of security incidents. That
perception has prompted them, in some instances, to
restrict their movements. I think that can explain the
apparent discrepancy to which the President was
pointing.

The President's second question related to the
Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) and the fundraising
undertaking by a local non-governmental organization
known as the Friends of the KPC. We agree that the
majority of those funds probably come from Kosovo
Albanians. I do not think that is an issue, but,
regardless of where the funds come from, UNMIK and
KFOR have the responsibility to ensure that the KPC
continues to act and develop properly and in
accordance with the mandate that has been given to it.
They consider that whatever fundraising activities take
place, those activities should not hamper their efforts.
They are determined not to allow that to happen and to
ensure that the KPC continues to work and develop in
accordance with its mandate.

I think the Permanent Representative of Serbia
and Montenegro asked the next set of questions. The
first question related to the transfer of responsibilities
to the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. I
think that in my presentation I described in some detail
how those powers would be transferred and what their
limits would be. I also stressed that the pace of transfer
under the powers referred to under chapter 5 of the
Constitutional Framework will be a function of the
capacity of the local authorities to effectively discharge
the responsibilities transferred to them. Wherever there

are instances where the Provisional Institutions go
beyond the letter or spirit of resolution 1244 (1999)
and the Constitutional Framework, UNMIK will
certainly intervene, as it has done in the past, and
pronounce itself on whether those initiatives are
consistent with the resolution and the Constitutional
Framework. It will also declare them ultra vires as
necessary, as it has in the past. Such actions would be
reported to the Security Council, which would then
determine how best to respond.

I think the next question pertained to the concrete
steps that UNMIK is taking, or should take, to stop
incidents of increased violence. Paragraph 21 of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/42l) covers in
some detail the additional measures taken by UNMIK
and KFOR to stem incidents of violence. The situation
is not perfect, and I think the report is quite candid
about that. But we believe that the additional measures
detailed in paragraph 21 can help to control and
improve the situation.

Finally, I think the third question from the
Ambassador of Serbia and Montenegro related to the
KPC and to the measures that UNMIK intends to take
to ensure that the KPC acts in line with its mandate. I
can assure him, as I said just a while ago, that UNMIK
and KFOR will continue to work together closely, and
to watch closely the activities of the KPC, with a view
to promoting and ensuring compliance with its
mandated activities. In fact, a Civil Protection
Development Group has been formed, as indicated in
paragraph 48 of the Secretary-General's report, with a
view to improving coordination and developing tasks
for the KPC that are in strict compliance with its
mandate. At the same time, we have been quite candid
in the report about some of the difficulties that UNMIK
and KFOR are encountering with the KPC. Whenever
there are cases of non-compliance they are taken
seriously. UNMIK and KFOR will continue to take the
necessary disciplinary measures whenever the need
arises.

