Mr. Moragas sanchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by
the observer of the European Union.

Spain advocates for an active and robust role for
the United Nations in conflict prevention, political
mediation and conflict resolution. This Organization
has a unique added value, the product of its broad
legitimacy amd its extraordinary ability to open avenues
to dialogue in multiple scenarios. With that it has been
able to create an unstoppable dynamic of peace.

We believe that current crises must be tackled with
a more realistic and effective approach. That means
that all the parties concerned must make courageous
decisions. In that regard, we appreciate the direct and
frank tone of the report of Lieutenant General dos Santos
Cruz on the security of United Nations missions. The
document has the virtue of departing from bureaucratic
rhetoric and focusing on a transparent analysis of the
issues. The ensuing action plan and mission reviews
will strengthen an approach that seeks not to assign
blame but to find common solutions. That said, I have
six brief observations with regard to the Secretary-
General's reform of the peace and security pillar of the
United Nations

First, we must strengthen the systems for mission
planning and operations. We must ensure that the legal
basis for missions, their mandates, are adapted to the
reality of a particular crisis and are clear and orderly in
their implementation. The interested parties must have
measurable goals, through performance indicators,
that respond to conditions that are decisive, defined
and attainable.

Secondly, we must reinforce capacities. Current
crises demand new capabilities. Concepts such as
force protection, appropriate predeployment training,
combating improvised explosive devices, intelligence,
offensive capacity, adequate equipment and an
effective system of lessons learned, among others,
are of particular importance in this context. Mission
contingents are not United Nations armies, as the
Secretary-General rightly noted this morning in his
statement, but neither should they be a mere collection
of capacities or a disparate accumulation of troops. We
must have an acceptable level of force cohesion and
interoperability, and that is a challenge that we must
tackle together.
Thirdly, we must optimize resources. The
current crises require us to look for synergies among
international organizations, regional organizations and
other bodies operating in conflict zones, including the
security and defence forces of host States. In the Sahel
region, the bilateral operations and European Union
operations - the European Union Training Missions in
Mali and the Central African Republic - are successful
examples that show the viability of this approach. The
work of all of those missions has benefited the United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. We must continue and deepen the search for
those complementarities.

Fourthly, we must strengthen the political
dimension of missions. The achievement, maintenance
and consolidation of peace should be the result of
a structured and continuous process that meets its
objectives through realistic strategies until it arrives at
a stable and sustainable State. We must ensure that the
institutions of the host State can design their own future
and maintain their own security. We need to establish
clear exit strategies for missions. In short, politics must
always be a permanent and cross-cutting dimension
in the actions of the United Nations, because we all
know that the United Nations must not and cannot do
everything, everywhere, or at all times.

Fifthly, if there is no force protection, the force
cannot protect civilians. The majority of current
missions have a wide range of mechanisms aimed at
supporting States in their responsibility to protect
civilians. The strengthening of national capacities
to ensure the necessary accountability for atrocious
crimes is included in their mandates. That is why
predeployment training and the identification of threats
at the planning phase are essential. Spain also calls
for the inclusion of a gender perspective in all phases
of a mission, and we welcome the work being done
by child protection and women's protection advisers.
Their interaction with the parties to a conflict is key
to achieving changes in the mindset of State actors and
armed groups. We believe that more women should
be deployed in peace missions and in leadership
positions, as outlined in Security Council resolution
2242 (2015), not only because women have added
value in the protection of civilians, but also because
of the unquestionable role they play in early warning,
capacity-building and contributing to the development
of more cohesive and inclusive societies.
Finally, we should all support a zero-tolerance
policy in cases of exploitation and sexual abuse. The
legitimacy of the United Nations and the ultimate
purpose of the missions are at stake. That is why Spain
has signed the Compact introduced by the Secretary-
General. The current President of Spain, Mariano
Rajoy Brey, is a member of the circle of trust to combat
this phenomenon.

I should not conclude without expressing the
unequivocal and decisive support of Spain for the
work done by the human rights components of these
missions. Considering the risk before us that a world
undergoing change could become a world in decline,
the United Nations is now more necessary than ever.
This Organization is facing the major challenge of
committing to in-depth reform that is multidimensional,
coherent, timely, bold and balanced. Our most universal
Spaniard, Miguel de Cervantes, said that "to change the
world is not utopia or madness. It is justice". I recall
that today in particular because the reform that we are
undertaking is essential.

