Mr. Ikoube (Congo) (spoke in French): I should
like, first of all, to thank the delegation of Qatar for the
manner in which it led our work last month. I would
also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
January. You can count on the full cooperation of my
delegation during your tenure.

I should like to express my sentiments of
friendship to those countries that left the Council at the
end of last year - countries with whom we had
excellent relations - and to welcome the new
members; they can rest assured of the full cooperation
of the Congolese delegation.

I should also like to welcome the Secretary-
General, who is participating in our work for the first
time, and to extend to him our wishes for every success
as he carries out his lofty and sensitive mission.

My delegation welcomes the fact that the Council
is beginning 2007 by holding this public debate on a
subject that is intrinsically linked to its major mission
in an international context characterized by many grave
crises. We are therefore grateful to you, Mr. President,
for having chosen this item for discussion in the
Council.

Some of the events of 2006 remind us that there
are threats to international peace and security on
various continents. They range from acts of everyday
terrorism to the very real risk of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, as well as protracted or
potential conflicts. Those threats thus represent a daily
reality for the international community as a whole and
a constant danger for certain populations that live in
fear and under threat. Let us therefore take full stock of
those threats and ensure that we always make the most
appropriate responses to them, which the Council never
fails to do.

The best way to deal with threats to international
peace and security is, first of all, prevention. We are
pleased to note that the culture of prevention is
beginning to take root within the United Nations and in
certain States. In that regard, significant progress has
already been made at the normative level with the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1318 (2000)
and, particularly, resolution 1625 (2005), on
strengthening the effectiveness of the Security
Council's role in conflict prevention, particularly in
Africa. Here, we should also commend the General
Assembly for its recent adoption of a Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, to whose implementation all States
should commit themselves.

In the Outcome document of the 2005 World
Summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1), Member
States renewed their commitment to promoting a
culture of preventing armed conflicts and strengthening
the means of prevention available to the Organization.
In addition, many strategies have already been
indicated in our previous work on this issue. It is
important to ensure regular follow-up.

We also note that, as the Secretary-General stated
in his report on the prevention of armed conflict
(A/60/89l), the surest way to prevent crises is to
reduce the impact of risk factors. While the primary
responsibility for prevention falls to Governments, they
sometimes find it impossible, for various reasons, to
live up to their obligations. Hence, there is sometimes
a need to rely on external support - for example, in
the context of the adoption and implementation of
measures aimed at regulating the trade in certain
resources that fuel conflicts, such as diamonds and
timber.

Among settlement mechanisms, we would stress
political dialogue among the parties to a conflict and
the good offices of the Secretary-General. That practice
has been developing recently, and we encourage it. We
always encourage the search for peaceful solutions, and
we will assist the Secretary-General in his mediation
efforts. In that context, the new mediation support
capacity within the Secretariat is an initiative that we
welcome and support.

Unfortunately, when prevention is not enough, we
must face up to a sad necessity: conflict management,
through existing mechanisms or those yet to be
established. That includes the strengthening of
peacekeeping capacities - which, it must be stressed,
lack the resources necessary to carry out their
missions- and partnerships within the system and
with regional and subregional organizations.

In that connection, we welcome the positive
developments in the relations between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council, as evidenced by the recent
declaration on cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union defining the framework for a
10-year programme to strengthen African Union
capacities, signed on 16 November 2006 at Addis
Ababa by the United Nations Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission. But
as everyone knows, the will and the commitment of the
African continent are not always enough to meet
logistical or management needs in certain situations as
complex as that of Darfur, for example. Hence the need
for such a partnership, which is vital for maintaining
peace and security on the continent.
The year 2006 also reminded us that the threat of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is not
a mere possibility, but rather a reality that can be
effectively addressed only through compliance with the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), which establishes obligations, but also rights,
for all signatories. Indeed, it is essential to implement
that important instrument in full - that is, by taking
into account its three pillars: non-proliferation, nuclear
disarmament and the right of every State to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy.

Weapons of mass destruction are and will always
be a threat to humanity as a whole, regardless of who
possesses them. In the fight against the threat posed by
such weapons, the unity of the Council is essential, as
are its objectivity and impartiality. Otherwise, its
action risks being misunderstood and suspected of
being illegitimate.

Once again, we wish to welcome the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
has just taken its first, tentative steps. We hope that
that organ will effectively strengthen the system for
stabilizing situations and will help to improve, in a
lasting manner, the atmosphere in areas emerging from
conflict. We also wish to emphasize the need to take
account of the development and human rights aspects
in any conflict prevention policy, as recommended by
the Secretary-General in his report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa. We must emphasize
that for some peoples, extreme poverty, hunger, disease
and small arms and light weapons represent real
weapons of mass destruction and thus pose threats to
international peace and security.

