Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: Since the briefing by the
Deputy Secretary-General to the Security Council on
1 March 2014 (see S/PV.7I24), the situation in Ukraine
has continued to evolve rapidly. We understand that
there is a continuing build-up of Russian troops in
Crimea and that a number of Ukrainian military bases
have been surrounded by Russian troops. In addition,
the situation in eastern Ukraine remains fluid, with
reports of demonstrations in certain cities and attempts
by local groups to seize control of some official
buildings.

On Sunday, 2 March, Ukraine's Parliament urged
Russia to fulfil immediately the terms of the agreement
on its Black Sea fleet's temporary presence in Ukraine's
territory and called for the rapid withdrawal of Russian
troops to their bases. The Russian position on events
was articulated by Foreign Minister Lavrov in remarks
made today in the Human Rights Council. Foreign
Minister Lavrov stated that Russia's actions in relation
to Ukraine were "a question of defending our citizens
and compatriots and ensuring human rights".

The Secretary-General has remained closely
engaged on the situation in Ukraine. In the latest
telephone conversation with President Putin over the
weekend, on 1 March, the Secretary-General told him
that he was closely following the serious and rapidly
unfolding developments in Ukraine. The Secretary-
General expressed grave concern about the continuing
tense situation that could compromise the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.
He reiterated that it was critical to restore calm and
proceed to an immediate de-escalation of the situation
and asked for cool heads to prevail. The Secretary-
General appealed to President Putin to urgently engage
in direct dialogue with the authorities in Kyiv.

As members of the Council know, the Secretary-
General has repeated emphasized that it is critical
that full respect for and preservation of Ukraine's
independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity be ensured. He has underscored the utmost
importance of restoring calm in order to de-escalate
tensions immediately through dialogue. He has stressed
that, in the spirit of the United Nations Charter, we
should all adhere to the principles of the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

Following the Security Council's consultation on
Saturday and given the developments on the ground
in Ukraine, the Secretary-General asked Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson to travel to Ukraine
on Sunday. While in Ukraine, the Deputy Secretary-
General will be personally apprised of the facts on
the ground and will subsequently brief the Secretary-
General on the next steps the United Nations could
take to support the de-escalation of the situation. The
Deputy Secretary-General arrived in Kyiv today and
has already begun his meetings. Robert Serry, who
briefed the Secretary-General yesterday in Geneva on
his recent mission to Ukraine, joined Mr. Eliasson in
Kyiv today.

Over the past 48 hours, the Secretary-General has
spoken to a number of key people, including Prime
Minister Cameron, President Hollande, President Putin,
European Union High Representative Ashton and the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Burkhalter,
as well as OSCE Secretary General Zannier. He also
met with Foreign Minister Lavrov today in Geneva.
In all these calls and meetings, the Secretary-General
reiterated the urgent need for coordination in support of
a stable and united Ukraine.

In conclusion, I Wish to reiterate the Secretary-
General's call for dialogue to de-escalate the tensions
immediately. As the Secretary-General has underscored
in his calls to world leaders, all of us share the urgent
responsibility to assist in finding a peaceful resolution
in a collaborative effort.

