Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I too would like to
thank you, Sir, for your presidency. I cannot do so in
as dignified a way as Ambassador Matjila did, but I
mean it. I was very happy to find when I entered the
Chamber this morning that you had the curtains open.
I see that they are closed again. I do not know if that
is due to pressure from the Secretariat or to the very
sombre subject on today's agenda.

Before I come to the substance of my statement, let
me comment a bit on what United States Ambassador
Cohen said with regard to the Syrian representative. I
can only fully support what he said, but at the same
time I have to ask him: "What do you expect? What
do you expect from the representative of a Government
that bombs its own citizens, that drops barrel bombs
and chemical weapons indiscriminately on its own
citizens? What do you expect from the representative
of a Government that puts its people in prisons where
they are subjected to torture and death? The photos
of Syrian prisons that we have all seen are about the
worst we have ever seen. What do you expect from
the representative of a Government that continuously
bombs humanitarian aid workers and says that White
Helmets and humanitarians are terrorists?" That is
something that we totally object to and reject, but we
are not that surprised.

What I was more surprised by was what the Russian
representative just said. He said that the approach we
are taking here - the approach of putting emphasis
on human rights and international humanitarian law;
of seeking a political solution; of not accepting sexual
violence against women - is an outdated approach. I
do not want my children to grow up in a world like that
which he imagines. I want my children to grow up in
a world where humanitarian law and human rights are
respected, where we look for a political solution and
where we do not bomb indiscriminately.

Let me come to the point. Again, I fully support
what Geir Pedersen said and subscribe to the way
forward. I can also only echo his concern with regard
to the military offensive in north-western Syria. It is
unacceptable that there continues to be indiscriminate
air strikes, shelling and barrel bombs. Again, we are
seeing the deaths of innocent civilians. In the fight
against terrorism, nothing justifies the indiscriminate
bombing of civilians or attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Anyone who does not believe me should
talk to Mr. Voronkov, the Russian Under-Secretary-
General of the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism. He clearly says that respect for human rights
is key in the fight against terrorism.

The Russian representative said earlier that all
aerial attacks are against intelligence-confirmed
targets. What kind of intelligence is being used when
clearly identified cars, belonging to humanitarian aid
workers and carrying patients from another attack, are
bombed and killed by the Syrians or their allies on their
way to the hospital? Are these targeted killings? Are
these intelligence-confirmed targets? What happens to
the pilots when they come back to the base? Are they
decorated, or do they go to court?

So, there is no military solution; there is only
a political solution. All parties must comply with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). Geir Pedersen works very hard
and is working on the 3+3 or 4+2 formulas. I must say
that when one looks at the paragraphs of the various
agreements, it is not that important whether we are
using the 4+2 or 3+3 formula, because a two-thirds
majority, I believe, is needed to take action. So, in the
end, that is only a technical move.

If our Russian friends would only - for one, two
or three days - agree to stop their military support and
intelligence until the Syrian Government agrees to a
certain formula and consents to go to Geneva, that would
happen right away. I can only say what Mr. Pedersen
does - that Geneva has to be supported and that the
political process has to advance. There can be no
military solution. Even ifthe Syrian regime decides to
try to kill everybody in Idlib, there can be no military
solution. There has to be a political solution. Geneva is
one element, but the other necessary element in Syria is
reconciliation. That is only possible ifthere is an end to
the arbitrary arrests, killings, torture, sexual violence,
disappearances and denials of humanitarian assistance.
Only then will the return of refugees be possible.

I say to our Russian colleague that we will work
for the preservation of sanctions as long as the Syrian
regime does not change its brutal behaviour against
its own population. The sanctions are not outdated;
we want to preserve them as long as necessary. We
welcome the fact that the Arab family is not welcoming
Syria back as a member of the League of Arab States,
but is keeping the regime out. We very much appreciate
that the League is upholding the values that I spoke of
at the beginning of my intervention.

