Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation would like to
extend a very warm welcome to Mr. Ante J elavic, Chair of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the
Members of the joint Presidency, Mr. Alija Izetbegovic and
Mr. Zivko Radisic. Their presence here among us in the
Council today is indeed a historic occasion. Their presence,
as far as my delegation is concerned, symbolizes the
continuing commitment of the leadership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to work together to bring to a close a dark
chapter of the country's history and to bring the country
back to its rightful place in the family of sovereign States.

My delegation also joins others in mourning the tragic
deaths of personnel of the World Food Programme in
Kosovo.

My delegation wishes to thank the Chair and the
Members of the Presidency of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for their briefings on the current situation in
their country, which we find extremely useful. We are
gratified that there has indeed been some progress in the
peace implementation process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, further strenuous and sustained efforts are
required before Bosnia and Herzegovina will enjoy self-
sustaining peace and stability and emerge from the
protective care of the international community.

A number of fundamental common State institutions
have been constituted and begun to function, albeit with a
number of constraints. We believe that with the necessary
political will, these impediments can be overcome. The
statements just made by the Members of the Presidency
attest to their commitment and genuine desire to overcome
them and to continue to work together towards realizing a
shared vision of Bosnia and Herzegovina as an independent,
unified, multi-ethnic, multicultural and multireligious State
within its internationally recognized borders.

Much remains to be done to resolve the remaining
critical problems and to ensure that peace and stability
will be further consolidated and will endure in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The return of refugees and displaced
persons, in particular the return of people to areas in
which they are in a minority, reconciliation among
different ethnic communities, minority protection and
economic reforms and recovery are among the main
outstanding problems that have to be urgently and
comprehensively addressed to facilitate the establishment
of a viable statehood for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The international community has made the return of
refugees to all parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina one of
the highest priorities. This is imperative for reconciliation
in the country. Like others, we are concerned by the very
slow pace of the return process. Last week the High
Representative informed this Council that if the current
slow tempo of return continued the process would take at
least 22 years to be completed in the Federation, and 40
years in the Republika Srpska. Clearly, new approaches
need to be taken to address this issue, with, of course, the
full cooperation of the leadership and people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, so as to bring about more tangible
results.

There are a number of other challenges that still
have to be overcome. They include the continuing
entrenched positions of certain groups and parties and the
deep ethnic divisions that still exist. The situation
demands greater efforts on the part of the leadership and
principal forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina to achieve
increased democracy, tolerance and reconciliation among
the different ethnic communities. My delegation believes
that the assertion of the political and moral authority of
the Presidency will contribute significantly to developing
a positive environment. In this regard, my delegation
warmly welcomes the New York Declaration issued by
the joint Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Malaysia's own experience as a multi-ethnic,
multicultural and multi-religious country has convinced us
that tolerance is the indispensable ingredient for co-
existence and nation-building. Malaysia is proud to have
been associated with the efforts to rebuild peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In addition to our programme of
bilateral cooperation, until last year Malaysia participated
in the United Nations Protection Force, the
Implementation Force and the Stabilization Force (SFOR),
and our civilian police personnel continue to serve with
the International Police Task Force (IPTF).

 

As part of our contribution to the national
reconciliation efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina - with
encouragement from the Bonn Peace Implementation
Conference and funding by Canada - Malaysia organized
a non-governmental forum in Kuala Lumpur in August last
year. The objective was to expose the participants from
Bosnia and Herzegovina to Malaysia's own experience as a
multi-ethnic, multi-religious nation. We found the forum
extremely useful in providing fresh perspectives and
approaches to promoting trust, confidence and tolerance in
a plural society. While the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is vastly different from that in Malaysia, we
believe that there may be lessons to be learned from the
Malaysian experience in multi-ethnic living.
We commend the ongoing work of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the IPTF, in
particular the Mission's efforts aimed at establishing a
viable political force and judicial system in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also commend the High Representative's
recent measures relating to the package of property
legislation reforms and the introduction of a new draft
election law, as well as the ongoing work on the
establishment of a State border service. We are gratified
that these important new measures have the full support of
the Presidency, Government and people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as they constitute essential elements for
national reconciliation, democracy and security.

The success of international involvement in Bosnia
and Herzegovina can only be guaranteed if there is a strong
commitment of and full cooperation from the Bosnian
leadership and the people at every level. Ultimately the
main responsibility for achieving reconciliation and lasting
peace in the country lies with the leaders and people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina themselves. At the same time, a
durable peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina requires the full
cooperation of its neighbours.

My delegation underscores once again the important
role of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, and emphasizes the necessity of continuing
support from the international community for the Tribunal.
We believe more serious efforts should be taken to bring
the indicted war criminals to justice. The continued freedom
enjoyed by the leading indicted war criminals sends the
wrong political message and contributes to the climate of
insecurity that limits refugee returns, particularly in
minority areas. The arrest and prosecution of these indicted
war criminals would not only serve to mete out justice, but
would also contribute to accomplishing the long-term goal
of national reconciliation, which alone can guarantee Bosnia
and Herzegovina freedom from the ghosts of its tragic
past.

We urge all concerned in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as the Office of the High Representative and
SFOR, to work more closely with the Tribunal in the
fulfilment of its mandate. My delegation welcomes the
clearly stated position of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on this important issue.

Finally, I would like to express my delegation's deep
appreciation to you, Sir, and to your delegation for
making possible the convening of this truly unique and
historic meeting of the Council.

