Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and, in the
process, underscoring Australia's prominent leadership
on this issue.

Without a doubt, terrorism remains an issue of
pressing and shared concern. Today's world bears
witness to terrorism in its modern form, eschewing
borders and authority, propagating indiscriminate
violence, and finding refuge and support in fragile
States, in vulnerable communities and, as the
representative of Kyrgyzstan emphasized much earlier,
among the disenfranchised. Terrorism brings real but
not insurmountable threats that demand our collective
action. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and terrorist entities associated with Al-Qaida bring
those threats into sharp relief. Their barbarous acts,
described yesterday by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights as "monstrous" crimes (see S/PV.7314),
are well documented and sometimes vividly and
provocatively displayed with appalling deliberation.
Foreign fighters are further exacerbating the problem
as bearers of extremism, often into areas between
conflict zones.

New Zealand therefore welcomes the resolve of the
international coalition with its comprehensive strategy
to combat ISIL in Iraq. In the short term, military
action to halt ISIL's advance is vital, but long-term
solutions will require much more. They will require
support for inclusive governance in Iraq, a political
solution to Syria's violent stalemate and measures to
counter ISIL's narrative of violent extremism. We
therefore welcome Iraq's shared commitment to tackle
that difficult problem.

Like South Africa's representative speaking
just before me, New Zealand supports the four-pillar
approach in the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy: addressing conditions that spread
terrorism, preventing and combating terrorism,
counter-terrorism capacity-building and respecting
human rights and the rule of law. We also urge States
to draw on mechanisms provided by the Council itself,

such as the Al-Qaida sanctions regime for stemming the
flow of individuals and entities that fund and carry out
terrorist acts, and we urge States to share best legislative
practices to deal with terrorism-related offences. States
must share enforcement and operational information
and must increase the effectiveness ofnational, regional
and international coordinating mechanisms. Shared
problems require shared solutions, so New Zealand was
very pleased to support the comprehensive approach of
resolution 2178 (2014) on foreign terrorist fighters.

New Zealand's approach to combating terrorism
is based on a coordinated, whole-of-Government
response, including working at the grass-roots level to
build resilience to radicalization and to recruitment.
We also draw on our own domestic experience to
support our regional and international partners in
countering violent terrorism, and we provide support
to counter-terrorism capacity-building efforts through
community policing, border control, civil aviation and
the detention and reintegration of terrorist detainees.
The Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, mentioned by
others, facilitates cooperation between States on those
issues. Its best practices and guidelines for countering
violent extremism and terrorist fighters and for the
adjudication of offences are an excellent resource, and
we urge States to contribute to them and use them to
guide their work.

Terrorism threats also demand that we work
together to confront the problem at the political level.
Specifically, in that regard, we agree with Guatemala,
South Africa and others that we must make progress on
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
New Zealand looks forward to next year's discussion
directed towards moving discussions on that topic
forward.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for calling and
convening this debate. The Council must be not only
a reflective but also a decisive body for international
decisions regarding terrorism, and New Zealand
commits itself to contributing to all such discussions.

