Mr. Williamson (United States of America): My
delegation wants to thank the President of the Security
Council for putting this important topic on our agenda.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his very useful
report on children in armed conflict and for his
statement this morning. We thank also the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Olara Otunnu, for his important
work and for the progress he has helped achieve in this
area.

The use of children as combatants is one of the
worst aspects of contemporary warfare. Young girls
and boys are especially vulnerable to exploitation
during warfare and its aftermath. They are unable to
protect themselves, and they are stripped of their
opportunity for better lives. Over 300,000 children are
used in government or rebel forces in more than 30
armed conflicts around the world. These children serve
as soldiers, runners, guards, sex slaves and spies.

Our children are our future. Allowing their
exploitation in armed conflicts does irrevocable harm
to them, and it diminishes the future for all - robbing
a people of the future leaders they will need to
reconstruct their society when the conflict ends;
scarring the next generation that a society needs to
reconcile and find justice when the killing stops;
distorting the next generation's perspectives and
diminishing the contribution it can make to rebuild the
economy and social structure; and often irreparably
harming the child's opportunity for a healthy,
productive and normal life. We therefore have a special
responsibility to make extra efforts to protect the
children caught in the destructive cauldron of armed
conflict.

The United States has been supporting, and wants
to continue to support, the important efforts to end the
use of child soldiers contrary to international law. We
want to support efforts to end the exploitation of girls
and boys in armed conflict.

In his report, the Secretary-General touches upon
a number of areas in which children today tragically
suffer as a consequence of their exploitation in armed
conflicts. As noted in the report, when war displaces
families and communities, children often spend their
entire childhood in camps, where they are at risk of
exploitation and forcible recruitment by armed groups.

In armed conflicts, girls and young women are
present in many of today's fighting forces. These child
soldiers - boys and girls - are the result of a cynical
exploitation that exacerbates the violence and great

suffering endemic in any conflict. We must do better to
protect the human rights of children caught in armed
conflict. We must do better to protect their future.

The United States strongly supports setting 18 as
the minimum age for compulsory recruitment by State
actors and for recruitment or use in hostilities by non-
State actors. We also support having States take all
feasible measures to ensure that members of their
armed forces who are under 18 years of age do not take
a direct part in hostilities.

We support the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict as
he works to obtain commitments for the protection and
well-being of children in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

The United States supports the principle that
child protection should be an explicit feature in
peacekeeping mandates and, where appropriate, that
child protection advisers be part of United Nations
peace operations.

The United States supports the working group on
child protection, training for peace personnel, and
developing training materials that can be adapted to the
mandate of peace operations and employed to train
military police and civilian personnel.

My delegation was pleased to learn of the
progress that is being made to implement various
Security Council resolutions to protect children in
armed conflict. As the Security Council discussed
during its deliberations last fall on the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is especially
important that humanitarian access by State or non-
State actors be allowed, consistent with humanitarian
law.

The United States joins others in opposing the
illicit commercial exploitation of natural resources in
conflict zones. We must be mindful to mitigate the
adverse impact on children. In the Interlaken
declaration of 5 November 2002, the United States
joined 47 other Governments pledging to eliminate
conflict diamonds from international trade through the
implementation of a global rough diamond certification
system.

The United States applauds the progress by
regional and subregional organizations in making
children and armed conflict a priority concern in their
policies and programmes.

I turn now to the one of the most important
aspects of the Secretary-General's report. For the first
time, in response to a Security Council request - in
resolution 1379 (2001) - this report from the
Secretary-General explicitly names Governments and
armed groups that recruit or use child soldiers in
violation of their international obligations. Such public
exposure can be a powerful tool to expose violators,
hold them to account and, hopefully, better protect
children in armed conflicts.

The list names 23 armed parties to conflicts in
five countries: Afghanistan, Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Liberia and Somalia. Let me
comment briefly about each of these.

Significant positive progress has been made in
Afghanistan since the inception of the Bonn process
just over one year ago. As the Secretary-General's
report notes, the Afghan National Army will not recruit
underage soldiers. Despite the use of child soldiers by
factions, the lives of Afghan children have improved
markedly. Since October 2001, America's Fund for
Afghan Children has raised $11.4 million, including
more than $1 million in the past three months. Refugee
and internally displaced children are perhaps
Afghanistan's most vulnerable. The United States has
donated more than $145 million over the past year to
assist in resettlement.

Although Burundi has not received the same
attention as Afghanistan, the situation there is
extremely volatile, and the international community
must be vigilant in preventing a catastrophe on the
scale witnessed by Burundi's neighbour in the recent
past. There have been encouraging developments, but
circumstances in Burundi are still such that children
continue to be exploited as combatants. Our work
towards any peace agreement to prevent inherent
instability and danger should prohibit the use of
children in armed conflicts.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo we have
witnessed the sad exploitation of children in war over
the past few years. Human Rights Watch reports that
official communication from the Government has
called on children between 12 and 20 years old to
enlist. Meanwhile, rebel groups have habitually
recruited children to aid their causes. While the task
before us is difficult, it is important. There are ways to
help these victims. There are ways to improve
opportunities for exploited children. For instance, the
United States continues to support the work of the
Displaced Children and Orphans Fund and the Patrick
J. Leahy War Victims Fund, both of which offer grants
to rehabilitate children soldiers in the region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and around the
world.

The Government of Liberia's flagrant failure to
adhere to international law is a major factor
contributing to the ongoing instability in West Africa.
The armed forces of Charles Taylor, the President of
Liberia, and the militias he has backed have a record of
recruiting underage children. As long as his
Government continues to support civil strife in West
Africa, the threat to the region's children is real, the
damage great. The international community must be
vigilant.

In Somalia, the situation is just as grave. Reports
have indicated that boys as young as 14 and 15 years
old have participated in militia attacks. Faction leaders
recruit young boys to serve as personal bodyguards.
Yet the situation could get worse if the international
community does not make an extra effort to protect
those children. Some recent estimates suggest that
there are at least 175,000 internally displaced children
in Somalia. This ongoing tragedy cannot be tolerated.
We must do better to ensure that these children are not
subject to exploitation.

As I noted, explicitly naming Governments and
armed groups that recruit or use child soldiers, in
violation of their international obligations, can be a
powerful tool in our efforts to protect children in armed
conflict. These obnoxious practices cannot stand the
light of scrutiny. The perpetuators of the abuse of
children in armed conflict want to remain in the
shadows, hidden from scrutiny, protected from
accountability. Our moral and legal obligations compel
us to force these harmful practices, these damaging
activities, into the light of day. Impunity in this area is
unacceptable. The crushing consequences on children
in armed conflict must be ameliorated. A better future
depends on it; a society's reconciliation, justice and
opportunity after the killing stops require it.

The Secretary-General's report is a good start in
response to the Security Council's request for a list
drawn from countries currently on the Security
Council's active agenda. However, some of the worst
violators of children in armed conflict are not included
on the list, even though they are mentioned in the
report. For example, Burma is an area of concern. It is
thought to have the largest number of child soldiers in
the world. Human Rights Watch recently reported that
there is widespread forced recruitment of boys as
young as 11 in Burma. Reportedly, children are
routinely picked up on the streets, forced into the army,
and never see their families again. According to
Human Rights Watch, many children are forced to fight
against armed ethnic opposition groups and to carry out
human rights abuses, such as rounding up villagers for
forced labour, burning houses and even massacring
civilians. Armed opposition groups forcibly recruit
young children.

In Uganda, the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
has waged a civil war against the Government of
Uganda since the mid-1980s, and has abducted
between 10,000 and 16,000 children from northern
Uganda to serve as soldiers. Children are forced to
participate in acts of extreme violence. Girls as young
as 12 are given to commanders as wives. Some
abducted children have managed to escape, while
others have died from disease, mistreatment or combat
wounds. In recent months, reports of abductions have
risen. One non-governmental organization estimates
that 4,000 children have been abducted just since June
2002.

Colombia's children have long been caught up in
the country's devastating conflict, including some
6,000 to 14,000 who are currently used as soldiers by
armed groups, paramilitaries and militias. Boys and
girls, some as young as 8 years old, are often recruited
forcibly and used as combatants, spies, human shields,
messengers, porters, kidnappers, guards, cooks, sexual
companions or slaves, or for placing and/or removing
bombs. Girls in armed groups and in paramilitary
groups are particularly at risk for sexual abuse.

Clearly, the abuse of children in armed conflict
goes beyond the scope of the Secretary-General's
current report. And clearly, we have a moral
responsibility, a moral imperative, to leave no child
behind. We cannot ignore the damage to children in
armed conflicts, wherever that devastation occurs.
Therefore, the United States would like to see the
Secretary-General submit a list to the Security Council
next year of the worst abusers of children in armed
conflicts, not limited to countries currently on the
Security Council's agenda. And the United States
would like to see active monitoring of those that have
already been named.

In conclusion, let me again thank the Secretary-
General and Olara Otunnu for their good work and
contribution in this area. It is extremely important. Our
children are our future. We must be more vigorous and
more vigilant in working to protect children in armed
conflict.

