Ms. Schmid (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you personally, Mr. President, and the Togolese
presidency for having invited me to take the floor on
behalf of the European Union (EU) during this timely
and relevant debate. It is an honour to be here today.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
for their insightful remarks. We can only agree with all
the important issues they have brought to the fore. The
United Nations can count on unwavering support from
the European Union to move our common, ambitious
agenda forward.

Following the end of the cold war in the 1990s,
West Africa has undergone a process of
democratization, which has been consolidating over the
years. Importantly, West African States are currently
involved in a solid regional integration process. The
European Union views those regional integration
mechanisms as key pillars for bringing peace, security,
stability and prosperity to the region.

But despite those important strides, the countries
of the region still face daunting challenges, ranging
from challenges to democracy, including human rights
violations, weak governance and corruption, to
security, economic, environmental and humanitarian
challenges.
Those threats, especially in combination, could
send the region's security and humanitarian situation
into a deteriorating spiral. Indeed, across the Sahel

region of western Africa, a combination of drought,
poverty, high grain prices, environmental degradation
and chronic underdevelopment threatens to plunge
millions of people into a new food and nutrition crisis
this year. Twelve million people are at risk of hunger.

The European Union has already taken rapid and
determined action to prevent famine in the Sahel. We
are scaling up humanitarian assistance to
€125.5 million for the Sahel region. Combined with at
least €150 million of development assistance, that
brings European Union funding for the Sahel so far this
year to almost €275 million. However, it is estimated
that €700 million will be required to cover the next six
months. Overall, and despite many decades of effort
and international aid, the situation remains very
worrying.

Against that backdrop, we would like to
congratulate Togo for its proactive approach and for
having put the issue of organized crime so high on the
agenda of its presidency. This is an important and
urgent subject for the United Nations. But it is also a
very important matter for the international community.
These problems also seriously affect us all. Our duty is
to raise awareness of these threats to peace and
stability. It is also in our common interest to maintain
and step up action in West Africa in the years to come.
The European Union is already acting on these
challenges, and it stands ready to play its role and stay
the course.

The European Union has well-established and
highly substantial cooperation with the region, and it is
firmly committed to continuing to support West Africa
in facing its challenges. Ours is a comprehensive
approach, in partnership with the region, covering all
the main challenges related to organized crime. That
includes the Sahel and support in the fight against
drugs and piracy, to recall some important examples.

For the Sahel, the European Union has recently
adopted a comprehensive Strategy for Security and
Development to support the countries most concerned
by the problems of insecurity. The Permanent
Representative of Pakistan has already referred to it in
his remarks. It is an ambitious strategy, in partnership
with all the European Union member States as well as
with the countries of the region. It is endowed with
substantial political and financial resources covering
political, security, development and diplomatic action.
It is a strategy building on the principle of ownership
and promoting regional cooperation among the most
concerned countries.

The EU is also considering possible civilian
action in the region within the realm of our Common
Security and Defence Policy. But the main
responsibility and leadership lies with the Sahel
countries concerned.

The fight against drug trafficking is a critical
challenge for West Africa. The region has given itself a
promising action plan, based on the Praia Declaration
against drugs. It is essential that it now be translated
into concrete action. The EU has made clear its firm
determination to support the region's efforts to
implement the plan, and we are liaising with the United
States as G8 Chair and with other partners to
coordinate and maximize the impact of our support.
But the main burden is on the region's shoulders; it
must lead the fight, with the unfailing support of the
European Union and the rest of the international
community.

Piracy off the coast of West Africa is a growing
problem. Escalation in both the frequency and the
intensity of attacks on citizens and trade is causing a
significant decline in customs and port revenues, as
well as damaging the prospects of the subregion. The
EU is already taking action to help the region to
confront that scourge. For example, we are funding
INTERPOL's development of a police information
system for Ghana and Benin. Under that system, a
single data base on organized crime will be created and
will be made available to all 15 West African States.

Other possibilities for supporting the subregion
are currently being explored. Again, West African
leadership will be essential at both the national and
regional levels to confront this important challenge
successfully. Under the same principle of regional
leadership and ownership, we fully support and
welcome the increasing involvement of the Economic
Community of West African States in confronting
security and development challenges.

To conclude, let me underline our common
objective to have a stabilized, more peaceful,
democratic and prosperous West African region, an
area safe for people and trade, where local governance
is improved, wealth is better distributed and benefits
from the natural resources reach local communities.
Continued and deepened regional integration should
result in effective institutions and common policies in

support of peace, stability and governance, thereby
increasing prosperity. Significant improvements in
good governance and human rights will also be
essential in order to address the root causes of
insecurity.

The EU remains deeply committed to helping
West Africa, in partnership with its countries and its
regional organizations.

