Mr. Mwamba Kapanga (Spoke in French): The
current meeting of the Security Council on the situation in
Africa is an initiative of the Government and of the
representative of the Netherlands, President of the Council
for the month of September. Allow me, first of all, to
express my delegation's warmest congratulations and our
gratitude for this praiseworthy initiative.

Like the others who have spoken before me, my
delegation would like to tell the Secretary-General that it
greatly appreciates the report (S/ 1999/ 1008) that he
presented on the situation in Africa, which sheds much-
awaited light on the subject of our statements here. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo also notes the wish
expressed by various speakers on the necessary cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), which must take root and be improved if we
want to deal effectively and in a concerted manner with the
many security problems that impose enormous and
undeserved suffering on the African States.

As the head of our delegation, Mr. Yerodia Abdoulaye
Ndombasi, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, said in his statement yesterday in
the general debate of the General Assembly at its fifty-
fourth session, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
been experiencing an armed aggression since 2 August
1998 described by the Secretary-General of OAU as
pointless and senseless. This aggression is forcing enormous
sacrifices on the innocent people of my country, whether
they reside in free areas or in occupied provinces.

My delegation does not wish here to go back over this
shameful, senseless war of aggression, whose notorious
history is known to you all. The suffering and destitution
that it is imposing on our people, already bruised by three
decades of civil chaos and poverty, should provoke
universal revulsion and lead the international community to
lend all its weight to putting an end to this quickly: the
credibility of the United Nations depends on it.

Although we are the victim of this unjustified
aggression, from the very beginning of this war the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has nevertheless
sought peace. This is why it has attended all the meetings
organized in Africa and elsewhere in the world to discuss
a negotiated end to it. The Rwandan and Ugandan
aggressors, however, were conspicuous by their absence
at most of these meetings, or used delaying tactics to
prolong their occupation of our territory.

As you know, Mr. President, on 10 July 1999,
following very difficult negotiations conducted by
President Chiluba under the aegis of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and the Organization
of African Unity, the heads of State of the six countries
involved in this war of aggression signed in Lusaka,
Zambia, the Ceasefire Agreement for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, commonly called the Lusaka
Agreement. Practical modalities and a specific timetable
for implementation of the Agreement are annexed to it
and form an integral part of it.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo attaches
particular importance to the implementation and success
of the Lusaka Agreement, which states the need to find
solutions to the security concerns of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as well as those of its neighbours.
This concern has already been expressed by my
Government by organizing in May 1998 the conference
on solidarity and development in the Great Lakes region,
a conference that was unfortunately sabotaged by those
now attacking us.

My Government reaffirmed this concern within the
framework of the Lusaka Agreement, in accepting the
establishment of a mechanism to disarm militias and
armed groups found in our territory. The Agreement also
urges the countries of origin of the members of these
armed groups to commit themselves to taking all the
necessary steps to facilitate their repatriation. The
assistance of the United Nations in this process is very
much needed. In giving such assistance, the world
Organization would help to prevent aggressor countries
from finding a new pretext to attack the Democratic
Republic of the Congo again once their troops have been
withdrawn from Congolese territory and their withdrawal
has been verified.

I categorically deny the false allegations made here
and the nonsense spoken by the Rwandan delegation, to
the effect that the Interahamwe militias had been
integrated into the Congolese armed forces. Until 2

 

August 1998 the Congolese armed forces were led by
senior Rwandan officers, who were incapable of flushing
out the least of the Interahamwe. Since then the Rwandans
have occupied the north-eastern part of our territory,
through which the Interahamwe have supposedly passed in
order to attack Rwanda. Thus far the Rwandans have not
produced a single Interahamwe militia member, dead or
alive.
To return to the Lusaka Agreement, I would like to
draw the Council's attention to the fact that, as during the
negotiations, immediately after the signing of the
Agreement the aggressors resumed their diversionary tactics
in order to delay its implementation as long as possible.

Due to an alleged dispute over the leadership of the
so-called rebels, we had to wait 51 days - until 31 August
1999 - for them to sign the Agreement with the support
of their sponsors, since Presidents Museveni of Uganda and
President Bizimungu of Rwanda, in person, announced the
news of the signing to their peers in SADC, meeting at the
SADC summit in Maputo, Mozambique.

Since then nothing stipulated in the Agreement has
been implemented. Rather, the aggressors are using the
Agreement as an excuse to prolong indefinitely their
presence on our territory. The Joint Military Commission
remains a dead letter, despite the appointment of its
Chairman, because the so-called rebels have still not chosen
their representatives and the necessary funds have yet to be
released. The inter-Congolese national dialogue has still not
begun, and the question of choosing facilitators has yet to
be resolved, since the aggressors have yet to follow up on
my Government's proposals. Nor has any withdrawal of
troops to defensive positions been observed.

Defying the truce called for by the Secretary-General
for the national vaccination days Rwandan and Ugandan
troops carried out a fratricidal war on our territory, in
Kisangani. A great deal of infrastructure was completely
destroyed and 3 million doses of polio and smallpox
vaccine were lost, threatening our children with lifelong
disabilities. But the Democratic Republic of the Congo
condemns above all the death of more than a hundred
innocent Congolese victims in Kisangani. The town will for
ever mourn their deaths.

Despite the signing of the Lusaka Agreement by all
the parties, the Rwandans and Ugandans continue to mass
troops, military equipment and heavy weapons around the
mining towns of our country, such as Mbuji-Mayi, Beni
and Butembo. They continue to appoint governors of
provinces. They even raise customs barriers within
provinces they occupy, link these provinces and their
cities, establish and use air connections, and so forth, thus
carrying out their wicked intention of partitioning our
territory. All these activities are taking place under the
eyes and within earshot of the international community.
The United Nations and the OAU - which are parties to
the Agreement, and whose charters are obviously being
violated - making the slightest protest, even though, by
resolutions 1234 (1999) and 1258 (1999), the Security
Council reaffirmed the need to respect the territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

How can we explain to our African populations this
new source of despair, involving their being daily
discriminated against and marginalized by international
institutions, in political, humanitarian, economic and
military interventions?

The Council knows full well the costs to the
international community of the humanitarian intervention
to aid European refugees, from Bosnia and Kosovo, with
those incurred to help African refugees, from Somalia,
Sierra Leone, the Sudan, Angola or the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. There is no need to point out the
speed with which decisions have been taken to intervene
to end conflicts in Europe, Asia or the Middle East; the
dazzling speed at which enormous financial, material and
human resources are assembled; and the precision with
which the missions of the forces are defined, within the
framework of Chapter VII of the Charter.

How can we not note strongly and with indignation
that when it is a question of an African conflict the
Security Council cannot decide, or does so haltingly? It
often cites budgetary reasons for not being able to
mobilize the necessary financial, material and human
resources. It discharges its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security by
entrusting it to the OAU, which must both come up with
the necessary resources and define the missions of
hypothetical buffer forces.

Finally, the Council is aware that, in Europe, Asia or
the Middle East the deployment of United Nations forces
ends only after a political solution imposes on the warring
parties respect for the relevant provision of the Charter of
the United Nations. In Africa, on the other hand, the
tragedies in Somalia and Angola - to mention only those
two - show that the deployment and hasty withdrawal of
United Nations forces allows situations to worsen and
exacerbates conflicts.

 

In describing this situation, far be it from my
delegation to cast aspersions on our world Organization.
Prominent world figures, such as the President of the
French Republic, Mr. Jacques Chirac, and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Sadako
Ogata, have recently and on various occasions raised this
issue in order to draw the international community's
attention to this glaring and unbearable injustice.

Thus, my delegation reaches out to such Africans as
the President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-
General to tell them that the peoples, nations and countries
of Africa cannot understand how, under their shared
mandate, Africa remains the unbeloved wallflower of the
Security Council with respect to the settlement of armed
conflicts. They have the important and noble task of
sounding the alarm to wake the United Nations from its
stupor, so that the goal of peace and harmony does not
remain for our peoples, nations and countries a mere dream,
which, as everyone knows, is the guardian of sleep.

By Security Council resolution 1234 (1999),
unanimously adopted on 9 April 1999, the United Nations
clearly established that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a victim of its neighbours' aggression. Rwanda,
Uganda and Burundi are thus in clear violation of the
United Nations Charter, which every Member is called on
to respect and defend. The Government of my country takes
note of Security Council resolution 1258 (1999) of 6
August 1999.

My delegation wishes to reiterate the words of
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who writes in his report
S/1999/790:

"The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has inflicted further terrible suffering on a
country already heavily burdened with poverty and
neglect. An estimated 700,000 persons are displaced
within the country, in addition to some 300,000
refugees located on its territory... The conflict has
been characterized by appalling, widespread and
systematic human rights violations, including mass
killings, ethnic cleansing, rape and the destruction of
property... The international community and the

United Nations should therefore do everything in their

power to assist the Congolese Government, parties and

people, as well as the other Governments involved, in

achieving a peaceful solution." (S/J 999/790, paras. 15'-  14)

My Government makes a solemn and emotional
appeal to the entire international community in general,
and to the Security Council in particular, inviting them to
become fully involved in the immediate implementation
of the Lusaka Agreement so as to put an end to the
untold suffering of my people. The Security Council
must, first, exert firm political pressure on the aggressors
to respect the ceasefire and to compel them to withdraw
their troops and arms from Congolese territory and to go
home; secondly, proceed to the rapid and massive
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; and thirdly, assist in
the rapid organization and successful convening of inter-
Congolese political negotiations.
My delegation should like to conclude by saying
quite simply that a Congolese national is no different
from a national of Kosovo or East Timor. He has a head,
eyes, arms, legs, hair. Like the national of Kosovo or East
Timor, the Congolese national is a human being. He, too,
has the right to life; he, too, has the right to expect his
fundamental rights to be respected. The colour of his skin
does not make him a sub-human being. When the
international community feels that certain reprehensible
acts are unacceptable in this waning century, it is obliged
and duty-bound to prevent them from being committed
and perpetuated in my country.

