Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his briefing today. We have
taken note of his third report to the Security Council,
submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 1970
(2011).

At the outset, I should like to mention that
Pakistan is not a signatory to the Rome Statute or a
member of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
However, we acknowledge the rights and obligations of
the States members of the ICC.
The situation has evolved in recent months. The
two remaining individuals for whom the Court had
issued warrants of arrest have been apprehended. We
have also noted the admissibility challenge filed by the
Government of Libya regarding one case under
article 19.2(b) of the Rome Statute. We take note of the
desire of the Libyan authorities that the two individuals
should be tried by Libyan courts.

The Pakistan delegation has also noted that the
Prosecutor has implemented article 19.7 of the Rome
Statute by suspending the investigation into Mr. Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi activities until such time as the
Court makes a determination on the issue of
admissibility. We also take note of the fact that, in
accordance with the principle of complementarity, the
Rome Statute clearly establishes that the International
Criminal Court is meant to be complementary to
national jurisdictions and that primacy is to be given to
national action. That point was also made by the
Prosecutor in his briefing today.

We therefore hope that the request of the Libyan
authorities to investigate and try these individuals will
be considered positively. We look forward to a decision
of the judges of the Pre-Trial Chamber on the
admissibility of the case before the ICC. In case the
trials of these individuals are conducted in Libya, the
Libyan authorities must guarantee that their legal rights
will be protected and that due process of law will be
respected. As regards investigations initiated by the
Court concerning other alleged crimes committed in
Libya, we expect that the Prosecutor will conduct
thorough and impartial investigations.

Let me conclude by recalling that the overall
objective of the Council and the international
community is to promote durable peace and stability in
Libya in the best interests of the Libyan people.

