Ukraine highly appreciates the initiative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to hold this important debate and expresses its gratitude to all the briefers for their presentations. The idea of addressing the contemporary risk factors and their implication for the entire security context, which is already overburdened with unresolved problems, is worth supporting. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has explicitly shown how dramatically newly emerging challenges could complicate our efforts to address the long-lasting threats. Health emergencies, food insecurity, environmental degradation, climate change and cyberthreats are only a few of those new challenges that could be turned into conflict triggers. Given the fact that most of those triggers take no notice of national borders or economic growth rates, we fully agree with the assumption made in the debate's concept note (S/2020/1064, annex) that new challenges to international peace and security must not be addressed in isolation of each other. Regrettably, the practical effect of the international efforts to respond to the contemporary threats and challenges remains insufficient. One explanation is that, along with meeting the new challenges of the twenty- first century, we are still compelled to confront the threats of past times - armed aggression against sovereign States, occupation and attempted annexation, as well as violations of international law. We all know that the coronavirus poses a higher risk to people with other health problems, and prevention, as well as treatment, must also address accompanying and often complicating diseases in order to be effective. That is similar to what we are experiencing at the global level. COVID-19 has attacked the international order at a time when its immune system - international law - has been weakened by regular and flagrant violations. It is therefore clear that an effective remedy to the pandemic, as well as other contemporary drivers of insecurity, such as climate change, would hardly be possible without a proper and adequate response to the security threats stemming from armed aggression and the attempted annexation and militarization of occupied territories. Bearing in mind the aforementioned threats, one of the main drivers of international instability is the ongoing erosion of the international rules-based order. That is our common problem, which requires the unified efforts of all nations. Consequently, it is in our mutual interest to address this issue so as to prevent some countries from exploiting such a situation in pursuit of their aggressive policies on the international arena. That is particularly the case for Ukraine, which is facing Russian armed aggression and illegal occupation of a part of its territory for the seventh year. Ukraine has on its hands an international armed conflict, which was spawned as a result of outdated geopolitical reflections of the past and the aspirations of a State making a conscious decision to completely ignore the principle of the sovereign equality of States enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The readiness of the aggressor to violate international law for political, economic and territorial gains remains the most dangerous and disastrous driver of conflicts. The number of killed and wounded in the Russian aggression against Ukraine, illegally detained and missing people in occupied Crimea and Donbas are all but testimony to that. We fully share the concerns mentioned in the debate's concept note about the possible forced displacement of as many as 250 million people due to climate change by the year 2050. In that regard, it is worth recalling that 1.5 million Ukrainian citizens have already been forced to flee their homes as a result of the illegal occupation of Ukrainian territories where they resided. As the conflict in Donbas is of a completely artificial nature, a wide range of instruments have been used by the aggressor to instigate it and further fuel it. The devastating impact of inciting hatred and hate speech, including by disseminating fake news and disinformation, and the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms have been widely recognized by the international community. These should be further addressed until a solution based on respect for international law is found. The violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the occupied territories should also be seen as a deliberate action by the occupying Power to undermine the prospects for a peaceful resolution. The situation in the area of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine is further exacerbated by the persisting repressive policies against Ukrainian citizens, in particular Crimean Tatars. In that regard, it must be clear that a human rights violator and abuser of the fundamental norms of international law could hardly be a reliable partner in addressing pressing problems on the global agenda, including the pandemic and environmental issues. That is why we are convinced that now more than ever we need strong institutions protecting international law, where all members are responsible and reliable contributors to safeguarding the rules- and values-based international order. Only strong institutions, in particular the Security Council, can safeguard international security and address the contemporary drivers of conflict.
