The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Austria, Cuba, Egypt, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan,
Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Morocco, Norway, South Africa, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Yemen and Zimbabwe in which they request
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the consideration of the item without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carmon
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 30 June
2006 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2006/465, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting of
the Security Council being held on Friday,
30 June 2006, regarding the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
take a seat at the Council table.

I should also like to inform the Council that I
have received a letter dated 30 June 2006 from the
representative of Senegal which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that His Excellency
Ambassador Paul Badji, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Senegal to the
United Nations, be invited, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
to participate in the debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council."

In accordance with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Paul Badji to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Angela Kane, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

The Security Council is meeting in response to
the requests contained in letters dated 29 June 2006
06-41366
from the Permanent Representatives of Algeria and
Qatar addressed to the President of the Security
Council, documents S/2006/458 and S/2006/462,
respectively.

I wish to draw the attention of the members to the
following documents: S/2006/436 and S/2006/463,
letters dated 26 and 29 June 2006, respectively, from
Israel addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/2006/459, letter dated 29 June 2006 from
the Syrian Arab Republic addressed to the President of
the Security Council; S/2006/443 and S/2006/460,
letters dated 28 and 29 June 2006, respectively, from
Palestine addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ms. Angela Kane, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs.

I now give her the floor.


