Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me begin
by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Jean Arnault for his comprehensive briefing
and for the tireless efforts for peace by him and his
team. Let me also welcome to the Security Council
Colombia's Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo Garcia, as well as the High Counsellor
for Post-Conflict, Mr. Emilio Jose Archila.

The presence of the Minister today is a
demonstration of Colombia's continued partnership
with the United Nations in support of durable peace.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands consists of four
autonomous countries, including Aruba and Curacao,
which are close maritime neighbours of Colombia.
A close friendship exists between our peoples, and
our Prime Minister, Mark Rutte, looks forward to his
visit to Colombia in November, together with high-
level delegations from Aruba and Curacao. I assure
Mr. Trujillo that the Kingdom of the Netherlands
is fully committed to peace in Colombia, which we
support both politically and financially.

Today's discussion comes soon after the mandate
renewal of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia. The joint request by the Colombian
Government and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun (FARC) to extend its mandate reaffirm their
sustained commitment to the peace agreement and to
sustainable peace. The implementation of the Final
Peace Agreement remains a challenge. It can succeed
only with the full attention and commitment of the
Colombian Government and the other parties involved.
In that light, I will address three issues today: first,
the importance of an inclusive approach; secondly,
socioeconomic and legal reintegration; and, thirdly, the
security situation.

My first point concerns the need for an inclusive
approach. In his inauguration speech, President Duque
Marquez expressed the intention of his Administration
to bring Colombians together, seek consensus and
overcome polarization. We applaud his expressed
commitment to inclusivity. We call upon the Colombian
Government to engage with civil society and foster
ownership and inclusivity of the peace process, while
including women and youth. Inclusivity is particularly
important for marginalized and vulnerable groups, such
as the indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities
and the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
community. We welcome the resumption of the work
of the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement and the National Reintegration Council.
We also welcome the meeting held by President
Duque Marquez with representatives from indigenous
communities and his expressed commitment to promote
indigenous development. We also appreciate the
efforts of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, the Colombian authoriti non-governmental
organizations to implement the relevant gender
provisions of the peace agreement. We underscore the
need to continue to prioritize gender-mainstreaming.
The engagement of youth is similarly important. The
project of the youth-led organization BogotArt entitled
"Letters for Reconciliation" promoted an exchange
of letters between students and former combatants of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP). That very important
project was awarded the Youth Carnegie Peace Prize
at The Hague last month. The project shows that peace
in Colombia is much more than an agreement signed
by the Colombian Government and the FARC-EP. It
is also a process of reconciliation among all parts of
civil society.

That brings me to my second point, which is the
need for socioeconomic and legal reintegration. The
reintegration of former combatants of the FARC-
EP represents a core pillar of the peace agreement.
Stimulating income-generating activities and providing
social services can address the root causes of conflict,
promote self-reliance and sustain peace. We therefore
call on the Government and the FARC to expedite the
design and effective implementation of a comprehensive
reintegration strategy. The provisions for transitional
justice are another core pillar of the peace agreement.
We underline the critical importance of the independent
and effective functioning of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace. It is a key institution for guaranteeing Victim's
rights and ensuring transitional justice.

Thatbrings me to my third point, namely, the security
situation. We are deeply concerned about the continued
high level of insecurity in the areas that were most
affected by the conflict. Restoring comprehensive State
authority, with the presence of both civil and military
institutions, is a key priority in that regard. Violence
against former FARC-EP combatants strikes at the core
of the peace agreement. In our View, it is essential for
the Government to uphold their security guarantees.
The ongoing and increased number of assassinations
of social leaders and human rights defenders remains
alarming. Mr. Arnault spoke of that in his briefing, and
we thank him for that clear statement. It is unacceptable
that those Colombians who have the courage to stand up
for human rights are made to pay the highest price. Let
me underline the statement of our Swedish colleague in
that regard. We welcome the adoption of the pact for life
and the protection of social leaders and human rights
defenders. We look forward to its urgent follow-up to
ensure effective prevention and protection, as well as to
ensure the prosecution of perpetrators. We encourage
the Government and the National Liberation Army to
continue to assess the scope for peace negotiations and
maintain an open line of communication. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands stands ready to support that process.

(spoke in Spanish)

In conclusion, let me emphasize that the signing
of the peace agreement marked a historic success and
serves as an inspiration throughout the world. Colombia
must now spare no effort to ensure that peace become
permanent, as peace is much more than an agreement.
Peace must be inclusive, based on ownership by civil
society and respect for human rights. Peace is grounded
on effective State institutions that provide security,
respect for the rule of law and development. Peace
attracts investments that are directed towards shoring up
public capacities. Peace requires sustained commitment
together with the pledge to ensure reconciliation
and a safer future that includes Colombians from all
sectors. As Colombia's neighbour, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands stands ready to continue its support for the
peace agreement and its effective implementation.

