Mr. Farhad (Afghanistan): Mr. President, at the
outset, allow me to congratulate Mexico on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
during this month of April. I would like to express my
sincere gratitude to you, Sir, for having convened this
timely open discussion of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) in order to consider the work of this
Committee during its next period of work. In addition,
I would like also to seize this opportunity to commend
highly the vigorous and sustained efforts of
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock as Chairman of the
CTC over the past 18 months.

My delegation remains confident that the arduous
mission of Ambassador Greenstock, as Chairman of the
CTC, and his team will be successfully continued by
Ambassador Arias of Spain, a well-known diplomat of
outstanding ability.

It is quite clear that Afghanistan has been one of
the main victims of terrorism. For nearly five years,
during the reign of the Taliban, the people of
Afghanistan suffered tremendously from the menace
imposed by that regime and the Al Qaeda terrorist
network. However, the international military campaign,
along with the courageous support of the Afghan
people, resulted in the eradication of that regime and
its Al Qaeda ally. Nevertheless, we should remain
mindful of the fact that remnants of the Taliban remain
active along the eastern and southern border of
Afghanistan. Therefore, it is vital for the international
community to sustain its vigorous focus and support of
the Transitional Government in the combat against
terrorist activities.
The Transitional Government of Afghanistan
remains strongly committed to the full implementation
of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1456 (2003), which was
adopted at the ministerial meeting on 20 January 2003.
Afghanistan has submitted its national reports to the
CTC in line with the timetable provided. To this effect,
allow me to inform the Council that the Transitional
Government of Afghanistan is currently engaged in
establishing a Counter-Terrorism Department within
the Ministry of the Interior to prevent and deal with
acts of terrorism throughout the country. We are
confident that this Department will fulfil its mandate.

In addition to outlining the progress we have
made, we would like also to inform the Council that
Afghanistan is in the process of restructuring its legal
and security apparatus. Therefore, we would like to
renew our request that the CTC dispatch an assessment
team to Afghanistan in order to assist in the adoption
of the legislative acts and administrative measures
necessary to meet all requirements of resolution 1373
(2001).

We acknowledge the fact that the fight against
international terrorism should enjoy the broad support
and cooperation of all Member States and regional and
subregional organizations. In this context, my
delegation welcomes the special meeting of the CTC
held on 6 March 2003, which brought together
representatives of international, regional and
subregional organizations in order to enhance the
effectiveness of global action against terrorism. All
participants shared important information regarding
their initiatives and measures taken to combat
terrorism. We are convinced that Member States can
adopt the best practices, codes and standards provided
by representatives at that 6 March special meeting.

I would like to reiterate my Government's
commitment to continuing its struggle against terrorism
in Afghanistan and to work with other Member States
and international, regional and subregional
organizations for the full implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1456 (2003).

Free Afghanistan was fighting against the
terrorism of the Taliban and of Al Qaeda five years
before 11 September 2001. Let me remind the Council
that it was two days earlier, on 9 September 2001,
when the heroic Afghan resistance leader Ahmad Shah
Massoud was killed by two Al Qaeda suicide terrorists.
Today the Afghans are ready to fight any re-emergence
of the Taliban. Now, the international community has
to be on our side.
