Mr. Trautwein (Germany): My delegation is
grateful for the comprehensive and instructive briefing
given by Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and we
welcome the detailed progress report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET).

Let me begin by saying that Germany aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the Netherlands on
behalf of the European Union.

Germany commends the steady progress achieved
by the people and the Government of Timor-Leste and
by UNMISET in the past three months. The Special
Representative deserves our special tribute for having
constituted eight working groups following the
previous discussion in the Council in August, thus
maintaining the momentum and following-up on the
concerns expressed by member States.

Germany agrees with the balanced assessments
and conclusions of the Special Representative and with
the report of the Secretary-General. While
acknowledging the progress Timor-Leste has made in
the past few months on its path towards self-
sufficiency and stability, the finish line has not yet
been crossed. The political solution of various issues
on the domestic front demands urgent and continued
efforts on the part of the Timorese authorities. Further
development of key State institutions and security
agencies, the veterans issue, the broadening of the
dialogue with civil society, the appointment of the
Provedor for Human Rights and Justice and the focus
on reconciliation as an important element in nation-
building are required.

Likewise, the efforts of the Timorese Government
to solve outstanding external problems prior to the
termination of the mandate require continued attention
on both sides. Germany is confident that further
progress towards concrete agreements on border
delineation and other pending issues with neighbouring
countries can and will be achieved in the next few
months.

As regards the role of the United Nations system,
we share the view of the Secretary-General and
Mr. Hasegawa that UNMISET will have to focus
increasingly on preparing and implementing its exit
strategy during the coming six months, aiming at
increasing Timorese ownership, but also requiring
sustained bilateral and multilateral assistance following
the departure of UNMISET. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the donors' conference to be
held in March 2005 will hopefully be instrumental in
this regard.

In the light of the remaining domestic and
international challenges Timor-Leste is still facing,
Germany supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to retain the Mission with its current
tasks, configuration and size during the final extension
of the mandate until 20 May 2005.

Timor-Leste has repeatedly and rightly been
described as a possible exemplary model for nation-
building. Germany encourages all Timorese and
international actors involved to remain committed and
focused in order to complete this success story.

Taking into account the desire for justice of those
affected by violence in 1999 is, in our view, part of the
reconciliatory process and successful nation-building
based on the rule of law. In this respect, we look
forward to specific proposals in the near future.

