Sir Jeremy Greenstock: I am very grateful to
members of the Council for their remarks this morning,
and particularly for their universal support for the
CTC, its work programme so far, its achievements and
its indications of future direction.

I want to comment briefly on some of the things
that have been said and hope that some things said this
morning will be picked up reactively by some of our
speakers this afternoon.

The Ambassador of Colombia was correct to give
a critical appreciation of the work of the Committee so
far and to point, not least, to some of the risks we face
if we do not adapt as we go on. He was correct to say
that, if we focus only on reports, the momentum behind
the reports exercise risks fading if it does not lead on to
other things. He coupled with that the need to consider
very carefully how we should move from bureaucracy
to action, and perhaps look at casework in the near
future.

I would like to give notice through the Council to
members of the CTC that I think we should discuss this
quite soon in the next season. We are never going to
become a tribunal. I will certainly not preside over a
committee that does that. But it is going to become
increasingly necessary to deal with the gaps that we
and our experts perceive in the capabilities of Member
States to deal with terrorism in their jurisdictions and
to try and work with them to meet those gaps,
particularly where there is a real life vulnerability or a
real life likelihood that those gaps will make it easier
for terrorists to actually operate. I think that is an area
which is relevant to the kind of gentle warning made in
Colombia's presentation.

I also take careful note of his suggestion, as
others have done, that we need to improve cooperation
or perhaps, to put it better, the operational linkage
between the work of the CTC and the work of the
Sanctions Committee on Afghanistan. I shall certainly
bring that up for discussion within the Committee
before Ambassador Valdivieso leaves the Vice-
Chairmanship.

I want to pick up one comment from the
Ambassador of Mexico, his observation that uniformity
and complementarity in the international system are
beginning to take a grip. We do not mean uniformity in
the sense that we must all do everything the same way,
because national politics, jurisdictions, legislative and
other Government machineries are different, and
cultures are different, but uniformity in the objective
and in the determination is extraordinarily important.
This is something to which the CTC has been able to
contribute over the past year. Complementarity in the
way in which we fill gaps and raise capacities is
absolutely vital. This is why I have placed so much
emphasis on the work of the regional and subregional
organizations - because like-minded States have to
work together on this and encourage and help each
other, since they are collective neighbourhoods
protecting the whole neighbourhood. That sense of
complementarity is a very useful theme which we
should keep in mind as we go along.
I appreciated hearing several Council members
mention human rights in some detail. This is a sensitive
subject both for the CTC and the Council, but the
awareness of the CTC to human rights obligations must
be very active, not just passive. I think Mexico, Ireland
and the United States particularly focused on this, and
reminded us that what we are promoting in the CTC
must be actively compatible with human rights
obligations, leading to greater opportunities for
Member States to meet their human rights obligations
against the tension of the requirement to meet
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001). Here - and
this is particularly relevant in this area, although it
applies more generally - I would like to pay tribute to
the work of the legal advisers of delegations in the
Committee. Some of them actually sit on the
Committee as their national representatives there, but
all the legal advisers have played a very important role,
not just in advising us on what the law requires - what
resolution 1373 (2001) says, and where we should be
going in the legislative part of our programme - but
also in directing us in that rather difficult area between
politics and law, both domestic and international,
which all members of the Council from time to time
have to get right. In this respect, I would like to thank
my own legal adviser, Iain MacLeod, who has been a
tower of strength to me across the board.

Finally, the representative of Singapore
mentioned three challenges, two of which I want to
comment on. First of all, "new ways to synergize
coordination" (supra) must not be just a rhetorical
phrase. Energy must be put into the business of
technical assistance and cooperation. I think that we
are beginning to do that, but I am not yet satisfied that
we have linked up with the international organizations
that are leading in this field, to make them aware of
what the CTC has to do and what it has the power to
do, and of what they are doing. That is another theme
for this upcoming season which I want to get right and
to which the Committee will need to give some
thought.

Secondly, and most interestingly, I thought that
Ms. Lee was right to advise us to beware of sticking
only to conventional paradigms. Many articles have
been written recently on asymmetrical warfare.
Terrorism is one of the instruments of asymmetrical
warfare - that is warfare by small groups against large
States, warfare in unconventional ways, and the
delivery of unconventional attacks against established
States and established governmental institutions. The
CTC, while dealing with an asymmetrical threat, is
trying to establish a symmetrical response. That does
not mean to say that we are being conventional, but we
have to be aware that in producing a collective,
governmental, symmetrical and in many ways defence-
oriented response - defence understood in its widest
sense, not just physical but also metaphorical - we
have to be aware that we are dealing with a nasty
asymmetrical enemy. That too is something on which I
would quite like to have some expert briefing of the
Committee in the months to come.

I will be available this afternoon to respond to
comments from non-members of the Council. But I
would like to draw the attention of the United Nations
to the leaflet on the CTC that we have produced, which
is available in and around this Chamber, for Member
States, members of the Council and those outside to
use in reminding their Governments of the facts behind
the CTC - what it is doing and what it intends to
do - in an easily digestible form. I urge everyone:
please use it, distribute it and keep up the good work.

