Cyprus would like to complement the statement of the European Union by adding some national remarks. We welcome this open debate on an issue that is existential and we thank the German presidency and the co-sponsoring delegations for organizing it. Climate change is a threat in itself and a multiplier of challenges to peace and security. As a truly global challenge that knows no borders and is already impacting peace and security, climate change has the potential to create or exacerbate existing conflicts, increase the displacement of populations, further complicate existing political, social and economic crises, aggravate the availability of and tensions over resources, destabilize fragile post-conflict regions, roll back progress on development and human rights protection, induce migratory flows and exponentially increase the inherent vulnerability of small island States, which are already dealing with extreme phenomena that have the power to destroy their entire gross domestic product and whose very existence is threatened. As a country with part of its territory under occupation and an island State that has been experiencing the consequences of climate change for years, Cyprus is extremely concerned about the real threat to international peace and security. We are extremely concerned not only about our inability to protect the environment throughout our territory, because part of it is occupied, but also about the environmental degradation in our territory, which is occupied without any accountability for the occupying Power that is responsible for it. While environmental degradation in general and climate change in particular have been identified as a security threat for some time now, we have not progressed on incorporating it, along with other emerging non-conventional security threats, into the work of the Security Council. As it becomes clearer that we are not on course to meet the target of limiting temperature rise to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, we need to begin work on the anticipated consequences of climate change. The Council needs to adopt a methodical approach in order to factor the security angle of this debate into its work, as part of a more comprehensive approach to security, and in order to ensure that it can respond to the threats facing us at any one time. We believe that the Council has a significant contribution to make, particularly with regard to the prevention of conflicts that can be anticipated as a result of climate change. Additionally, the Council can already start to consider the impact of climate change on the conflicts on its agenda. An important tool that the Council has at its disposal is the extensive United Nations presence globally and the peacekeeping operations that it has mandated. The Council could ask country teams to submit reports on conflict risks as a result of climate change based on a template that it would develop, and it could ask Member States to do likewise. It must, however, decide how it will act upon such information. In our view, the most important tool at the disposal of the Council is a preventive one and consists of encouraging Member States to use mechanisms, including judicial ones, for the peaceful settlement of disputes arising from climate change phenomena.
