I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by Mr. Miroslav Jenea, Assistant Secretary-General for Europe, Central Asia and the Americas, Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations; Colonel Mahamadou Seydou Magagi, Director, Centre National d'Etudes Strategiques et de Securite; and Ms. Coral Pasisi, Director, Sustainable Pacific Consultancy Niue, as well as the statements delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Alexander De Croo, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Development Cooperation of Belgium; Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam; Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany; Mr. Rene Kokk, Minister of the Environment of Estonia; and Lord Tariq Ahmad of Wimbledon, Minister of State for the Commonwealth, the United Nations and South Asia of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and by the representatives of China, the Dominican Republic, France, Indonesia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and South Africa, in connection with the video- teleconference on "Maintenance of international peace and security: climate and security", convened on Friday, 24 July 2020. Statements were also delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Wilfred Peter Elrington, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belize; Mr. Simon Coveney, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Ireland; Ms. Raychelle Awuor Omamo, Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Kenya; and Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations, as well as by the representatives of Denmark, Fiji and Nauru. In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Brazil, Costa Rica, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Georgia, Guatemala, India, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Senegal, Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Tuvalu and the United Arab Emirates. Pursuant to the letter dated 2 April 2020 from the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/273), which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the enclosed briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
