Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Mr. President, the
delegation of Brazil would like to commend you for
convening this timely open debate. By responding to
the request of Canada, Mexico, New Zealand, South
Africa, Sweden and Switzerland, you have created a
crucial opportunity for all Member States to express
their views and perceptions on the draft resolution on
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and non-State
actors. We believe that the United Nations membership
will provide an indispensable input into the
negotiations now taking place within the Security
Council.

The Brazilian position regarding the current draft
is based on two clear underlying premises. First, the
Council is dealing with the potential threat posed by
non-State actors, especially terrorists, who have access
to nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, as well as
to their means of delivery. The Council seeks to close a
gap in international law - and let me add that the
relevant international instruments do not deal in the
required detail with that potential threat. Secondly,
there is a sense of urgency, given the gravity of this
matter.

Brazil is in a comfortable position to address this
issue. At the domestic level, the Brazilian Constitution
forbids the use of nuclear energy for non-peaceful
purposes. Appropriate laws regarding the prohibition of
chemical and biological weapons have already been
adopted. At the international level, we are party to all
major treaties and arrangements: the Treaty of
Tlatelolco, the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and
the Chemical and Biological Weapons Conventions.
We are also a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group
(NSG) and the Missile Technology Control Regime
(MTCR). Additionally, with the creation of the
Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and
Control of Nuclear Materials (ABACC), Argentina and
Brazil pioneered a scheme for bilateral nuclear
inspections that is widely seen as a model of
cooperation. Our credentials on this field are thus
unimpeachable.
In parallel, we pursue the universalization of all
international instruments in the field of WMD and urge
their full implementation by States parties. A world
without any weapons of mass destruction would be a
safer world for all of us, for our children and
grandchildren. We take this opportunity to invite all
Member States to show their commitment to this cause.

With the aim of safeguarding the integrity of
existing international treaties and conventions, the
delegation of Brazil circulated to members of the
Council on 8 April a non-paper suggesting an
alternative way of addressing the subject of WMD and
non-State actors. We believe that such an approach
provides a satisfactory and expeditious manner of
pursuing our shared objectives in a way consistent with
international law.

In addition, it is our view that, by avoiding the
term "non-proliferation" and by resorting to innovative
language aimed at characterizing the linkage between
non-State actors and WMD as a new development in
international life, we would have sidestepped many
legal, political and practical difficulties in our
negotiations, while sharpening the focus of the draft.

Although showing a readiness to consider our
non-paper, the sponsors were not really responsive to
it. The explanations provided, however valuable, did
not seem to us entirely persuasive or sufficient. This
encouraged the belief that the only way still open for
improving the draft resolution would be the
presentation of further amendments.

Indeed, last Tuesday, 20 April, our delegation
circulated a small number of amendments expressing
our concerns. Those proposals, I note, are
complementary to other suggestions already submitted
by members of the Council, which have our support. To
our regret, only a few of the proposals have been
incorporated so far into the revised text. But, we
assume that the Council will be working towards
reaching a consensus on this matter.

Having said that, I would like to state our core
positions regarding the draft resolution as it stands.

First, the draft resolution should emphasize the
primary responsibility of the Council to act against any
potential threat to international peace and security, as
provided for by the Charter of the United Nations.

Secondly, it should make use of new concepts to
address a new issue, namely the transparent concepts of
non-access, non-transfer and non-availability of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) to non-State
actors.

Thirdly, it should reflect the existing delicate
balance within international instruments in this field
regarding the obligations of all States parties on non-
proliferation, disarmament and international
cooperation for peaceful purposes.

Fourthly, the draft resolution should not need to
invoke Chapter VII of the Charter, since Article 25 of
the Charter provides that all decisions by the Security
Council shall be accepted and carried out by the
Member States of the Organization. If, however, a
reference to Chapter VII is retained, we could accept
that its scope of application be limited to the draft's
first three operative paragraphs.

Fifthly, better language should be sought as
regards the obligation contained in operative paragraph
2 to the effect that all States shall adopt specified laws.
We strongly recommend that the text take into account
the independence of national congresses in the exercise
of their law-making power.

Finally, the committee envisaged by operative
paragraph 9 should not carry out activities that may
undercut the mandates of multilateral organizations
established by treaty. We are waiting for further
clarification by the sponsors on aspects related to the
possible mandate, functions and composition of the
committee. We are thus in the same position as that of
the delegation of the Philippines.

I wish to reiterate that my delegation has high
expectations as to the results of this open debate. This
session will certainly allow us to understand the
various viewpoints of the international community. For
our part, we are ready to work towards a successful
outcome - that is to say, an approach that effectively
responds to this potential threat against international
peace and security and that is considered to be
meritorious by the wider membership of the
Organization.

