Mr. Matjila (South Africa): First, let me
congratulate you, Sir, for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for March, and pay tribute to
Equatorial Guinea for its able work last month. I also
thank you, Sir, for facilitating today's briefing by the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Miroslav
Lajcak, Minister for Foreign and European Affairs
of the Slovak Republic. I thank him for sharing with
us Slovakia's vision in chairing the OSCE, centred
on conflict prevention and mitigation to preserve
peace and responding to new threats through deeper
cooperation, including the women and peace and
security agenda, the enlistment of young people and
effective multilateralism to address global and shared
challenges. It is always refreshing to listen to him. I
believe that he has literally continued where he left off
a few months ago at the helm of the General Assembly.
I welcome him back to the United Nations.

It is clear from his briefing that regional and
subregional organizations dealing with issues of peace
and security remain important for ensuring sustainable
peace and security in their respective regions. The
briefing also illustrated the importance of support and
cooperation from the United Nations, as the primary
international organization tasked with the maintenance
of international peace and security. Efforts to enhance
the relationship between the United Nations and the
OSCE are therefore welcomed. We wish to reiterate that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the furtherance of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations is necessary to ensure
closer coordination between our organizations.

We acknowledge, however, that every regional
organization is unique in terms of the challenges that
it faces in the maintenance of international peace and
security, as well as the manner in which it addresses
those challenges and threats. We must be clear, however,
that the efforts of regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security do not absolve the
Council of its Charter-mandated responsibilities as the
guardian of international peace and security. Those
efforts complement one another, and it is for that reason
that cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations is so important
to muster. Dialogue of such a nature allows us an
opportunity to share experiences and best practices
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
such as the OSCE.

I wish to reiterate South Africa's support for the
work of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, which needs to continue to enjoy unhindered
access in order to monitor and verify compliance with
the Minsk agreements in terms of its mandate. Similarly,
my delegation believes that creating a conducive
environment towards compromise, reconciliation and
long-term stability in Kosovo is the responsibility of
all the relevant role players, including the OSCE as
one of the largest field operations in Kosovo. That
inclusive approach builds a strengthened foundation
for support and bolsters international trust-building
efforts. The work of the OSCE in Ukraine and Kosovo
and support for their efforts towards finding peaceful
and sustainable solutions will prove invaluable for their
people and the greater region.

I wish to conclude by reiterating that the Security
Council, regional bodies, international partners and
other actors, such as donors, civil society and youth
organizations, should continue to engage in dialogue
and cooperation, in the interests of the people, as well
as for the stability of the broader region.

