Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings,
which provide us with a comprehensive update after the
Stockholm discussions.

I would like to start byjoining my voice to those of
the other members of the Security Council to commend
the outstanding efforts and commitment of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths, who convinced the parties to
gather around the negotiating table and successfully
complete the Stockholm discussions in a truly
constructive spirit. Let me also enthusiastically thank
the Secretary-General for his personal commitment,
which really made the difference, as Mr. Griffiths said.

France welcomes the commitment of the parties,
which has made it possible to achieve these initial
positive results. We warmly thank the Swedish
Government for hosting these talks, and all regional and
international partners that supported the discussions.

The holding of these talks is in itself an important
first step. Decisive progress has been made on three
fronts: the exchange of 4,000 prisoners, a withdrawal of
the armed forces from the port and city ofAl-Hudaydah
in the coming days - and a ceasefire throughout
the province - and, finally, the establishment of a
mechanism for de-escalation at Taiz. The agreement
on Al-Hudaydah, in particular, is essential to progress
on the path towards a comprehensive cessation of
hostilities. Its implementation must have a positive
impact on the whole country, by facilitating the
humanitarian response that Mark Lowcock has just
stressed as absolutely necessary.

The significant progress achieved in Stockholm is
potentially a breakthrough that can mark the turning
point towards the end of the Yemeni conflict. The
Stockholm talks show that peace is possible in Yemen.
Their full implementation requires the firm commitment
of all and the unity of the Security Council in support
of Martin Griffiths.

This progress should not obscure the fact that
the Yemeni people are still facing an emergency
humanitarian situation, which is my second point.
And I would like to thank Mark Lowcock and his
teams for their exemplary work and for their absolutely
clear message. While Yemen is experiencing, as Mark
Lowcock just pointed out, the worst humanitarian crisis
in the world, with more than 22 million people dependent
on humanitarian assistance, or nearly 75 per cent of the
population, and a still very high risk of famine, the
positive momentum at work in Stockholm must now be
translated into reality. We call on all parties to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
in particular with regard to the protection of civilians.
We also call on them to respect human rights. France
will be both active and vigilant on this subject.

The discussions also allowed progress to be made
on other crucial issues, such as the reopening of Sana'a
airport and the implementation of economic measures
to restore the country's economy. We hope that these
discussions can continue very soon on these points,
which must converge to create the momentum we
are looking for. It is essential that the progress made
in Stockholm quickly has a beneficial impact on the
ground for the populations in order to create and
maintain this impetus towards peace. We call on all
States in a position to do so to continue to use their
influence to help ensure that all parties comply with the
guidelines that have been defined.

In this context, and this is my last point, it is more
essential than ever to respond to the requests made by
Mark Lowcock and Martin Griffiths. Only a political
solution will be able to ensure lasting peace and put an
end to the ongoing humanitarian disaster in Yemen. We
therefore call for further political discussions to be held
as soon as possible in order to build on the momentum
generated in Stockholm without delay. In this context,
we believe it is important for the Security Council to
put all its weight in the balance. Our meeting today
demonstrates the strong unity of the Security Council.
Let us use it without delay as a lever for action in
support of the ongoing efforts.

That is why we are ready to work now with the
United Kingdom as penholder on an updated draft
resolution, to express our support for the efforts of
Martin Griffiths and the important results achieved
in Stockholm, but also to respond to the humanitarian
emergency by endorsing Mark Lowcock's requests. I
would like to echo what my British colleague has just
said on this point. This draft resolution will mark the
unity of the Council and the international community
in support of United Nations humanitarian and
political action. We are ready to move very quickly
on the subject because, as my British colleague said,
we have no time to lose. Be assured, Mr. President, of
France's full mobilization in this regard, in support of
United Nations mediation and in conjunction with all
interlocutors in the region.

