The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Morocco for the kind words he addressed to me.

The next speaker is the Secretary-General of the
People's Committee for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, His
Excellency Mr. Omar Mustafa Muntasser. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

Mr. Muntasser (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
(interpretation from Arabic): I wish at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I am confident that your personal qualities
and diplomatic skill will enable you to guide the work of

 

the Council to success. I wish also to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Tono Eitel, Permanent
Representative of Germany to the United Nations, for the
successful way in which he conducted the work of the
Security Council last month.
Once again, the world, including the Security Council,
is witnessing the Palestinian people being massacred, as
they have been for the past 50 years, by the terrorist
aggressors, the Israelis, a brutal force confronting a
defenceless people mortally wounded and drained of its
life-blood.

The Zionist usurpers have established their Zionist
entity and pursued a policy of displacement. They have
been supported in this by a number of countries, foremost
among which is the United States of America, which has
supported terrorism and aggression against the Arabs and
Muslims, forgetting its important role as a super-Power and
a permanent member of the Security Council, which is the
depository of the hopes of all peoples for justice and
fairness.

The responsibility for the massacres and genocide
being perpetrated right now against the Palestinian people
should be borne by the United States, which wholeheartedly
supports the Israelis. The Israelis kill the Palestinians as if
they were lambs, displacing them from their homes, their
gardens and their houses. This shameful crime against
humanity does not move the conscience of the largest
country in the world, which ignores it completely and at
best appeals to both parties to exercise restraint.

Do we not have the right to ask the Council exactly
what it means when it appeals to both parties, both the
victim and the aggressor, to exercise self-restraint? All its
members know that this cannot serve the maintenance of
international peace and security. The settler occupation is
expanding day after day, in spite of the resolutions of this
Council. The prisons are filled with Palestinians, houses are
demolished for the flimsiest of reasons and the holiest of
places are being desecrated and trampled upon daily. And
now we see measures aimed at demolishing these holy
places and we hear irresponsible statements every day. The
Palestinians exercise absolutely no right to establish their
independent State and absolutely no thought is given to a
withdrawal from the Golan, except after hundreds of years.
The Palestinians enjoy absolutely no rights in Jerusalem.
Tunnels are opened under the Al-Aqsa Mosque in
preparation for its demolition. The attacks are aimed not
only against occupied territories, but also at the autonomous
areas, including Gaza. Despite all of this, the Council talks
of peace. What peace? The peace of the killer and the
victim, of the lamb and the wolf? The peace of terrorists
equipped with all kinds of weapons - weapons of mass
destruction, bacteriological, chemical and nuclear
weapons? The displacement of a people that has fallen
victim to a conspiracy of the whole world - a portrait of
the tragedy of the twentieth century?
We support peace. The only difference between us
and others is that we are against surrender and a policy of
fait accompli. We are for a peace that is just and
comprehensive. We have no hatred for Jews. While we
are concerned about the interests of the Palestinian
people, we are also concerned about those of the Jewish
people. Therefore, as we said before, the steps outlined
for a so-called peace will not lead to real peace. Real
peace must be comprehensive and just to start with. These
developments prove our insight: a comprehensive and just
peace must include both Palestinians and Jews. This
cannot be achieved without the establishment of a
disarmed, democratic State, free from bacteriological,
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, in which
both Palestinians and Jews could live under a democratic
regime supervised by the United Nations, as in South
Africa. We are confident that this solution would further
the interests of all, and that if it is not followed the
tragedy will continue.

The powerful will not remain powerful forever, nor
will the weak remain weak. This fact has been seen in all
times and will never change. This is the word of God and
the word of God cannot be changed.

In conclusion, we would like the Security Council,
in addressing this tragic topic today, to assume its
responsibility to stop the Israeli aggressors from carrying
out their plan to judaize Jerusalem and from committing
aggression against the holiest religious sites of Christians
and Muslims, and to impose upon Israel a commitment to
honour its own pledges and to sit at the negotiating table
without arrogance, intransigence or preconditions. A
deadline for such negotiations must be determined or else
the Council should implement Chapter VII, from which
Israel has been exempt for over half a century. We call
upon the Council today not to reiterate the same old
concern or issue another appeal for restraint. This has
never stopped aggression before and has never saved a
victim. Repeating it would only deepen the feeling on the
part of Arabs and Muslims that the Security Council has
a double standard and is only here to punish Arabs and
Muslims.

 

Right will prevail, even if it takes a long time.

The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Secretary-General of the People's Committee for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya for his kind words addressed to me and to
my predecessor.

The next speaker on my list is the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, His Excellency Mr. Ali
Osman Mohamed Taha. I welcome him and invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.


