Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): It is
always an honour to speak before the Security Council,
especially under your presidency, Sir, which benefits
by your great experience.

We are discussing today an issue that has been on
the Council's agenda for more than 35 years. In this
tragic moment, I hope that the Council, its permanent
members and the international community will bear in
mind these very wise words of Jean Francois Paul de
Gondi Cardinal de Retz:

"To enact a law and not enforce it is to authorize
that which we would prohibit."

Canada is deeply troubled by the deterioration of
the situation in the Middle East. The Council has
charted the way forward in resolutions 1397 (2002),
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). The elements of those
resolutions are not conditional and there can be no
justification for continuing to disregard them. Their
immediate implementation has been called for in all
quarters and can be deferred no longer. This is not only
a political requirement; it is a humanitarian imperative.

As the situation continues to deteriorate, the
rising toll of casualties and the deplorable humanitarian
conditions of the Palestinians require the immediate
implementation of all relevant resolutions. We call on
Israel not only to respect the requirements of those
resolutions, but also to facilitate the access of
humanitarian workers and the delivery of humanitarian
aid to those in need and to ensure that the Palestinian
people have full and unhindered access to basic needs,
including food, water and medical supplies. Canada is
deeply concerned by reports detailing incidents in
which clearly marked ambulances have been denied
access to wounded civilians, delayed at checkpoints or,
worse yet, fired upon. Israel should exercise the utmost
restraint in order to avoid further civilian casualties.
The Palestinian Authority should in turn commit itself
to ending all terrorist acts, including suicide bombings
that target innocent civilians and are an affront to
humankind. Both parties should move immediately to a
meaningful ceasefire.

As has been reiterated for many years now, there
can be no military solution to this conflict. Continuing
on the present course makes a peaceful resolution even
harder to reach and risks destabilizing the entire region.
The escalating tensions on the Israeli-Lebanese border
and the continuing violations of the Blue Line are of
serious concern and we call on all parties to
demonstrate maximum restraint.

(spoke in English)

Canada has consistently affirmed that third-party
monitors could serve both parties' interests in assisting
with the implementation of a ceasefire agreement.
Indeed, Canada recognizes that the urgency of the
current situation makes consideration of this matter all
the more pressing and we stand ready to assist the
cause of peace in any way we can. We urge the parties
to take the steps necessary to create an environment in
which third-party monitors can play a constructive and
consensual role. It is their responsibility.

Canada welcomes the direct engagement of
United States Secretary of State Colin Powell,
underlines its urgency and urges the parties to give him
their full cooperation. We fully support all efforts,
including those of the "quartet", aimed at achieving a
ceasefire and the implementation of the Tenet plan,
accompanied by the prompt resumption of negotiations
towards a political solution and the implementation of
the Mitchell Committee recommendations. The
Security Council can help to establish a locus and a
context for the two sides to navigate back from the
precipice. We all know and understand the elements
upon which a final settlement should be based.
Negotiations by the parties aimed at achieving a
political solution, and taking account of these elements,
should be resumed without delay on the basis of earlier
agreements.

In conclusion, it is our hope - if we are
permitted any hope - that reports of the withdrawal of
the Israel Defence Forces from Qalqiliya and Tulkarem
are the beginning of the recognition by Israel of its
responsibility under the Council's resolutions.

