Mr. Rivard (Canada): On behalf of the
Government of Canada, I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for having convened this open debate.
I also wish to express my appreciation to today's
speakers for their remarks.

We welcome the Secretary-General's eighth
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579). The report offers a sobering view of the
situation facing civilians in armed conflict. It also
offers a clear set of actions that can be taken by the
Council to better respond to protection needs.

Ten years after the adoption of Security Council
resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000), the linkage
between civilian protection and the maintenance of
international peace and security has been firmly
established. Subsequent resolutions, including those on
women, peace and security and on children and armed
conflict, have demonstrated the Council's resolve to
better protect civilian populations living in situations
of armed conflict, as has the Council's regular
consideration of protection concerns and strategies in
country-specific contexts.

(spoke in French)

In his previous report, the Secretary-General
identified the overarching challenges we all must face,
as well as the crucial steps to be taken to better protect
civilians. Here, I would like to address a number of
such measures that we view as being of particular
importance.
First, it is important that the Council consider
comprehensive approaches to the better protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict. We agree with
the Secretary-General that new and innovative ways
need to be identified to address country-specific
situations that are not on the Council's formal agenda.
In doing so, the Council could send a strong message
that it is determined to take action against attacks
deliberately targeting civilian populations.

Canada strongly encourages Council members to
ensure greater consistency in terms of how the Council
addresses protection issues. In that light, the aide-
memoire on the protection of civilians and the informal
group of experts are important tools that could be
drawn upon by the Council to a greater extent in order
to make well informed decisions. The aide-memoire, in
particular, is an important guidance document that
reminds the Council of the full range of tools at its
disposal in situations where civilian populations are at
risk.

At the same time, the Council would benefit from
better defined criteria its disposal to complement the
aide-memoire in assisting the Council in determining
when and how to intervene. That is particularly true for
those situations of which the Council is not actively
seized but where there are concerns with regard to
protection and where strategic and targeted attention by
the Security Council could yield results.

(spoke in English)

Secondly, comprehensive protection strategies
need to be fully integrated into the day-to-day work of
United Nations country teams and peacekeeping
missions. For the latter, it is important that protection-
of-civilian mandates be fully considered in the
planning, resource-allocation and training stages of
missions. In that regard, we welcome ongoing efforts
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
develop an operational framework as called for in
resolution 1894 (2009). We strongly encourage that
Department and others to ensure that such a framework
builds on the key indicators identified in resolution
1325 (2000).

In addition, protection considerations should
ultimately inform decisions to drawdown or withdraw
United Nations peacekeeping personnel, as well as
decisions on how resources are allocated. But,
protecting civilians is not just a job for military
personnel. For all United Nations actors on the ground,
both civilian and military, protection strategies should
be clear, concrete and measurable, drawing on clear
indicators and benchmarks. They should also be well
coordinated with all actors - local, national and
international.

Thirdly, Canada believes that enforcing strict
accountability for those who target civilian populations
is fundamental. States must fulfil their obligations to
investigate and prosecute persons suspected of such
crimes, and, where appropriate, cooperate with
international judicial institutions to ensure that
perpetrators are brought to justice. Monitoring and
reporting mechanisms should be strengthened to ensure
that violations of international human rights and
international humanitarian law are documented and
reported to the Council. Such mechanisms can be
critical in terms of providing early warning
information leading to the implementation of effective
preventive and protective measures.

In that regard, we applaud ongoing efforts to put
in place an effective monitoring mechanism to report to
the Council instances where humanitarian access is
deliberately delayed or denied. We strongly encourage
the Council to act on such information when it is
received and to take appropriate steps to address
violent attacks against humanitarian personnel as well
as to deal with bureaucratic constraints that
deliberately hamper efforts to access those in need of
life-saving assistance.

In conclusion, the protection of civilians is
inextricably linked to the maintenance and promotion
of freedom, democracy, human rights and the rule of
law. Translating protection norms and our collective
statements of support into concrete, effective,
meaningful and measurable actions has not been and
will not be easy. It will require the ongoing and full
attention of the Council. The Government of Canada
stands ready to continue to support Council efforts on
this important issue.

