Ms. Power (United States of America): As we sit
here today, nearly 11 million Syrians are struggling to
survive the worst humanitarian crisis in the world. I
met with some of them last month when I visited the
massive and ever-expanding refugee camps along
Syria's border with Turkey. One family after another
shared harrowing stories of their communities being
bombarded from the air by the Al-Assad regime and
their families being deliberately denied humanitarian
aid simply because they lived in areas controlled by
the opposition. I met children whose parents had fled
with them to Turkey because those kids were gravely
malnourished, inhumanly denied food and medicine by
the Syrian regime.

The Al-Assad regime has until now refused to allow
United Nations humanitarian assistance to flow through
border crossings it does not control - something
members of the Security Council address with resolution
2165 (2014). By adopting that resolution, the Council has
opened four crossings to United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their implementing partners without the
need for approval from the regime. Those humanitarian
agencies will increase the supply of life-saving aid,
including food to eat and medicine to care for the sick
and injured. If implemented fully, the resolution will
allow critical aid to reach up to 2 million Syrians who
have been denied adequate assistance for the past year
and suffered immeasurably as a result. The resolution
also authorizes the United Nations to cross conflict
lines between regime and opposition forces to deliver
aid, and the Syrian regime, which is systematically
denying cross-line humanitarian assistance, must heed
that obligation.

In addition, the resolution adopted today establishes
a United Nations monitoring mechanism, under the
authority of the Secretary-General and with the consent
of Syria's neighbours, to monitor the United Nations
aid consignments in order to confirm that they indeed
contain humanitarian aid. The mechanism conforms
with the Secretary-General's proposal and the resolution
stipulates that the inspections will occur at loading
facilities in neighbouring countries. We are grateful
to Syria's neighbours for their crucial cooperation in
this effort and their tremendous generosity in helping
respond to the massive humanitarian crisis.

Yet even as we recognize the promise this resolution
holds for reaching more people in need, we must not
forget that it should have never required a Security
Council resolution for a Government to allow food
and medicine to reach millions of families whose lives
have been hanging in the balance. Yet when the United
Nations has requested such permission over the past
year, its letters have gone unanswered and its requests
have been rejected.

The Al-Assad regime has seized every opportunity
to make it more, and not less, difficult to provide such
crucial assistance to civilians in dire need. Instead of
opening paths for aid, it has deliberately closed them;
rather than providing free and unfettered humanitarian
access to all Syrians, it has used the denial of aid and
the starvation, sickness and misery it imposes as yet
another weapon in its cruel and devastating arsenal
against opposition-held areas.

The effectiveness of today's resolution will depend
on the efforts and cooperation of many parties. Those
parties include the United Nations and international
humanitarian agencies, which have made clear their
interest in using those crossings. They also include us,
as members of the Security Council, who must ensure
that the resolution is fully enforced. The Council must
be prepared to take decisive action should the parties to
the conflict, particularly the Al-Assad regime, fail to
comply with it.

To that end, I would remind the Syrian regime that,
under Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Syria is obligated to accept and carry out the decisions
made by the Security Council in the resolution. At a
time when many are raising questions about the ability
of the Council to fulfil its purpose regarding Syria, we

have shown again today that we can come together and
take action to address the horrific crisis in Syria.

In September of last year, we stood together in
demanding that the Al-Assad regime end its use of
chemical weapons against the Syrian people. Today,
100 per cent of declared chemical weapons in Syria
have been removed from the country. In February, we
stood together in calling on the Syrian regime to allow
free and unfettered access for humanitarian assistance
and to end the systematic besieging of civilian areas,
yet that resolution went largely unheeded.

Today, we are taking steps to ensure that our
resolution 2139 (2014) from February has a real impact
on the ground, unlocking the impediments that stand
in the way of cross-border assistance. There is other
unfinished work from that resolution, including ending
the systematic targeting of medical facilities and schools
and the monstrous use of barrel bombs against civilian
areas. The Council must now take the cooperation
and unity we have shown today and bring it to bear
in ensuring the end of the horrors being perpetrated
against the Syrian people.

