Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Our hearts still go
out to all the victims and families of the unforgettable
and unforgivable terrorist attack of 9/11. We send our
prayers and profound condolences to all those families
that lost loved ones at the World Trade Center. In the
aftermath of the 9/11 attacks, people all over the world,
including Kazakhstan, stood shoulder to shoulder in
mourning, solidarity, sympathy and friendship with
the people of the United States. This day is not only
to commemorate but also to make sure that it never
happens again anywhere else in the world. Our resolve,
collective effort and unity against terrorism is the
way forward.

We thank the delegation of the Russian Federation
for initiating this open briefing to discuss the outcome
of the Tehran summit, which has great implications
for the current phase of the Syrian crisis. Kazakhstan
welcomes the trilateral summit of the Heads of the
guarantor countries of the Astana process in Tehran,
which resulted in the adoption of a joint statement
and further cooperation among the three countries to
resolve the Syrian crisis.

As we know, the guarantor States of the Astana
process - Russia, Iran and Turkey - have met for the
third time, with very constructive outcomes of a turning
point for the Syrian people. The summit was held under
the common understanding of the unacceptability of
any provocations. The Heads of the guarantor States
also confirmed the commitment to preserving the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria. The summit also clearly demonstrated the
positive role of the Astana process in coordinating
international activities related to the Syrian peace
process, including preserving the political unity and
integrity of the country.

We welcome the most notable parts of the text,
referring to cooperation against terrorist groups such
as Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida, and the
importance of distinguishing between terrorists and
armed opposition groups participating in the ceasefire.
The statement also emphasizes the political process, the
creation of a constitutional committee, humanitarian
assistance, the repatriation of asylum-seekers and
the organization of an international conference on
refugees and internally displaced persons. Kazakhstan
believes that this will contribute to the final formation
of a constitutional committee and undoubtedly have
a positive impact on the political processes and
preparations to hold free elections in Syria.

The summit proved once again that urgent
international tasks can be solved only on the basis
of respect, trust and constructive cooperation. My
delegation notes with satisfaction that a ceasefire in
Idlib was facilitated, thereby creating new opportunities
for the political process. In that vein, we are convinced
that the world community should direct its joint efforts
towards creating the conditions for the settlement
of the intra-Syrian conflict by exclusively peaceful
means, rebuilding the ruined country and addressing
the complex humanitarian situation. We also need to
support the creation of conditions for the return of
numerous Syrian refugees. In that regard, the idea
of convening an international conference on Syrian
refugees could be a first step towards a collective
solution of the problem.

Kazakhstan commends Moscow, Tehran and
Ankara for their agreement to exert all efforts to
protect the population and improve the humanitarian
situation, in particular by restoring the economy
and infrastructure to address acute social problems.
Another important point was the emphasis on the
political process, conveying that there is no military
solution to the crisis and the parties concerned should
sit down at the negotiating table.

It would be wrong to suggest that the trilateral
summit produced an ultimate formula to resolve the
Idlib crisis. We are sure that the unresolved issues will
take time and further efforts to settle. In that context,
we look forward to the next meeting of the guarantor
countries ofthe Astana process in Moscow to discuss all
issues related to the recent developments on the ground.

