Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
sincerely grateful to the Bolivian presidency of the
Council for convening this meeting and would like
to warmly congratulate it on Bolivia's exemplary
leadership of the Council. I also want to thank
today's briefers.

I align myself with the statements delivered earlier
by the representatives of Venezuela, on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and Bangladesh,
on behalf of the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation.

The situation in Palestine continues to deteriorate.
In the wake of new Israeli crimes, the number of
Palestinian protesters killed is more than 200 and the
number of injured more than 22,000. Why are they
protesting? They are protesting the systematic violation
of their inalienable rights over the past 70 years, the
occupation of their land, the decade-long inhumane
siege of Gaza, the recognition of Jerusalem as Israel's
capital by the United States, the racism shown towards
them and its recent legalization in Israeli law, the
demolition of their homes and the construction of
Israeli settlements.

They want to return to their ancestral lands, their
own homes, villages and cities, and to establish their
own State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. But
why is Israel killing them? It is killing them merely
because they are Palestinians, whether they are children,
women, farmers or fishermen. Because in Israel's view,
Palestinians have no rights - no right to assembly,
to expression, to protest, to return, to establish their
own State or even to life, and because Israel is addicted
to cruelty, crime, death and destruction. With those
realities before us, let us review what the Council has
done to protect the rights and lives of Palestinians.
During the past seven decades, it has adopted more
than 300 resolutions on the Israeli-Palestinian crisis
and related issues, the most recent being resolution
2334 (2016). In previous meetings, almost all Council
members have said that Israel has violated that
resolution. Of course, that is only one of the more than
300 Council resolutions that Israel has violated, and it
is the symbol of an international outlaw.

The United States unconditionally shields Israel
against any of the Council's measures. One example of
that is its veto of 44 of the Council's draft resolutions
on Israel. In practice, the United States has rendered the
Council completely ineffective with respect to Israel,
which has therefore been emboldened to commit all
four of the core international crimes, wage more than
15 wars, occupy Arab countries' territory, invade all of
its neighbours without exception, attack other countries
in the region and beyond and possess every kind of
weapons of mass destruction. The list goes on. The
question that is now before us is whether there is any
option, besides taking international action, for holding
both the United States and Israel accountable for all of
their wrongdoing and for depriving Palestinians of their
inalienable rights. That is why we believe that the world
should continue to support the realization of Palestinian
rights and reject any further occupation, aggression,
oppression or intimidation.

In order to comply with this meeting's agenda, I
have been focusing only on the question of Palestine.
We will make a further statement later to respond to the
irrelevant claims of the United States representative.

