Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): First, I would like to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Palestinian State, and thank him for his statement. We also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his remarks, and Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, for his briefing. The quest for a comprehensive and lasting solution to the Palestinian question continues to command the interest and concern of the relevant parties, countries in the Middle East and the international community. Viet Nam joins the international community in reaffirming our strong support for the legitimate struggles of the Palestinian people and their inalienable rights. We firmly believe in and strongly support the two-State solution, including the establishment of an independent and sovereign State of Palestine, with the borders enshrined in the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, living side by side with the State of Israel in peaceful coexistence, security and mutual recognition. After decades, peace and a final settlement remain elusive. We share the deep concerns of other Security Council members with regard to Israel's continued settlement activities and the recent call for the annexation of parts of the occupied Palestinian territory. We therefore call on and support the relevant party in striving for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace settlement, through dialogue and negotiations, on the basis of respect for international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including resolution 2334 (2016), with the consent of the parties concerned. We are convinced that such a peace agreement can be reached only by exercising restraint, avoiding actions that might further complicate the situation and maintaining direct dialogue. It is our sincere hope that the parties will engage in discussion in good faith and in a constructive manner. To that end, Viet Nam welcomes all initiatives and efforts to restart the Middle East peace process, based on international law and bilateral agreements. We are ready to make a positive contribution to the promotion of dialogue and negotiations, within and beyond the United Nations, with a view to achieving a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that ensures the legitimate rights and interests of Palestinians and the other party concerned.
