Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to thank you, Madame President, for having
organized this debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/540)
concerning recent events on the ground, as well as
proposals to address the situation during the coming
months. In addition, we would like to welcome the
Secretary-General's new Special Representative,
Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui, and to express
our admiration and respect to Mr. Edmond Mulet for
his work in Haiti over the past year.

We pay tribute to the resilience of the Haitian
population in overcoming a series of external shocks
on the heels of the devastating earthquake of January
2010. These shocks have two serious consequences.
First, they have created an ongoing humanitarian
emergency that threatens the peace and stability of
Haiti. Secondly, they have set back the development
agenda, which was already seriously compromised
even before the earthquake. These setbacks have
reinforced the general impression that Haiti is trapped
in a spiral of failures. However, there is nothing
inevitable about that trend. We believe that Haitians
can and must overcome them. They also deserve the
support of the international community; for Haiti's
failure would also be our failure.

Part of the external support gravitates around the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). It is understood that peacekeepers
cannot remain in Haiti in perpetuity. However, in this
renewed phase of MINUSTAH, it is important not to
abandon Haiti prematurely. The question is how to
fulfil our mandate while ensuring that the United
Nations does not have to return in the next decade. As
we all know, an exit strategy for the Mission had begun
to be considered prior to January 2010. The new
demands Haiti faces today certainly warrant a
continued presence. Nevertheless, we think that the
Mission should focus on priority areas tailored to the
current state of affairs, with measurable targets and
benchmarks and an eye to a future exit strategy.

Among the priority areas that should be
considered, political stability is an absolutely critical
element. We applaud the historical peaceful transfer of
power from a democratically elected President to an
opposition successor. However, we are concerned that
the taking of key decisions has to date been
undermined by a lack of political consensus.

A second obvious priority has to do with recovery
and reconstruction. While we cannot return to the
pre-earthquake situation, it is still indispensable to go
beyond recovery towards economic and political
development. Throughout the years, the rule of law,
democracy, security and development have been the
main areas of focus. Regrettably, they have not all been
addressed in an integrated manner or dealt with the
same level of commitment and resources. We have
learned various lessons, and now understand the
importance of building on and complementing existing
strategies and programmes. A point of special concern
in the report is the slow disbursement of the resources
pledged to the earthquake recovery efforts for the
period 2010-201 1.

In our view, a third priority for MINUSTAH is
for the Government of Haiti, along with civil society,
to begin to gradually take up some of the activities now
undertaken by MINUSTAH. Under genuinely
extraordinary circumstances, MINUSTAH undertook
new responsibilities at the cost of advancing in key
sectors such as those of security and the rule of law.
We believe that there is enough support and resources
in both these areas to be able to refocus our efforts.
MINUSTAH cannot and should not take on the role
and primary responsibilities of the State. We fully
support the development of the proposed rule of law
compact. We look forward with interest to the next
five-year Haitian National Police development plan.

We are proud to have been part of MINUSTAH
since its establishment. We will remain committed to
both Haiti and United Nations peacekeeping operations
for as long as necessary. In that regard, we support the
Secretary-General's recommendation to renew the
mandate of MINUSTAH for another year. We would
like to express our solidarity with MINUSTAH, its
personnel and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Mariano Fernandez Amunategui. We believe
that the Mission's presence is having a profound and
positive impact on the future well-being of Haiti.

