Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): My delegation
commends the Lithuanian presidency for holding
this open debate on the protection of journalists in
conflict situations. We welcome you, Sir, and thank
you for coming to New York to participate in this
important debate. We also thank Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson. We welcome the presence here
of Mr. Christophe Deloire and Ms. Mariane Pearl of the
Daniel Pearl Foundation and thank them for briefing the
Council, and especially for sharing with us their very
insightful remarks, which are an important contribution
to our debate this morning.

While States bear the primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians, including journalists, as
highlighted in resolution 1738 (2006), the international
community has a subsidiary but very important
role to play in addressing this very serious problem.
Journalists face risks in conflict zones: abduction,
hostage-taking, harassment, intidimidation, forced
disappearance, arbitrary detention, torture and illegal
arrest, in clear violation of international humanitarian
law. According to Reporters Without Borders, in 2014
alone 69 journalists were killed in the discharge of
their honourable duties. This year, 25 have been killed,
13 of them in countries on the Security Council's
agenda: five in South Sudan, two in Iraq, two in
Yemen, two in Ukraine, and one each in Syria and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

While the majority of victims are male journalists,
women are increasingly subject to violations of their
integrity while performing their duties in conflict
situations. Women journalists face additional risks
related to, among other things, gender-based prejudices,
sexual harassment and intimidation, and sexual
violence and abuse in detention. This implies that
there is a need for a gender-perspective approach when
considering measures to address the issue of violence
against journalists.

Nowadays, threats are not faced exclusively
by traditional journalists. Those engaged in social
media - bloggers and others using modern information
technologies to communicate, disseminate information
and express points of view - also frequently find
themselves in danger.

Angola, my country, attaches great importance
to the protection of civilians in conflict situations,
and particularly to the protection of journalists, in
accordance with the Geneva Conventions, including the
1949 Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of
Prisoners ofWar and the Additional Protocols of 1977, in
particular article 79 of Additional Protocol I regarding
the protection ofjournalists in areas of armed conflict.
In Angola, the freedom of information and expression
is granted by the Constitution, which recognizes the
right of all citizens to express, disseminate and freely
share their thoughts, ideas and opinions by word, image
or other means of communication. The Constitution
also recognizes the right to freedom of information as
the basis of a plural society in which the fundamental
rights of citizens must be respected within the primacy
of the law.

Journalists often draw attention to and witness
grave violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, especially by reporting on situations
that often amount to threats to international peace and
security. We value the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
approved in 2012 by UNESCO, which has helped States
to develop specific legislative mechanisms regarding
the freedom of expression.

Despite the increased attention given by the
international community and the States Members of
the United Nations, and the Security Council's action
on the issue, including the adoption of resolution 1738
(2006), violence against journalists persists. The most
recent report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians (S/2013/689) highlights the fact that
accountability for the perpetrators of attacks against
journalists is virtually non-existent. This is a situation
that cannot prevail. Those responsible for violations and
attacks againstjournalists must be held accountable. We
believe that combating impunity is an important means
of ensuring greater safety and protection for journalists
in conflict zones. It is with dismay that we witness the
current trend of threats against journalists,including
the terror tactics of war used by some terrorist groups,
such as the recent beheading ofjournalists in Syria by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.

To conclude, we reiterate the important role that
regional and subregional organizations can play in
ensuring the protection of journalists and associated
personnel in armed conflict, and the need to render
more effective the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. We are convinced
that journalists can play a very important role when
reporting events with objectivity and professionalism.
The Security Council should continue to pay more
attention to the protection of journalists, and the
Secretary-General could include more detailed
information on the situation ofjournalists in conflicts
zones, both in his reports on the protection of civilians
and in his country-specific reports.

With respect to our adoption today of resolution
2222 (2015), which Angola co-sponsored, we think that
the Council is pointing in the correct direction by acting
on an area that has not yet been sufficiently covered.
For that, we again thank the Lithuanian presidency for
bringing it to the Council.

