Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) contained in document
S/2012/603. Likewise, allow me welcome and thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Farid Zarif for his briefing. We are also grateful for
the presentations that we heard earlier this morning
from Prime Minister of Serbia Ivica Dacie and from
Mr. Hashim Thaci.

We commend Serbia on its successful elections
and we hope that once the establishment of the
Government in Belgrade is finalized dialogue with
Pristina will resume, focused on the implementation of
existing agreements as well as tackling new subjects.
We welcome the clear reaffirmation of commitment
by the new President of Serbia to fully comply with
agreements already achieved. The Secretary-General's
report describes events that make it clear that UNMIK
continues to play an essential role as a guardian of
stability and neutrality in Kosovo and the region.

I would first like to refer to the situation in northern
Kosovo, which as the Secretary-General states, remains
fragile. We call on the parties to act with restraint,
to prevent a political setback or a resurgence of
instability. We share the Secretary-General's concern
about Pristina's intention to cut funding of the UNMIK
Administration Mitrovica, diverting it to a local
administrative office, which lacks the support and trust
of the public.

The report highlights the ongoing challenges faced
by minority communities throughout Kosovo. Since
the Secretary-General's last report (S/2012/275) there
has been an increase in criminal acts greatly harmful
to minority communities, as compared with the same
period last year. What is especially alarming is that the
attacks have now intensified and become more brutal. In
that regard, we would like to receive recommendations
on a more regular basis about how the Security Council
can support UNMIK in fulfilling its mandate. That is
also critical to increasing the rate of voluntary returnees
to Kosovo.

That brings me to another point, which is the
need to strengthen the rule of law and the judicial
sector, especially the need to improve the response of
public institutions, especially the police, when such
incidents occur. We expect that every complaint will be
conscientiously investigated and that those responsible
are brought to justice.

In that connection, I should also like to refer to
the Special Investigative Task Force charged with
analysing allegations of human rights violations and
organ trafficking in Kosovo. We are closely following
the progress in that regard. We note the report by
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(S/2012/603, annex I). We continue to believe that it
would be best to find an arrangement that involved the
United Nations in investigating those allegations.

Finally, I wish to express our complete support for
the Mission, as well as for the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. We urge them to continue
to fulfil their mandate in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999), which is the basis of the legal framework
in Kosovo.

