Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The consensus that has been achieved by
the Security Council on the draft resolution before us is
extremely important. The draft resolution reflects the
profound concern of the members of the Council over the
recent acute deterioration of the situation in Tajikistan as
a result of the offensive actions of the opposition in the
Garm region and over the continuing stagnation, since

 

July of this year, in the inter-Tajik talks caused by the
unconstructive policy of the opposition leaders.

The Russian Federation firmly condemns the
continuing terrorist acts in Dushanbe aimed at the peaceful
population, the military personnel of the collective
Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) and the Russian border forces. It also
condemns the gross mistreatment of the United Nations
observers at the hands of both the government personnel
and the fighters of the opposition.
The draft resolution urgently calls upon the parties to
create all the necessary conditions for the activity of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT), which is a significant factor for stability. The
members of the Council attach great importance of the
extension of the mandate of this Mission.

We note the statement of the representative of
Tajikistan, who confirmed his determination to seek a
solution to this conflict through solely political means. We
are firmly convinced that only the rejection of force as a
solution to the Tajik problem, the sincere implementation
of the commitments made by the sides and their readiness
to make mutual concessions and compromises will allow us
the progress to be made that is indispensable to the
negotiating process to achieve a resolution to the conflict.
It is precisely this that is demanded of the parties by the
draft resolution before us.

We welcome the protocol on the settlement of the
military-political situation in the conflict zone and the other
agreements achieved on 10-11 December at the meeting
between the President of the Republic of Tajikistan,
Mr. Rakhmonov, and the leader of the opposition, Mr. Nuri.
We note that this meeting was jeopardized by the forced
landing by the Taliban of a United Nations
aircraft carrying a delegation of the Tajik opposition. We
firmly condemn this scandalous action.

As for the agreements reached at the meeting
between Mr. Rakhmonov and Mr. Nuri, we believe that
they have a very good chance of being implemented. The
Russian Federation, for its part, will render
comprehensive assistance in convening a new meeting in
Moscow between President Rakhmonov and the leader of
the opposition, Mr. Nuri, on 19 December.

In supporting the noble efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Tajikistan,
Russia, as an observer State at the inter-Tajik talks,
intends to strengthen comprehensively further cooperation
with the United Nations towards a settlement of the
conflict.

