Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 1874
(2009). The international community has sent a very
strong message to North Korea through the Council.

For years, North Korea has chosen a dangerous
path. It has built up a clandestine nuclear programme,
whose exclusively military aims are evident. It has also
developed a ballistic missile programme that increases
the its nuclear threat. It has spread extremely sensitive
technology throughout the world, thus threatening the
security of us all even more. In doing so, it has
repeatedly violated the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, from which it has declared its
withdrawal. It has used its dangerous programmes to
demand benefits in exchange for its commitment to
dismantle its programme, which it has not honoured.

Over the past two months, North Korea has
significantly increased tensions in North-East Asia by
first conducting ballistic missile tests, then a nuclear
test and the firing of short- and medium-range missiles.
Today's reaction of the Security Council is
commensurate with that provocation and the risk that it
will encourage others to do the same. The Council
condemns that activity in the strongest terms possible
and demands its immediate cessation.

The Council imposes very strong sanctions that
will limit North Korea's capacity to advance its banned
programmes, in particular by cutting off the financial
resources originating from another destabilizing
activity - the spread of weapons throughout the
world- by blocking the financial networks that fuel
those programmes, by extending the embargo to
products that feed it, by adopting sanctions against the
persons and entities involved and, lastly, by demanding
that States inspect, seize and destroy the transportation
of banned cargo.

It must be underscored that this response is,
however, targeted, which ensured the Council's
support. The resolution excludes from the sanctions
regime humanitarian assistance and economic
development programmes for the people, whose
circumstances continue to be of grave concern.
The key aspects remain to be addressed. In the
coming months, we must agree in the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) on the
list of additional North Korean individuals and entities
who, because of their involvement in sensitive
activities, must be subject to individual sanctions. We
must ensure that all the provisions of resolution 1874
(2009) are strictly implemented by all.

In that respect, France is pleased that the Council
has endowed the Committee in charge of monitoring
the resolution's implementation with a panel of
experts, which will be of valuable help to the Turkish
presidency of the Committee. In particular, it will
enable us to considerably enhance follow-up and
assistance to States that need it.

We must also draw lessons from this crisis for the
future. I am thinking in particular of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). The
usefulness of the detection system established under
the CTBT Organization is clear in that respect. We
must also work towards the rapid entry into force of
the Treaty. Here in New York in September, France and
Morocco will host the ministerial conference on
article 14 of the Treaty. I am also thinking about the
upcoming Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
In May 2010, we cannot fail to speak up about the
seriousness of the threat posed by proliferation crises
to the entire non-proliferation regime. We will also
need to keep it in mind when we discuss strengthening
guarantees and when we consider how to respond to
States that may want to leave the Treaty.

Finally, we must firmly call on North Korea to
resume negotiations in the framework of the Six-Party
Talks. North Korea must make a strategic choice to
renounce its nuclear programme once and for all and to
re-establish normal relations with its neighbours. Its
people will be the first to benefit from that and it will
be a first step towards the complete denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula, which France, like the European
Union, dearly hopes for.

