Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Netherlands
aligns itself with the statement made by the observer
of the European Union. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Luxemburg for its leadership on
this issue and for organizing this important debate.
Also, please allow me to commend the work of both
Special Representative Leila Zerrougui and UNICEF in
promoting and protecting the rights of children affected
by armed conflict.

Since the adoption of resolution 1261 (1999),
thousands of children have been killed in conflicts
and many more have been left disabled, homeless or
separated from their parents. The civil war in Syria
stands out for its catastrophic scope and human cost.
Over 10,000 children have been killed and 3 million
children are in need of humanitarian assistance. Let me
underline the importance of the "No lost generation"
initiative and other efforts to alleviate some of the
suffering of Syrian children and offer them a future.

In view of the continued violence against children
in conflict and the use of child soldiers in conflict, it
is clear that more should be done by the international
community. Let me address three issues: prevention,
protection and prosecution.

First of all, we must strengthen the prevention
of conflicts and the prevention of the use of child
soldiers in conflict. The further focusing of our
common international norms in resolution 2143 (2014),
adopted today, is of great importance to that effect.
The establishment of legal frameworks, strengthening
governance and rule of law in countries, age verification
in recruitment mechanisms and raising public
awareness are some examples of concrete action. We
therefore welcome the important report published by
the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack
recently and the launch of the "Children, not soldiers"
campaign.

The full implementation of the action plans by
parties in conflict, as listed in the annual report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/245), is called for. It is
clear that children belong in schools, not in armies,
as the Secretary-General so rightfully mentioned this
morning.

Secondly, together we should strengthen the
protection of children in conflict. In that regard, the
Netherlands is especially alarmed by widespread
and deliberate attacks against schools, teachers and
students as a tool of war. Nearly 50 million children
and young people in conflict zones face enormous
barriers to education every day, keeping them out of
school and preventing them from reaching their true
potential. That will affect the potential for growth and
development of the country as a whole, long after peace
agreements have been signed.

My Government is also alarmed by the rise in the
use of school buildings for military purposes, including
as barracks, fighting positions, detention centres,
interrogation or torture sites, and weapons depots.
We strongly oppose such practices and, in line with
resolution 1998 (2011), urge everyone to take steps both
within their own legislation and military policies and
doctrine, as well as internationally, to end the military
use of schools and protect children's rights to safety
and education. Schools, as we know, are protected
under international humanitarian law. Nevertheless, as
Valerie Amos has told us, in Syria they are used for
military purposes. That must stop.

My third point is if prevention and protection have
not had sufficient results, prosecution and fighting
impunity are called for. If crimes against children
do occur, it is first and foremost the State concerned
that should ensure that perpetrators are brought to
justice. But if a State is unwilling or unable to do so,
the International Criminal Court (ICC) should step in
and investigate and prosecute violations and abuses
against children in armed conflict that fall within its
jurisdiction. The verdict of the ICC against Thomas
Lubanga for recruiting and using child soldiers in
hostilities was important in that context. For children
who were the victims of armed conflict, it is important
to see that justice is done, because impunity is not only
denial of justice - it is denial of the truth. Fighting
impunity is therefore a prerequisite for durable conflict
resolution and stable and peaceful societies, which we
all want for our children.

In conclusion, the Preamble of the Charter of
the United Nations states: "We the peoples of the
United Nations [are] determined to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war". Of course, that
phrase is about our children and their children. Let us
engage in that task, knowing that our children are the
promise for a more peaceful future. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands will continue to be a partner in that
endeavour for peace, justice and development.

