Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for organizing this important
meeting. I also thank the briefers, Mr. Jan Kubis,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq (UNAMI); Mr. Philip Spoerri, Head of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC);
and Ms. Suzan Araf Maroof.

A few days ago, we marked the twenty-eighth
anniversary of Iraq's invasion and occupation of
Kuwait. That was indeed a very sad and painful
anniversary. Since then, the Security Council has been
working on addressing the effects and repercussions of
that invasion. It has adopted dozens of resolutions and
many obligations have already been fulfilled. However,
the issue of Kuwaiti prisoners, missing Kuwaiti citizens
and third-country nationals remains one of the most
important humanitarian issues. It has been addressed
in a number of Security Council resolutions, notably
resolutions 687 (1991), 1284 (1999) and 2107 (2013).
The issue remains an open wound and the families of
the missing persons are still suffering. We have learned
of the fate of only 236 out of 605 missing individuals.
We have not discovered the fate of any prisoner or
missing person since 2004, and unfortunately we have
achieved no progress in that regard.

We value and appreciate the efforts of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, which
heads the meetings of the tripartite mechanims and
its Technical Subcommittee. We express our gratitude
and appreciation to the Iraqi Government, represented
by the Ministry of Defence, which has been making
great efforts in that regard. We hope that those efforts
will be pursued and redoubled in order to close this
humanitarian file and put an end to the suffering of the
families ofthe missing persons. For its part, Kuwait has
spared no effort to support those endeavours.

We call on UNAMI to continue implementing its
mandate with regard to the issue of Kuwaiti prisoners,
missing persons and the return of Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives, according to resolution
2107 (2013). In that context, we support the Special
Representative in implementing his mandate and the
task of the Mission pertaining to providing advice and
assistance to the Iraqi Government and support for the
political process and reconstruction efforts. We are
aware of the magnitude of the challenges that Iraq is
facing and that it needs international support to ensure
its security and economic and political stability.

We commend the achievements of the Iraqi
Government and its liberation and recovery of territories
that were under the control of Da'esh. We welcome the
recent holding of parliamentary elections, and hope that
the ongoing consultations among the different political
parties will be successful so that Iraq is able to form
a Government of national accord that encompasses all
sectors of Iraq's population.

Kuwait, as a neighbouring country, is committed
to providing support and assistance to the new Iraq
and strengthening our relations in all areas in order
to overcome the disastrous consequences of the
actions of the previous regime, which destabilized the
whole region.

Kuwait has done its utmost to assist Iraq in
overcoming challenges and threats to its security. We
provided logistical support to the international coalition
against Da'esh and helped to alleviate the humanitarian
suffering of Iraqi internally displaced persons. We
have cooperated with Iraq, the United Nations, the
European Union and the World Bank in hosting, in
Kuwait last February, the International Conference for
the Reconstruction of Iraq and the rebuilding of areas
liberated from Da'esh. We decided to provide urgent
assistance, in line with the directives of His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, to meet
the needs of the Iraqi brotherly people and to improve
services in some of the southern governorates where
demonstrations have taken place recently. We trust that
Iraq will overcome such difficult circumstances.

We would like once again to thank Special
Representative Mr. Jan Kubis for his efforts despite the
immense difficulties and challenges which he faced
during his mandate.

