Mr. Williamson (United States of America): I
wish to thank the Deputy United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Ramcharan, and
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for
their briefings to the Security Council this morning on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The bloody, violent conflict in the Congo is
tragic. For over three and a half years, there have been
brutal killings, rape, pillage and looting. Innocent
people have died at the hands of combatants and from
disease, malnutrition and other consequences of war.
Some estimate the death toll from this war at over 3
million people. Some of the worse acts imaginable,
including cannibalism, have been committed. Women
and children in particular have been victimized by this
conflict. And for too many there has been a climate of
impunity in which these vicious acts have been
perpetrated. Frankly, the international community has
been too slow and too timid to respond to these
grievous crimes, and the leaders of the various fighting
factions have failed in their responsibilities to end the
excessive brutality of their forces.

Approximately one year ago, the Security
Council was briefed by the then-United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mary Robinson,
about the atrocities that took place in Kisangani in May
2002. The report was thorough, detailed and very
useful. Security Council members, quite properly, were
shocked and distressed by what we were told. The
abuse of life and of human rights was appalling; the
stories of beheading were repulsive. At that time, the
Council thanked the High Commissioner for her good
work and strongly condemned the perpetrators of the
awful acts in Kisangani, and it reiterated the critical
principle that there can be no climate of impunity, that
these crimes must stop and that those responsible must
be held accountable.

Given these events and the Security Council's
actions, it is disheartening and distressing that we have
had to meet again and again on atrocities and terrible
human rights abuses in the eastern Congo. In February,
the Council met in formal session to hear the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Sergio
Vieira de Mello, report on the catastrophic human
rights situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In his report, the High Commissioner included
some of the preliminary findings regarding the atrocity
committed in the Ituri district last fall by the
Mouvement national de liberation du Congo (MLC)
troops and their ally, the Rassemblement congolais
pour la democratic - National (RCD-N) rebel
movement. At that time, the United States delegation
listened with revulsion and profound sadness to the
High Commissioner's descriptions of wanton acts of
torture, rape, killing and cannibalism. The United
Nations investigation confirmed that these atrocities
were part of a systematic and horrifying campaign of
atrocities committed against civilians in the forest of
northeast Congo, with children among the victims.
Apparently, rebels called their terror campaign
"Operation Clean the Slate", and the operation was
presented to the people almost like a vaccination
campaign.

At that time, we expressed our condemnation of
these horrendous acts, and I said in that Council
meeting on 13 February:

"What we have heard today about the
catastrophic human rights situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the
atrocities committed by various armed factions,
tragically reaffirms that we must keep human
rights at the centre of our efforts to foster a
lasting peace and a new transitional Government
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo."
(S/PV.4705, p. 8 and 9)

For the more recent victims of brutality in the
Congo, our rhetoric rings hollow and our actions
insufficient. For now, five months later, we hear details
of further atrocities committed elsewhere in the Congo.
Last winter, Jean-Pierre Bemba, the leader of the MLC,
promised to address the atrocities of Mambasa. He
announced that his rebel group had arrested five of its
own members, including its chief of operations in Ituri
province, Lieutenant-Colonel Freddy Ngalimo. He said
the five would face trial by rebel court.

The United States Government is very
disappointed at the inadequate manner with which the
MLC handled the trials of those suspected of
committing atrocities in Mambasa. We fully share the
assessment that those trials were gravely flawed. We
are concerned about the inadequate legal rights
afforded to the defendants in those trials and about the
callous disregard for the serious nature of the crimes,
as reflected in the light sentences handed down and in
the failure to charge anyone with crimes against
humanity or war crimes. The failures of those
proceedings will not end the culture of impunity; sadly,
those failures perpetuate that culture of impunity.

Just last week, the Security Council issued a press
statement congratulating the Congolese parties on
forming a transitional Government. The difficult issue
of who will serve as minister for land resources and
chief of staff of the Government appear to have been
resolved. On 30 June at Mbandaka, President Kabila
read out the complete list of ministers. By the end of
July it is expected that the vice-presidents, the cabinet
ministers and the members of the National Assembly
will all be sworn in. The United States Government
welcomed the announcement of the transitional
Government, and we welcome the movement to put the
transitional Government in place. We also welcome the
compromise on military integration.

Furthermore, my delegation welcomes the report
given by Under-Secretary-General Guehenno this
morning that verification efforts are taking place in the
Ituri district, that Bunia was declared a weapons-free
zone on 27 June, that 6,000 internally displaced
persons have returned to Bunia, that the Ituri interim
administration is being more active, and that the Ituri
district seems stable. That is good news. My delegation
also welcome's Mr. Guehenno's report that the second
task force will begin to deploy on 15 August and that
the Multinational Force in Bunia has begun to shift the
balance between the rebels and legitimate authority.
That is very encouraging indeed.

But Deputy High Commissioner for Human
Rights Ramcharan has given us yet another report of
gruesome crimes committed in the eastern Congo. This
morning he told us that in early April at Drodro people
were burned alive, that there were machete attacks in
hospitals and that there are 20 mass-grave sites. Again
we are repulsed by those acts of horrendous
inhumanity. Again our conscience is aroused. Again we
say there can be no culture of impunity. Yet those
crimes against humanity continue and our words ring
hollow.

The United States Government believes that the
transitional national Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must take responsibility for
ending the pervasive culture of impunity in that bloody,
brutalized land. The tragedies of the past years must be
addressed. As appropriate, we should assist the
transitional national Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to achieve these goals by
helping them to strengthen the nascent inclusive
national Government.

A lesson in recent years is that transitional justice
is very important for a post-conflict society hoping to
move towards a secure, stable and sustainable peace. It
is critical that there be no impunity. Accountability is
essential. Gross human rights abuses cannot be brushed
under the carpet. A full recording of these crimes is
required, and the perpetrators must be identified and
held to account. My delegation urges the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to assist non-
governmental organizations and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in gathering
documentary evidence of violations of international
humanitarian law and of human rights in order to
present these cases to the Congolese Ministry of Justice
for prosecution.

A truth and reconciliation commission as
described in paragraph 28 of the report on Drodro
requires an effective and functioning Government.
With the formation of the cabinet of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's transitional national
Government at the end of June, that framework is in
place. The Congolese parties who have agreed to work
together must now show that their hearts and minds are
committed to national reconciliation, and come to
agreement on extending Government control
throughout the country.

As I have already mentioned, on 16 July 2002 the
Security Council received a report on the events in
Kisangani of 14 and 15 May 2002. The
recommendation made then that the authorities in
Kisangani should take immediate steps to arrest those
who ordered or were involved in extra-judicial killings
has not been heeded, and violence continues. That is
unacceptable. The people of Kisangani who were
victimized deserve better. The people of the Congo
deserve better.

The years of brutal and bloody conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have exacted a
terrible toll on millions of people. The goal of a Congo
free from violence that is just, secure and sustainable
can only be reached through meaningful transitional
justice that leads to national reconciliation. That
requires an end to the culture of impunity, as well as
accountability and justice. International action can go
only so far in addressing the human rights problems in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Congolese
parties themselves must be sincere and active in
addressing them. We call on the Congolese to take
meaningful steps, beginning with expediting secure and
unrestricted access by investigators and MONUC staff
to areas of, and witnesses to, suspected human rights
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law.

