Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for hosting
today's debate on children on armed conflict. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous,
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Yoka Brandt and
Save the Children Associate Vice-President Gregory
Ramm for their remarks. We are also grateful to
Ambassador Lucas for her leadership as Chair of
the Security Council Working Group on Chilren and
Armed Conflict. We also deeply appreciate the devoted
work of Special Representative Leila Zerrougui and
her team in advancing this agenda. I thank her for her
briefing this morning as well.

The United States remains determined to combat
horrific acts committed against children in conflict-
torn countries. As the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/245) attests, there is no starker example of
where children desperately need the international
community's help than Syria. As we speak, Syrian
children are being tortured and murdered, used as
human shields and conscripted as fighters. Syria is
unfortunately not the only place where abuses are
surging.

In the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo armed groups, including the Mouvement du
23 Mars, have engaged in unlawful child recruitment,
as well as killing and maiming of children. We welcome
the commitment of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to address those horrors by
signing an action plan last October. We call for the
expeditious implementation of that plan.

We have also seen welcome progress in Burma,
where the Government has shown a degree of
commitment to the action plan signed in June 2012
by releasing 97 under-age military recruits in 2012.
However, we remain concerned that there was an
increase in complaints about unlawful child recruitment
in 2012 that occurred in 2011. We urge Burma, in
accordance with its commitments, to allow United
Nations access to military units to conduct verification
visits. Moreover, non-State armed ethnic groups in
Burma continue to use child soldiers. More progress is
needed on this front.

The Security Council requires more effective
ways to deal with the growing number of persistent
perpetrators, especially among armed groups. In that
regard, we appreciate the Working Group's focus on
this issue and its effort to develop appropriate tools.
We also commend the Secretary-General's proposals,
which deserve the Council's serious consideration.

The question of persistent perpetrators, however,
raises a larger issue about the United Nations children-
and-armed-conflict process itself. We can be proud ofits
accomplishments and must strive to make it as effective
as it can be. But it is only one tool among the many
that we should be using to protect children. Rather than
attempting to make the action plan process a one-size
fits all mechanism, we should promote children-and-
armed-conflict action plans in tandem with other
tools, to comprehensively address the various contexts
in which children are subjected to abuse. A wider
range of efforts is needed, from holding perpetrators
accountable and preventing them from committing
abuses to resolving situations of conflict that enable
such heinous crimes. For example, the conviction
of Thomas Lubanga for unlawful child soldiering by
the International Criminal Court sends an important
message that such crimes will not be tolerated.

Furthermore, several African countries, with the
support of the African Union, the United Nations, the
United States and others, are cooperating to end once
and for all the threat posed by the Lord Resistance's
Army (LRA), one of the world's worst perpetrators
of crimes against children. As noted in the Council's
discussion on 29 May (see S/PV.6971), that effort has
resulted in a substantial decrease in LRA attacks,
the removal of two top LRA commanders from the
battlefield and the defection of scores of LRA fighters.

Finally, peacemaking efforts work to safeguard
endangered children by ending the armed conflict
itself. Connecting those efforts into a comprehensive
approach will strengthen the ultimate goals of the
children-and-armed-conflict action plan process and
concretely advance the issue of the plight of children
caught in harm's way.

