Mr. Davies (Sierra Leone): Permit me,
Mr. President, to extend, on behalf of my delegation,
my heartfelt congratulations to you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March and to thank you for organizing this debate
on the fourth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) (S/2010/l35). My delegation
extends its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
that comprehensive and well-coordinated report. We
also thank him for his excellent analysis of the current
situation in Sierra Leone, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1886 (2009), which mandated him to submit
a report on the activities of UNIPSIL every six months.

I also take this opportunity to convey my
gratitude to members of the Sierra Leone country-
specific configuration, and especially to its Chair,
Ambassador John McNee, for his outstanding
leadership and for his lucid statement this morning. My
gratitude also goes to the Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, for his productive and inspiring briefing
today and the skilful manner with which he is handling
matters in Sierra Leone. On behalf of my delegation, I
extend thanks and appreciation to the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Fund for their determined and
untiring efforts to keep the process in full gear.

As we meet to consider the review of the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone - a
process designed to lead us to another extension of the
UNIPSIL mandate for twelve months - I am gratified
to note that significant progress is being made to
combat daunting challenges facing the nation. The
Government remains fully committed to pursuing
efforts aimed at consolidating peace and promoting
sustained economic growth.

We concur with many of the issues raised by the
Secretary-General in the report before us. Laudable
progress has been made in the Government's
commitment to promote good governance, as
evidenced by the strategic framework and concerted
actions that the Government continues to take to
facilitate the promotion of human rights, gender
equality, decentralization, and transparency and
accountability in government, and the crackdown on
corruption, drug trafficking and cross-border organized
crime.

The Government is also determined to establish a
culture of political tolerance among the country's main
political parties. These measures have led to a
relatively peaceful political climate, one favourable for
investments and improvement in the conduct of trade
and commerce throughout the country. The joint
communique signed by the two main political parties -
the opposition Sierra Leone People's Party (SLPP) and
the ruling All People's Congress (APC) - in April last
year continues to encourage peaceful coexistence and
dialogue among the main political parties, despite
periodic incidents of minor clashes between the
supporters.

The recent appointment of the former SLPP
Minister for Information and Communication,
Professor Septimus Kaikai, as Chairman of the Board
of Trustees of the newly constituted independent
national broadcaster, the Sierra Leone Broadcasting
Corporation, is a manifestation of the Government's
commitment to political tolerance and the building of a
strong democratic communications system. Sierra
Leone also boasts today of having one of the most
vibrant and independent media systems, with over 20
registered newspapers representing all shades of
political and social persuasion. The present climate of
press freedom in Sierra Leone is promoting open and
inclusive dialogue about the future of the country.

As already mentioned by the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, the
Government has over the past months demonstrated its
commitment to ensuring transparent and accountable
governance by dismissing from service two more
cabinet ministers and a number of public officials,
including the Commissioner-General of the National
Revenue Authority, after they were accused of
corruption and abuse of office by the Anti-Corruption
Commission.

President Ernest Bai Koroma remains committed
to the pledge he took on his assumption of office in
2007, that there would be no sacred cows in
Government and that any minister or official found
wanting in moral probity in the handling of the
country's meagre resources would be relieved of his or
her position and also made to refund whatever he or
she misappropriated, in addition to facing legal action.
The Anti-Corruption Commission is relentless in its
enforcement of the 2008 anti-corruption laws, which
are considered to be among the toughest in Africa. In
recognition of the Government's acknowledgement that
corruption is a major threat to economic growth and
prosperity, the Anti-Corruption Commission has
instituted 15 successful prosecutions and recovered
over 2 billion leones from stiff fines imposed on
perpetrators, and as a result Sierra Leone moved up 12
places in the Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index for 2009.
During the period under review, the Government
completed the Bumbuna hydroelectric project, which,
in addition to restoring power to a nation that has been
in darkness for over a decade, holds the potential of
providing much-needed impetus to socio-economic
improvement and improving the quality of life of the
people.

The Government has also taken strong measures
to improve security. Joint police-military patrols under
the Military Assistance to Civil Power Act have been
stepped up to tackle the recent spate of armed robberies
in the city. That has helped to improve the security
situation considerably.

The Government, in its continued efforts to give
relevance to the joint communique signed last year by
the two main political parties, continues to take
effective measures to ensure that the injustices of the
past that led to the destructive 11-year war do not
regain a foothold in the society. In a further attempt to
get to the root causes of the clashes between the SLPP
and APC in Freetown last year, the Government has
established an Independent Review Panel, composed of
members nominated by both the SLPP and APC, to
further investigate the clashes. The panel is presently
in session and on conclusion of its sittings will present
its recommendations to the Government on measures
needed to forestall a recurrence.

The showcasing of the Sierra Leone National
Action Plan to eradicate gender inequality,
discrimination and injustice, which was unveiled at the
United Nations two weeks ago during the session of
the United Nations Commission on the Status of
Women, was another major achievement by the country
in addressing the injustices of the past and a giant step
towards ensuring that abuse, violence and
discrimination against women are no longer tolerated
in our society. In addition, the Human Rights
Commission has been doing its utmost to monitor and
to bring awareness of the human rights situation in the
country, especially those of women and children.

The Consultative Group meeting on Sierra Leone
held in November in London was meant to foster and
advance investor confidence in the country in order to
generate wealth and create employment for the
youthful population, particularly through a
re-energized private sector and implementation of the
Agenda for Change. The endorsement of the aid policy
constitutes one of the major milestones of the
Consultative Group meeting, and the Government has
reiterated its firm commitment to its full
implementation. We remain highly hopeful that
partners will endeavour to scale up and deliver on their
commitments in a timely and predictable manner.

The Government has made such impressive
strides that it also received favourable ranking from the
Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance for being the
most improved country in Africa in the area of
governance over the past two years. In addition, a
recent World Bank study concluded that standards of
governance, political stability and the ability of
citizens to hold government accountable has improved
more significantly in Sierra Leone than in many other
countries around the world.

Despite these significant strides in promoting
responsible and responsive governance as well as in
accelerating the wheels of socio-economic and political
renaissance, the Government is aware of the fact that
significant challenges still remain and continue to
undermine its best efforts to improve the lives of its
people.

One of the thorniest areas that continue to require
urgent attention from stakeholders and Sierra Leone's
development partners is youth unemployment. A
significant percentage of youth continue to be
unemployed, and this predicament poses a serious
threat to efforts to consolidate peace and stability in
Sierra Leone. A Youth Commission has been
established, though it is not yet operational. We
commend the German Agency for Technical
Cooperation - the GTZ - for a pilot project to
engage youths in some form of gainful employment in
garbage disposal in the capital of Freetown. However,
the urgent need for resource mobilization to more
meaningfully tackle this nagging problem of youth
unemployment cannot be overemphasized.
In this respect, I wish to appeal to our
development partners to honour their pledges and
provide not only the projected $350 million needed by
the Government to implement its Agenda for Change,
but other resources and job-creation opportunities
required to ameliorate the problem of youth
unemployment. My delegation also continues to
believe that Sierra Leone's peace and stability still
remains at the mercy of subregional socio-political
instability - as evidenced by the present political
crisis in neighbouring Guinea, which has the potential
to spill over into our country.

While the Government continues working with
the Joint Drug Interdiction Task Force to make Sierra
Leone and the West African subregion drug-free, the
narcotic trafficking menace in West Africa and
organized cross-border crime remain real threats and
require UNIPSIL's continued engagement in Sierra
Leone for many more years to come, especially with
the fast-approaching 2012 presidential, legislative and
local government elections.

Let me conclude by reiterating our gratitude to
the United Nations, our bilateral partners and the
international community at large for their continued
engagement in Sierra Leone to ensure maximum
success in our socio-political and economic recovery
and the consolidation of peace. Let me take this
opportunity to also reassure this body of the
determination of the Sierra Leone Government to work
cooperatively with the United Nations, our
development partners and the international community
to ensure that we surmount the many challenges facing
us as a nation.

