The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Lebanon, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Mohamad Issa,
Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and Emigrants of Lebanon and Vice-President of the
Lebanese delegation to the General Assembly.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Issa
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/707, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, Germany, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America. I should also like to
draw the attention of members to document
S/2004/699, containing the text of identical letters
dated 30 August 2004 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President
of the Security Council, and to document S/2004/706,
containing the text of identical letters dated
1 September 2004 from the Permanent Representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President
of the Security Council.

I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mohamad Issa, Secretary-General of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and Emigrants of Lebanon and Vice-
President of the Lebanese delegation to the General
Assembly.


