Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for presenting the practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict, as well as the other speakers for their observations. I also welcome Their Majesties the King and Queen of the Belgians. Their presence confirms Belgium's commitment to this issue, which has also been demonstrated through Belgium's extraordinary work as Chair of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We welcome the practical guidance, and commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and her team, as well as the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and UNICEF, for preparing that document. The provisions on the protection of children should be a high priority in mediation processes. We are confident that this guidance will assist us in placing children at the heart of mediation efforts, thereby improving the chances for sustainable peace. We therefore encourage the Secretary-General to disseminate this guidance with a view to promoting its use in peace and mediation processes, and we encourage all actors involved in those processes, including civil society, to use it as an effective tool to channel the protection and rights of children into peace negotiations. The growing number of children in armed conflict and the disproportionate way in which they are affected is terrifying. The severity and extent of the short- and long-term repercussions of armed conflict on children are a source of deep concern. Nevertheless, as we commemorate the International Day against the Use of Child Soldiers, that tool is inspiring and encouraging. We are aware that addressing grave violations against children in situations of armed conflict is a sensitive issue that requires the skills necessary to address it. That is why, although we consider the guidance to be user-friendly and flexible, designed with confidence-building in mind and taking into account the context of the situation, it is also paramount for mediators to have an expert on the issue, or a staff member from UNICEF, the Office of the Special Representative or a child protection adviser, on their team. It is essential to take into account the point of view of children, as well as to include provisions on their protection at an early stage in peace processes, thereby increasing the possibility of preventing future violations and ensuring their protection. One example of that is the peace process in Colombia, in which theprotection of children served as the starting point for dialogue with the armed groups. Peace agreements should be not only reactive but also preventive. The protection of children must be included as a priority in the implementation of agreements. The sustainability and viability of peace agreements will depend largely on that. The number of peace agreements that make specific reference to child protection is very low. We hope that more peace and ceasefire agreements will include provisions pertaining to child protection. It is a matter of making it a regular feature of peace negotiations and agreements, as the Security Council has explicitly requested in resolutions on the subject. The Dominican Republichasendorsedthe Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers and the Paris Commitments, and has also joined the ACT to Protect Children Affected by Conflict campaign. The future of children affected by the conflict is threatened when warring parties continue to commit violations against them and impunity remains the norm. As former Executive Director of the Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict, Eva Smets, has emphasized, children are our reason to fight for the elimination of the worst aspects of war, but they are also our hope for success.
