The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Cheikh
Ahmed, Mr. O'Brien, and Ms. Al-Mutawakel for their
briefings. We reiterate our support for the work being
carried out by the Special Envoy and we thank him for
his ongoing efforts to find a solution to the conflict.
Uruguay firmly condemns the attack that he
suffered during his transfer from the Sana'a airport on
22 May during his official visit to Yemen. An attack
on his person is an attack on the United Nations and is
therefore unacceptable and must be condemned in the
strongest terms. We also extend our deepest gratitude
and recognition to the humanitarian agents and
institutions in Yemen for their arduous work to bring
hope to the civilian population who have been victims
of this armed conflict for more than two years.

This open Security Council briefing on the situation
in Yemen is not only a forum to address the issue, but
it also seeks to give shed light on the cruel reality that
the country is suffering and provide an opportunity to
express to the thousands of Yemeni men, women and
children that they have not been forgotten.

Uruguay supports the peaceful settlement of the
conflict in Yemen. The negotiation process and the peace
talks are the only way out of the crisis. Uruguay regrets
the prolonged stagnation in the peace process, which
has not been able to bring about positive results until
now. We are most concerned about the fact that none of
the parties is demonstrating sustained commitment or
interest in achieving a political settlement that would
put an end to the conflict. The United Nations and
the international community can and must promote
peace, but it is the Yemenis themselves who must
make their own decisions in order to achieve peace.
The stakeholders must acknowledge that they have to
make concessions. Uruguay reiterates its call on the
parties to resume the dialogue and to fully respect
the commitment to a cessation of hostilities, which is
fundamental step for the establishment of peace.

To achieve stability in Yemen, actors in the region
and those countries that have influence on the parties
must commit to working together towards a peaceful
settlement of the conflict. Yemen has been witness to
generalized violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law committed by all the
warring parties. These violations have been documented
in several case studies by groups of experts on Yemen.
We congratulate them on their work and we encourage
them to continue their work. The parties involved have
shown that they are completely unwilling to investigate
these horrendous acts. We therefore believe that it is
up to the Security Council to establish impartial and
transparent investigative mechanisms on international
humanitarian law violations that have taken place
in Yemen by both parties to the conflict. That is an
necessary and essential step to ensuring accountability.
Last week, during the open debate on the protection
of civilians and health care in armed conflict (see S/PV.7951), we stressed that civilians continue to pay
the highest cost of war. In Yemen, the indiscriminate
attacks are creating a real catastrophe. The bombing
against civil infrastructure require our full attention
and the condemnation of the international community.
Those responsible for these aberrant atrocities and
their accomplices must be held accountable for those
crimes. The traffic and trade in weapons to the warring
parties must cease because this directly contributes to
the massacre of civilians. The ongoing violence and
the dismantling of Yemeni institutions is also enabling
terrorism to spread. As has been seen, groups, such
as Da'esh and Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula,
are actively benefiting from the changing political
environment and the vacuum in governance to recruit
new members and organize new attacks.

With regard to the humanitarian situation,
Uruguay is also concerned by the humanitarian crisis
in Yemen, in particular the serious situation for the
most vulnerable people, such as women and children.
The appalling situation and the seriousness of the
humanitarian situation for the Yemeni people requires
immediate and unhindered access for humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population, including through
the port of Hudaydah. Access to that port is essential
as it is the primary access route for food imports to
the country.

Finally, I want to stress that we all share the
responsibility of maximizing efforts to bring about
peace and to alleviate the suffering of millions of
people. We call on all States that can bring influence to
bear upon the parties, to collaborate in the pursuit of a
peaceful solution to the conflict.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

