Mr. Verbeke (spoke in French): In my capacity
as Chairperson of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) of the 23 December 2006, I
have the honour to report to the Security Council, in
accordance with subparagraph 18(h) of that resolution,
covering the period from 23 December 2006 to
23 March 2007.

In order to be effective in using our time, I will
shorten my oral statement, the written text of my
statement, which has been distributed here this
morning, being authentic.

By resolution 1737 (2006), adopted on
23 December 2006, the Council imposed certain
measures relating to the Islamic Republic of Iran. I will
not enumerate them; we all know them well. The
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) has been entrusted with undertaking the tasks
set out in paragraph 18 of the resolution. Again, these
2
tasks are well known and are repeated in the written
text of my statement.

Members will recall that, on 18 January,
following consultations the Security Council elected
the Committee's bureau for 2007. Its members include
myself, as Chairman, and the representatives of Ghana
and Peru as Vice-Chairs. The Committee began its
work shortly thereafter on 23 January, when it held its
first official meeting. In my opening remarks at that
meeting, I told members of the Committee that we did
not have to resort to interpretations of resolution 1737
(2006) that might broaden or restrict its scope, and that
it was our job to facilitate the implementation of the
resolution as worded and to ensure that it is correctly
implemented. Any new proposal submitted to the
Committee would therefore be judged by the extent to
which it would contribute to the faithful and effective
implementation of the resolution.

I also proposed an initial programme of work
whereby we would begin by considering the guidelines
for the Committee's work and then proceed to the
consideration of reports submitted by Member States,
if needed, and of measures they have taken in follow-
up to the resolution. That would not prevent us from
also taking up any other question that might be raised
in the meantime.

Since that first meeting, the members of the
Committee have met six times for informal
consultations almost every week. It is my pleasure to
inform the Security Council that, thanks to the
intensive efforts made by Council members and to the
spirit of cooperation and good faith that they have
exhibited, the Committee has made good progress in
developing guidelines for the conduct of its work that,
I hope, will be able to be adopted soon. The guidelines
should allow us effectively to organize our work and
facilitate implementation by Member States of the
measures imposed by the Security Council.

The Committee's general guiding principle is to
ensure that the text of the guidelines is brief and clear,
and to avoid repetitions and ambiguities. The
guidelines are designed to ensure that results conform
to the letter and the spirit of resolution 1737 (2006).

In paragraph 19 of the resolution, the Security
Council decided that all States shall report to the
Committee within 60 days of the adoption of the
resolution on the steps they have taken with a View to
implementing effectively the relevant provisions of the
07-27989
resolution. On 7 February, in my capacity as Chairman,
I sent a note verbale to all Member States in which I
reminded them of their obligations thereunder. To date,
the Committee has received reports from 58 Member
States, as well as a report from the European Union. Of
those, 26 reports and the communication from the
European Union were received before the deadline of
21 February 2007.

Reports are published as official United Nations
documents except if a State requests that its report
remain confidential. Following a preliminary
consideration of the reports, I can inform Council
members that 51 States have indicated that they have
already adopted the legislative provisions required to
give effect to the corresponding paragraphs of the
resolution. Seven other States have informed us of the
measures they have taken or intend to take to put the
necessary legal frameworks into place. Finally, all
States that have submitted reports have assured the
Committee of their resolve to implement resolution
1737 (2006) and to discharge the obligations emanating
therefrom. I have asked Committee members to bring
any question or comment that they might have with
respect to any of those reports to the Committee's
attention.

In accordance with resolution 1737 (2006), the
Committee also asked the secretariat of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for
information regarding measures taken by the Agency
effectively to implement the measures imposed under
paragraph 16 of the resolution, which restricts the
scope of technical cooperation offered to Iran by the
IAEA, as well as any other information it might deem
useful in that respect. In a letter dated 5 February
addressed to the Director General of the Agency, I
requested the Agency to provide that information to the
Committee as soon as possible.

In a reply dated 13 February, the Agency
informed the Committee that its Board of Governors
had slated consideration of its cooperation with Iran
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) for its session
scheduled to open on 5 March 2007, and that the
Agency would communicate the requested information
as soon as possible once the Board had concluded its
consideration.

On 8 March, the Agency sent the Committee its
report on the issue, in which the Board of Governors
endorsed the measures proposed in the Director
07-27989

General's report of 8 February. Of 55 projects, 22 will
be suspended. Technical cooperation offered for food,
agricultural, medicinal, safety or humanitarian
purposes will be pursued. The Agency's projects in
those areas are connected to improving nuclear waste
management, using radioactive sources in medical
treatment, assessing the security of the research reactor
in Tehran and bringing it up to date, and assisting the
Iranian atomic energy organization to strengthen its
capacities with a View to starting up and running the
Bushehr nuclear facility.

The projects on which the Agency has suspended
its cooperation include the strengthening of Iran's
capacities with respect to its national nuclear energy
programme, the creation of a new nuclear technology
centre, the strengthening of strategic planning
capacities, and various technical training programmes.

As I said at the outset of this briefing, the
Committee is authorized to designate other individuals
and entities whose assets are subject to being frozen
and, in the case of individuals, whose travel is subject
to restrictions. The Committee is also authorized under
paragraph 3 (d) of resolution 1737 (2006) to determine
other items which could contribute to enrichment-
related, or reprocessing, or heavy water-related
activities, or to the development of nuclear weapon
delivery systems. During the period covered by our
report, the Committee received no request to designate
individuals or entities meeting the criteria set out in
resolution 1737 (2006) or to include additional articles
on the list of banned items.

With respect to individuals already designated in
the annex to the resolution, the Committee has received
no notification or request for derogation or for
delisting. It has also received no requests for
derogation under paragraph 9 of the resolution with
respect to the provision of items or assistance that the
Committee had determined in advance would clearly
not contribute to the development of Iran's
technologies in support of its proliferation sensitive
nuclear activities and of development of nuclear
weapon delivery systems.

In conclusion, while the Security Council
continues to consider measures taken by Iran in the
light of the report received from the IAEA pursuant to
paragraph 23 of resolution 1737 (2006), and while it
considers measures to be taken pursuant to paragraph
24 of the resolution, I wish to affirm that the
3
Committee will continue to conduct its deliberations as
effectively as possible, as called for in the resolution.

