Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Let
me reiterate here my congratulations to you, Sir, on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of February, as well as our complete willingness to
work with you for the success of your mission. I would
also like to congratulate Ambassador Holbrooke on the
success of the American presidency during the month of
January.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on East Timor and Mr. Vieira de Mello for his
complete and clear account of how the situation in that
Territory is evolving, its positive features and, above all,
the remaining difficulties and tasks.

Despite the precariousness of the situation and the
manifold difficulties, my delegation cannot but be pleased
by the progress that has been achieved and the concrete
advances that have been made. I therefore seize this
opportunity to congratulate Mr. Sergio de Mello and his
team on the efforts they have made and on the
determination with which they are carrying out their
work.

Pleased as we are about the general situation on the
ground, Tunisia nonetheless stresses the importance of the
consolidation and national reconciliation of East Timor
and of the establishment of peaceful, good-neighbourly
relations between East Timor and its neighbours.

Tunisia is also pleased by the arrangements for and
the progress achieved regarding transferring the
International Force in East Timor to the United Nations
within an appropriate time-frame and under good
conditions. I would also like to praise the goodwill that
the Indonesian Government has shown in cooperating
with the United Nations and its evident determination to
develop good relations with all the parties. This positive
attitude has been shown in actions the Government has
taken to find solutions to problems arising from the crisis,
including those related to Violations of human rights. In
particular, Indonesia's acts have included meetings with
leaders and the liberation of political prisoners. In
addition, it intends to establish cooperative relations in
several fields, and has decided to establish a working
group to speed the return of refugees to East Timor.

We agree that there is a need to strengthen the
capacities of the humanitarian organizations on the ground
so that they can discharge their duties under the best
possible conditions. In this context, effective coordination
between the various agencies operating on the ground is
designed to maximize results, as Mr. Vieira de Mello
emphasized.

Finally, I should like to welcome the financial
support that the international community is providing for
East Timor. That support is continuing to grow, as was
demonstrated during the donors' meeting in Tokyo.

Before concluding, I should also like to point out
that we attach great importance to the efforts and the
commitment being made by the international community
to restore peace, stability and prosperity for the population
of East Timor.

 

