Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the presidency of the Council for proposing
to focus today's meeting on the plight of children
in Syria. Let me also thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
for their briefings and for the relentless efforts of the
humanitarian workers in all areas of conflict.

I will focus my remarks on two key points: the
humanitarian situation and Syria's children.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, as the
Syrian crisis enters its eighth year, our Syrian brothers
are facing a humanitarian catastrophe and extremely
difficult economic and social situation. Thousands of
Syrians are subjected daily to the most heinous and
blatant violations of international law and international
human rights law as a result of the ongoing cycle of
violence, which to date has claimed the lives of no
fewer than 400,000 people, including a large number of
women and children.

We have followed with great concern the military
escalation in south-western Syria over the past
few weeks, which has led to the displacement of
almost 300,000 people and the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation of innocent civilians, including
women, children and the elderly. Although this number
has decreased following the return of some refugees to
their homes, many of them remain in dire need of urgent
humanitarian assistance. We share the Secretary-
General's concerns with regard to ending cross-border
humanitarian operations in south-western Syria as
a result of the recent escalation. We underscore the
need to providing humanitarian assistance to all those
in need in south-western Syria as soon as possible,
lifting all restrictions on international organizations
and agencies and delivering assistance to those in need
throughout Syria.

The war in Syria, which began in 2011, has created
the largest refugee crisis in modern history. The Syrian
people have been left with no choice but to escape or
to live under the stress of armed conflict. It has led to
more than 5 million Syrian refugees abroad, including
2 million children, and nearly 6 million internally
displaced persons, 2.5 million of whom are children.
That represents a total of 11 million Syrians. We
underscore that the return of refugees and displaced
persons to their homes must be safe, voluntary
and dignified.

Undoubtedly, the children of Syria continue to pay
the highest price of a war that has been going on for
eight years in their country. They have been robbed of
their innocence, dreams and their inherent right to life
and dignity. The suffering of Syria's children is a stigma
for the international community. Millions of children
know only war. They have experienced only war since
they were born. They remain the most vulnerable and
the most in need of protection. Therefore, we must not
disappoint them because they are the future of Syria.

There are more than 5 million children in Syria
in need of humanitarian assistance. As Ms. Virginia
Gamba stated a while ago, children in Syria are subjected
to grave suffering as a result of the ongoing conflict.
They are killed, abducted, kidnapped, recruited,
tortured and subjected to other tragedies. The conflict
has affected almost 2 million children, who have not
even received basic education, which could result in a
whole generation losing their right to learn.

In 2017, as Ms. Gamba just stated, 67 schools and
more than 108 medical facilities were targeted. This
information is included in the report on children and
armed conflict. We strongly condemn the systematic
targeting of vital and basic facilities, including schools,
hospitals and medical facilities. They represent a red
line, as underscored in resolution 2427 (2018). This
resolution, which was adopted unanimously at the
beginning of the current month and was sponsored by
Kuwait and 97 States Members of the United Nations,
is explicit and clear. It condemns the attacks on schools
and hospitals, and calls upon all parties to the armed
conflict not to thwart children's access to education and
health services. We urge all parties to the Syrian crisis
to implement this resolution. Furthermore, resolution
2401 (2018) is yet another example of a blatant violation
pertaining to Security Council resolutions. Although it
was adopted unanimously and called for a ceasefire
without delay and the delivery of humanitarian access
to besieged areas, that resolution, unfortunately, was
not implemented.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reaffirms that
there is no military solution to the Syrian crisis. We
must redouble our efforts to end the suffering of an
entire people - the brotherly Syrian people, who are
rich in history, culture and civilization. We must end
the repercussions ofa crisis that is destroying the region
and the world at large, by supporting a political solution
in line with relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2254 (2015), and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). This would lead to
a comprehensive settlement, agreed by all components
of the Syrian people, in order to meet their legitimate
aspirations and achieve the unity, independence and
sovereignty of Syria.

