The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Otunnu for the clarifications that he has provided.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
matter of children and armed conflict and taken
note with deep concern of the continued
recruitment and use of children by parties to
armed conflict in violation of international
obligations applicable to them, as reported by the
Secretary-General in his fifth report (S/2005/72).
It reiterates its commitment to address in all its
forms the impact of armed conflict on children.

"The Council reaffirms its strong
condemnation of the recruitment and use of child
soldiers by parties to armed conflict in violation
of international obligations applicable to them
and of all other violations and abuses committed
against children in situations of armed conflict. It
urges all parties to armed conflict to halt
immediately such intolerable practices.

"The Council recalls all its previous
resolutions, which provide a comprehensive
framework for addressing the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. It reiterates

its determination to ensure respect for its
resolutions and other international norms and
standards for the protection of children affected
by armed conflict.

"The Council recalls particularly paragraph
2 of its resolution 1539 (2004) dated 22 April
2004, requesting the Secretary-General, taking
into account the proposals contained in his report
as well as any other relevant elements, to devise
urgently an action plan for a systematic and
comprehensive monitoring and reporting
mechanism, which utilizes expertise from the
United Nations system and the contributions of
national Governments, regional organizations,
non-governmental organizations in their advisory
capacity and various civil society actors, in order
to provide timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information on the recruitment and use of child
soldiers in Violation of applicable international
law and on other violations and abuses committed
against children affected by armed conflict, for
consideration in taking appropriate action.

"The Council takes note of the Secretary-
General's proposal for an action plan for the
establishment of a monitoring, reporting and
compliance mechanism, in accordance with this
request and with paragraph 15 (b) of resolution
1539 (2004), and has started consideration of the
Secretary-General's proposal.

"The Council reiterates the crucial need for
a systematic and comprehensive monitoring and
reporting mechanism, and its determination to
ensure compliance and to put an end to impunity.
The Council further reiterates its intention to
complete expeditiously the process of the
establishment of the mechanism.

"In this regard, it has started work on a new
resolution with the aim of its early adoption and
with due consideration of views expressed by the
United Nations Member States during the open
debate held on 23 February 2005 , in order to take
forward the implementation of its previous
resolutions with a View to ending the recruitment
or use of child soldiers in violation of applicable
international law and other violations and abuses
committed against children affected by armed
conflict situations, and promoting their
reintegration and rehabilitation."

This statement will be issued as a document of present stage of its consideration of the item on its
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ZUOS/S. agenda.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my The meeting rose al5.55p.m.
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
