Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Inzko for joining us today. I also
thank Ms. Selma Korjenie. I really appreciate the
cautious optimism that she shared with us.

The United States is fully committed to the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as they strive towards a
more just, free and democratic society. A generation
has passed since the historic signing of the Dayton
Peace Agreement, but we must continue to think about
today's young people to give them a glimmer of hope,
no matter what side they are born on.

The present generation faces challenges that have
plagued Bosnian society and the Balkans for decades.
Nationalistic rhetoric sows troubling divisions. Leaders
exploit a fragile political landscape for personal and
financial gain, and young people leave the country on
a daily basis seeking the economic opportunity that
they wish they could find at home. If it wants to move
forward, Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot tolerate the
destructive narratives that have foreclosed stability
and opportunity for so many years. Its leaders must
embrace political reconciliation to move beyond the
legacy of war, and they must accept the necessary
reforms to set the country on the path towards Euro-
Atlantic integration. The Bosnian people deserve
democratically elected leaders who will govern with
integrity, practice accountability and deliver on their
promises. They deserve leaders who will put the needs
of their people first.

The United States is actively strengthening those
endeavours in several ways. We support the Dayton
framework to ensure peace and stability in the region.
We support programming and non-governmental
organizations that promote media freedom, equal
access to education and a judicial system free from
corruption. And we support efforts aimed at reducing
air pollution and fostering sustainable economic
development. But beyond support for institutions and
economic opportunity, we seek accountability for those
who threaten peace and stability in the region. I agree
with the representative of France that convicted war
criminals being honoured in any way is very disturbing.

We anticipate a strong partnership with the
country's Government and leaders, but we also expect
them to do their part to implement reforms now. I say to
High representative Inzko that we strongly affirm the
role of his Office, especially as the country implements
electoral reforms and prepares for the holding of the
2020 municipal elections. We also commend the
continuing and essential contributions of European
Union-led Operation Althea, which plays a crucial role
in preserving a stable environment, and we support the
renewal of its mandate for another year.

We will know that we have achieved something of
lasting significance when all generations and ethnicities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina are able to enjoy the
blessings of a democratic, stable and prosperous nation.
The United States looks forward to that day's arrival for
its people, and we will not cease in our efforts to hasten
its coming.

