Mr. Ivanic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Let me
begin by expressing, on behalf of the Government and
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, my deepest
condolences to the Palestinian people on the painful
loss of their leader, Mr. Yasser Arafat.

It is truly a great honour for me to have the
opportunity to address the Security Council for the first
time in my mandate as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the occasion of the
Council's consideration of the High Representative's
report on the implementation of the Peace Agreement
(S/2004/807, enclosure), which was submitted to the
Secretary-General.

At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to wish you every success
in your endeavours. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank Lord Ashdown for his extremely
eloquent and elaborate report encompassing the
activities of the Office of the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina for the past six months.

Despite all the difficulties that we had in the past
half year, I should like to begin on an optimistic note.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made significant progress
towards the full implementation of the Dayton/Paris
Peace Agreement. NATO announced at its recent
summit in Istanbul that the Stabilization Force (SFOR)
has successfully fulfilled its mandate. Upon the
termination of the SFOR mandate, a new mission for a
European Union-led force (EUFOR) will be
established; this marks a new stage in the process of
Euro-Atlantic integration. At the same time, NATO
will maintain a presence in the headquarters in
Sarajevo, aimed at assisting the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities in the field of defence reform,
in the apprehension of persons indicted for war crimes
and in the fight against organized crime and terrorism.
The handover is a clear sign that a new phase is
beginning in the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We have transformed ourselves into a virtually normal
European State in transition - from old-style
socialism to a free-market economy, from a communist
pre-war regime to a Western-type democracy, from a
zone of war and conflict to a stabilizing factor in the
region.

But, before I make a few remarks on our reform
process, I would like to bring section XIII of the report
all the way to the top and emphasize its content as the
most significant development in the reporting period.
Last Monday, the Human Rights Chamber of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
accepted the report of the Government of Republika
Srpska on the events that took place in and around
Srebrenica in July 1995. The special Commission on
Srebrenica, established by the Government of
Republika Srpska, thus completed its historical mission
and laid the cornerstone for successful post-war
reconciliation in my country. The report not only
contains the names of 7,800 persons who lost their
lives in what were certainly the most tragic of all the
events in the conflict and discloses several new
locations of mass graves, but also accepts the share of
responsibility placed upon Republika Srpska and
expresses remorse to the families of the victims.
Crimes were committed on all sides, as we all know,
and we expect all sides that were involved in the
conflict to follow this example, since there will be no
true reconciliation or restoration of trust until all
missing persons are accounted for.

We are well aware of the fact that cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) remains one of the greatest
obstacles to Bosnia and Herzegovina's association with
Euro-Atlantic integration processes. If it were not for
that one condition, we would have fulfilled all the
conditions set forth in the Feasibility Study; we
probably would have signed a stabilization and
association agreement with the European Union and
would be a member of the Partnership for Peace.

However, the apprehension of the Hague Tribunal
indictees is a delicate matter for both the local
authorities and the international community, but it is no
longer a political issue. As a result of continuous
requests by the international community, the authorities
of Republic Srpska have recently made several
attempts to arrest some of the indictees. One of those
attempts, in April this year, caused the most unwanted
consequences: the death of an innocent civilian and the
prosecution of two police officers. There is a firm
political commitment to arrest the indicted war
criminals as well as an awareness on the part of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina that full cooperation
with the ICTY is a precondition for the country's being
recognized as a democratic State. As a result of the
reforms, the State's capacity to deal with this problem
has increased significantly. A State intelligence service
has been established as well as a State Investigation
and Protection Agency, with a special department
dealing with the war-crimes issue. We are deeply
convinced that all those measures will produce
concrete results.

Bosnia and Herzegovina particularly underlines
the importance of close cooperation among
neighbouring States in this particular matter. However,
we are convinced that, without full coordination and
collaboration on this issue with the international
organizations that are present in Bosnia and
Herzegovina - the ICTY, EUFOR, NATO, the
European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Office of the High
Representative - the apprehension of indictees will be
less certain.

I should now like to make a few remarks on
economic reform. Ever since the current Council of
Ministers came into office, it has shown its readiness
and its competence to tackle the field of economic
reform as its number-one priority. Therefore, the
results are little short of remarkable: all the capital
laws required as a condition for a stabilization and
association agreement are in place, and even a law that
was not a condition but was deemed absolutely
necessary by the Government - the law on value-
added tax - is being considered in a parliamentary
procedure even as I speak. Needless to say, those
results have been achieved in close cooperation with
the Office of the High Representative, the World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund and other
international experts. The law on internal debt, not
without difficulties, was adopted by the Parliament in a
version that meets the recommendations of the IMF.

Reforms in other fields have been equally
successful. The State Ministry of Defence is
operational. The State Investigation and Protection
Agency has already assumed its role in tackling State-
level crime. The State Court is delivering its first
verdicts against organized crime and corruption, thus
making a great contribution to restoring the general
population's trust in the legal system and the rule of
law. A reformed customs service, together with the
State Border Service, successfully fights smuggling,
while at the same time increasing revenues.

As far as regional cooperation is concerned,
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to play an active
role in regional organizations such as the South-East
European Cooperation Process, the Stability Pact for
South-Eastern Europe and the Central European
Initiative, as well as on the bilateral level. Emphasis is
placed on stronger and more open cooperation among
the countries of South-East Europe, with the aim of
changing the image of the region and attracting foreign
investment. The economic progress and the prosperity
of the region depend upon stability - which we were
not blessed with in the past, but which we are now
continuing to improve.

That can be done only in the best spirit of good-
neighbourly and good regional relations, and we will
continue our efforts to that end. We are determined to
keep improving our relations with our immediate
neighbours, Serbia and Montenegro and the Republic
of Croatia, as well as with all other countries of the
region. Bosnia and Herzegovina remains determined to
continuously fulfil all its obligations and to meet the
criteria to be a part of Partnership for Peace
programme. Together with the other countries of the
region, we have set out a very active approach through
the Adriatic Charter. Through that forum we have
received the support of the countries of the region in
order to achieve the final goal of full membership in
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

Even though we all agree that a huge job has been
accomplished in Bosnia and Herzegovina to date, we
must not slow down and admire our achievements. In
order to complete our mission and achieve our common
goal of full political stability and economic
sustainability, we have to put in much more hard work
and make many more joint efforts at the local and
international levels. A detailed analysis of current
conditions in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as an
overview of tasks that are still ahead of us, is contained
in the High Representative's report. While fully
sharing the opinion that urgent measures are required
in key development sectors, I wish also to assure the
Council that the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will make whatever efforts are necessary to that end.
At the same time, I am convinced that we shall
continue to receive the Council's invaluable support, as
we have in the past.

I would like to conclude by making one final
remark. All the aforementioned reforms would not
have been possible without the firm readiness of the
institutions and the politicians of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take responsibility and to make
necessary compromises. Not a single law has been
imposed by the Office of the High Representative in
the last year. Although some laws were highly sensitive
politically, all were adopted through regular
parliamentary procedures. Furthermore, a month ago,
local elections took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for the first time independently organized and
flnanced. International observers declared the elections
to be fair and properly conducted. However, the fact
remains that we continue to have a rather poor turnout
for both local and general elections. Part of the reason
might be that voters still fail to recognize that local
politicians are the true bearers of authority, despite the
fact that a great number of the reforms have been
agreed among us.

The institution of the High Representative has
played very important role in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
but I am convinced that the time has come to consider
the review of its mandate. Ten years after the Dayton
Peace Agreement was signed, the institution of the
High Representative, with the so-called Bonn
powers - the authorization to impose laws and
dismiss politicians - should be transformed. I believe
that the best time for that is the end of next year. In that
regard, I would like to assure the Council that the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina are more than
ready to assume full power and responsibility for the
future of the country.

