Ms. Edjang Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I begin by congratulating the delegation
of Bolivia on its outstanding presidency of the Security
Council and expressing our praise for Mr. Arnault and
his team for his briefing. We also commend and are
grateful to His Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo
Garcia and his team for joining us today.
The environment that has prevailed with regard to
the major political events in Colombia this year, such
as the most recent legislative elections and the June
presidential elections, is encouraging and building
confidence within the international community
vis-a-vis the peace process in the country. That reflects
not only the will of the people and of the parties
involved in the process, but also the substantial work
of the United Nations. Equatorial Guinea reaffirms
its support for the Government of President Duque
Marquez and harbours the hope that his Government
will strengthen its commitment to promote a dynamic
encouraging the peace process, upon which the future
of millions of Colombians depends. In that regard, we
welcome the recent appointments to the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement, the National
Commission on Security Guarantees and the National
Reintegration Council, given their importance with
regard to the Final Agreement. Similarly, we commend
recent statements by the President in which he
highlights his firm support for the reintegration and
increased effective participation of former combatants
in the peace process and the adoption of the pact for life
and the protection of social leaders and human rights
defenders as a response to continued assassinations of
community leaders in conflict zones.

We nonetheless are concerned about actions that
tend to hinder the increasing progress by the parties
involved in the process, as well as about the departure
of several former combatants from the territorial areas
for training and reintegration in the south-eastern
region. The competent local entities must investigate
and thoroughly assess the concerns that led to that
action and formulate an expeditious solution, while
considering that such inappropriate and continued
withdrawal could create a new gap, which would be
unhelpful to the peace agreement.

We welcome the fact that the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace has opened its first cases. The unhindered
functioning of that body is essential for ensuring
accountability, above all for crimes committed in the
past. Kidnappings and violent acts that affected Afro-
Colombian and indigenous communities, including
extrajudicial executions, must be duly addressed. In
that regard, we underline the gesture by the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo in August 2017 in handing over assets to provide
reparation to victims. We also commend the fact that
that judicial process enjoys the cooperation of various
State and non-State actors.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/874), illicit economies based on drugs and
mining are continuing to add to the violence in Colombia
and pose a threat to the peace process. According to
data provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, it is estimated that more than 77,000
families have signed voluntary substitution agreements
under the national comprehensive programme for the
substitution of illicit crops. Thanks to those agreements,
several thousand hectares of coca have been destroyed.
We hope that the Government will promote those types
of motivational programmes for those families and
others who join that initiative.

It is regrettable that the sixth round of talks between
the Government and the National Liberation Army
(ELN) was not able to reach definitive agreements.
The inclusion of the ELN is important to guarantee a
comprehensive and secure peace process in Colombia.
In that regard, we invite the parties to work towards
facilitating conditions that will lead to the next round
of talks and take into account the points already
agreed upon.

As we said at the meeting on 26 July (see S/PV.8319),
the chief guarantor of national unity and the balance of
State institutions, by virtue of the attributes conferred
upon them by law, is the Government, which must
ensure that the needs of the people are met in order to
defuse possible divisions and overcome the challenges
the country faces.

Before concluding, I would like to express
Equatorial Guinea's willingness to work towards the
peace process in Colombia, as well as extend our praise
and recognition for the excellent work that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia is carrying
out to encourage and strengthen that process in support
of the Colombian people.

