Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): | would like to say to the Ukrainian representative that I am glad he is interested in Russian poetry. But that is not surprising - we all come from the same country and were probably taught the same lessons at school. I want to correct him. "O, do the Russians long for war? Ask of the stillness evermore Ask of the soldiers who now lie Beneath the birch trees ..." He missed one line. I do not know whose portraits will be carried on 9 May. I do not think that it will be those of Stalin. I doubt that. However, I wonder what portraits willbe carried in Kyiv on 9 May and whether there will even be a parade in Kyiv commemorating our - by the way - shared victory in the Great Patriotic War. Today we heard many things. It is impossible to respond to all of it and, in fact, that is not the task before me. Unfortunately, we have not heard anything new. Everything is as before - the same old tune. The representative of Ukraine calls on Moscow to comply with the Minsk agreements but, for some reason, he does not appeal to Kyiv. There is the same tinkering with the Minsk agreements and the issues of cause and effect. It seems that it was Russia that started the war in Ukraine, not Kyiv that came to Donbas. We again heard that Russia must withdraw its troops. But last year, we asked Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sajdik to tell us about the presence of Russian troops in Donbas (see S/PV.8461). They were unable to say anything precise or satisfactory to those who posed the question. Perhaps Ms. Grau and Mr. Cevik have more information. We can ask them where they saw Russian troops in Donbas. We are told that with a wave of the hand Moscow can end this conflict as soon as we tell the Donbas representatives. I have a question. My question is this: are they really that naive to think that the Kremlin is puppet master to those individuals in Donbas? Do they actually think those individuals do not have their own opinions, that they are nothing more than puppets of the Kremlin? I do not believe they are so naive as to think so. My friend Ambassador Heusgen never ceases to amaze me. His country is one of the authors of the Minsk agreements. I personally do not know Mr. Pashkov, who was the Vice-Governor of the Irkutsk region. But I want to ask Mr. Heusgen and Mr. Kyslytsya a question: does the fact that United States citizen Natalie Jaresko was once Finance Minister of Ukraine, that Lithuanian citizen Aivaras Abromavicius was Economy Minister and that United States citizen Ulana Suprun was Minister of Health - incidentally, she is from Chicago, which is 8,000 kilometres from Kyiv, greater than the distance from Kyiv to Irkutsk - lead us to think that the United States and Lithuania are direct parties to the conflict in Ukraine? I will not even mention the example of United States Army Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Vindman, who found himself entangled in the impeachment affair and who claimed that he was three times offered to be made Minister of Defence of Ukraine - something he himself acknowledged was a joke. Mr. Heusgen noted that today was a sad day for international law and for Ukraine. Was he referring to the anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2202 (2015), which endorsed the Minsk package of measures? Does it mean that for him the day of the adoption of that resolution is a tragic day? He referred to how Vladislav Surkov deftly persuaded the representatives of Donbas to sign on to the Minsk agreements. Mr. Heusgen perhaps should know that the Donbas representatives who signed the Minsk agreements in 2015 saw it as an enormous concession and defeat. Today the Ukrainian authorities do not even want to engage in dialogue with them, labelling them not just separatists but terrorists. There was much said about today's hostilities in the area of Holubivske. According to the information available to us, on 18 February a division from the Ukrainian armed forces attempted to destabilize the situation along the line of contact in Donbas. At approximately 6 a.m., a 10-person sabotage group from the armed forces of Ukraine moved towards the positions of the Luhansk forces near Holubivske. That operation by the Ukrainian armed forces was revealed at an early stage. As they approached the contact line, the group tripped a landmine, which killed at least two people and injured three more. In order to evacuate the dead and wounded from the area, the armed forces of Ukraine carried out a large-scale artillery attack targeting residential areas in the Luhansk People's Republic. That offensive strike was carried out using medium-calibre mortars and large-calibre artillery in vicinity of Holubivske, Sokilnyky, Donetskyi and Smeloye. Ukrainian military forces fired more than 50 mortar shells into the territory of the Luhansk People's Republic. Mr. Kyslytsya showed us a photograph of an unfortunate 22-year-old young man, Maksim Khitailov, who died today, apparently in the same area. He was a grenade-launcher operator with the 72nd Mechanized Brigade of the Ukrainian armed forces. That is a tragic event, but why are they deploying young men to die there? We remember how Mr. Kyslytsya's former Minister, Mr. Klimkin, seating in that very chair, showed us a photograph of an unfortunate girl who had died on their line of contact. I asked him, the next time he visited the Security Council, to please bring photographs of civilians who had died as a result of the actions of Ukrainian security forces in Donbas. Manysuch photographs could be provided. I will do so myself the next time, because most likely I will not wait for the Ukrainian side to do it. This is an ongoing tragedy. And this tragedy must end. The way to end it is by implementing the Minsk agreements. Mr. Heusgen also told us today about violations at the line of contact. In that regard, let me turn to statistics from the Special Monitoring Mission. Ukrainian forces were responsible for 60 per cent of firing incidents between 9 December 2019 and 12 February 2020. Kyiv committed 3,737 ceasefire violations, as opposed to 2,809 coming from Donbas territory - and that is just the cases in which the violator could be identified. The overall number of violations stands at 45,244 explosions on one side and 12,114 on the other side. There are 304 pieces of equipment west of the line of demarcation - a violation - as opposed to none on the east side. During the same period, Ukrainian security forces targeted three residential areas in Donbas, while there was not a single attack against territory under Kyiv's control. Unfortunately, he does not want to see what could not be clearer. I do not know what type of eyeglasses could help him see that. I continue to be surprised at where he gets his information about "unfortunate people who have been coping with that tremendous oppression in Russian-occupied Crimea". I have called on him many times to go to Crimea and have a look for himself how the "unfortunate Crimeans" are suffering there. Two speakers today mentioned the Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17 disaster. Of course, that is not the subject of today's meeting. I do not think they should present that information pretending to be a prosecutor. And I myself am not a prosecutor. Moreover, I want to share with the Council some surprising information published by Western media outlets today, namely, that Dutch military intelligence and security services did not detect a single Buk anti-aircraft missile system in the area where the aircraft was downed. We have repeatedly said that the investigation is shockingly closed and opaque. That information, which needs to be verified and corroborated, of course, only serves as proof. Lastly, I would like once again to recall the fact that it is important for us to understand that there are two sides, not three, in this conflict - and not two, Ukraine and Russia, in the view of our Ukrainian colleagues - namely, it is Donbas and Kyiv. As long as there is no direct dialogue between Kyiv and Donbas, there can be no settlement in Ukraine, just as there can be no settlement without direct dialog between the parties to the conflicts in Afghanistan, Syria, Cyprus, Colombia or anywhere else in the world. Only an inclusive dialogue can generate opportunities and guarantees for lasting peace. For that reason, the Normandy format is meaningful only if it is geared towards the implementation of the Minsk package of measures, which need to be implemented without any preconditions.
