Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing and we appreciate
the work that the Secretary-General continues to do
to shed light on the facts surrounding the downing of
Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17. We are also grateful
for the work carried out by the Dutch Safety Board,
as well as the valuable contributions of all countries
who have provided human and technical support for the
investigation.

Two months after the downing of the aeroplane,
my delegation reaffirms the unequivocal message of
resolution 2166 (2014) on the need for a full, thorough
and independent international investigation to be carried
out in accordance with international law. Chile notes
that the provisions of the Security Council are starting
to pay off with the issuance of this preliminary report.
Along with highlighting its findings, we urge the Board
to proceed to gather more background information to
allow it establish the truth of what happened on 17 July.
In particular, we need to know what kind of projectile
hit the Malaysian Airlines aeroplane and what are its
characteristics to make it possible to trace the object
and determine, definitively, who are responsible for
that heinous attack on civilians. We also hope that the
Council will remain seized of this matter.

We appreciate that the legislative measures adopted
by Ukraine, within the framework of dialogue with the
separatist groups in the east and the ceasefire, do not
include an amnesty for those responsible for the MH-17
disaster. The family members of the victims have the
right to know the truth. Once again, we urge all States,
in accordance with their obligations under international
law and relevant Security Council resolutions, to
cooperate actively with the relevant authorities.

Finally, we call upon the parties involved in the
conflict in Ukraine to allow unrestricted access and
ensure safety for as long as is needed by the investigators
at the disaster site so that they can continue with and
further develop their investigation. We hope that the
ceasefire between the Government of Ukraine and the
armed groups that control the area where the disaster
occurred will provide the conditions necessary for the
continuation of the investigation.

