Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by welcoming President Touadera to the Council and
thanking him and Mr. Maurer for their briefings. I also
want to thank the Secretary-General for his remarks
and for his report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2016/447).

My conclusion from this debate so far, sadly, is
that the protection of civilians in conflict is in crisis.
Whether in Syria or in South Sudan, we are failing the
most vulnerable when they need us the most - when
they are being targeted in their homes, when they are
being targeted in hospitals and even when they are
being targeted by the very peacekeepers sent to protect
them. The United Nations invented peacekeeping in
order to prevent war, so civilians benefit hugely when
peacekeeping works. But too often, peacekeeping is
failing to live up to the high standards that victims
rightly require.

Yesterday I met with Nadia Murad f the Yazidi
woman whom I mentioned in my statement last week
(see S/PV.7704). She told me, very movingly, how
19 girls were burned alive this week in her community.
That is the barbarity that civilians now face. It is almost
unspeakable. And yet she told me that she still has hope
because she feels that justice is on her side. Our job
today is to show people like Nadia that there is cause
for hope i that we can and will protect civilians. I see
four steps that we need to take.

First, we need to prepare peacekeepers for this
seemingly impossible task. How can we best train,
equip and deploy them? How can we ensure that they
make a real difference to the communities that they
are sent to protect? To answer those questions, we
need to recognize that as threats to civilians change,
so peacekeeping must change too. This means that all
of us must look into the future so that we can better
understand operating environments and the threats that
civilians and peacekeepers face. New technology and
better intelligence can help, but to maximize impact
and sustainability personnel need to be trained and
equipped to use those new tools.

President Obama's summit on peacekeeping last
September successfully increased the quantity of
peacekeepers available to the United Nations. We
now need to improve the overall quality. The United
Nations needs a mechanism to choose only those troops
who can definitively protect civilians effectively, and
to replace those who are unable or unwilling to fulfil
their mandated tasks. In that way, we can create a new
generation of peacekeeping - one with the protection
of civilians at its heart.

Secondly, the tragedies of Syria, South Sudan and
Yemen show that there needs to be better compliance
with international humanitarian law. The Secretary-
General's report makes clear that strengthening
compliance with international humanitarian law and
human rights law is a prerequisite for improving the
protection of civilians. Those laws are binding on all
sides of any conflict. They strike a balance between
military necessity and basic humanity. When those
laws are breached, everyone loses.

The primary responsibility for complying with
those laws lies with the parties to conflict, as the
Secretary-General and, indeed, my Russian colleague
reminded us today. When they starve and besiege,
when they attack schools and hospitals, or when they
impeded humanitarian access, we see unimagineable
suffering, populations fleeing, economies collapsing, a
whole country left staring into the abyss.

We recognized at the World Humanitarian Summit
that the humanitarian system needs reform. I am pleased
that the Summit included a renewed commitment to
international humanitarian law. However * and this is
my third point-to deter future breaches of international
humanitarian law, we need greater accountability for
when there is no compliance, or when the protection of
civilians is ignored or violated. The Secretary-General
talks of a pervasive lack of accountability. That must
be tackled. States must investigate crimes that occur
in their jurisdiction. When they cannot or will not,
international mechanisms such as the International
Criminal Court have an important role to play.

Accountability is crucial to improving the

protection of civilians in peacekeeping. Enhanced
reporting mechanisms are needed, including
independent mission observers. Commanders must
monitor for violations and missions should work
closely with local communities and non-governmental
organizations. They all must be able to report their
findings independently and regularly to us. There is no
greater need for accountability than for those sexually
exploited and abused by peacekeepers - those who
have been betrayed by the people sent to protect
them. Through resolution 2272 (2016), we pledged to
tackle the scourge, but to make progress we need a
commitment from the entire international community
to making zero tolerance a reality.
My final point is that the protection of civilians
is not confined to those under attack. It extends to
those who risk everything to flee across land and sea
to find refuge. So we welcome the Secretary-General's
report on large movements of refugees and migrants
(A/70/59) and the planning under way for the high-level
events of the General Assembly. Together we need to
deliver a framework for better global management of
migration, one that places greater emphasis on global
responsibility-sharing to provide real protection for
refugees. I hope that we can build on the London-Syria
conference commitments and the compact of ideas, and
find comprehensive and sustainable solutions.

Let me close by stressing that the United Kingdom is
committed to playing our part to enhance the protection
of civilians. It is why we have deployed personnel to
United Nations peacekeeping missions in Somalia
and South Sudan in recent weeks, and it is why we are
hosting a peacekeeping defence ministerial meeting in
September. Because through those commitments, and
more - everything else that we are doing - I believe
that we can help Nadia and all civilians under threat,
across the world, so that they too can have hope; so that
they too can believe that justice is on their side.

