Mr. Siddig (Sudan): Let me congratulate you,
Madam President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and assure you
of our cooperation with you. I would like to extend my
appreciation to Poland for organizing this particular
meeting of the Security Council to deliberate on the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2019/509). My delegation is appreciative
of the role played by Mrs. Virginia Gamba and her
efforts to reflect the dreadful situation of children in
armed conflict. The Secretary-General's report is self-
explanatory. In that regard, my delegation is also highly
appreciative of and thankful to UNICEF, under the
leadership of Executive Director Ms. Henrietta Fore.
We thank UNICEF for the valuable work that its staff
do all over the world for the protection of children. The
testimonies and personal experiences reflected before
us this morning by two young people from Africa stand
witness to the gravity and brutality of internal conflicts
and their impact on children. Their accounts reflect
how young people are subject to killing, maiming and
all kinds of cruel treatment.

Cognizant of our responsibility towards the
welfare of children and abiding by all international
instruments that govern the rights of the child, it is time
to stand together to put an end to the conscription and
recruitment of children in armed conflicts. It is time to
prevent armed groups, rebel movements and State and
non-State actors from exposing children to the scourges
of war.

During the past few years, with the assistance
of UNICEF, the Sudan was able to release child
combatants from some armed groups and hand them
over. Psychosocial assistance was extended to them and
their reintegration into society was conducted in an
acceptable manner. They were able to overcome their
trauma and healed. Ultimately, they were integrated
into their families.

My Government recently extended a unilateral
ceasefire throughout the conflict areas in the Sudan.
Some of the armed groups in Darfur, Blue Nile and
South Kordofan have reciprocated accordingly. That,
of course, is a step in the right direction for the
political settlement of armed conflicts in my country.
In negotiating the political settlement agreements
with arms bearers, the issue of children and their
protection will be highly prominent and reflected in
those agreements.

It is well known that the Sudan played a large role
for the sake of stability and peace in both South Sudan
and the Central African Republic. The Republic of the
Sudan acts with other African States and the African
Union as guarantors to those agreements. In following
the implementation, my Government will endeavour
to guarantee the rights of children in both countries,
perhaps through additional addenda to preclude any
violation of child rights.

Peace, stability, political settlements to the strife
of conflict, quelling the sound of guns and creating
job opportunities are among the measures followed
by my Government to safeguard and protect children
from the effects of war. In cooperation with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF,
national and local institutions are in place to implement
the joint plan of action signed with the United Nations
in 2016. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General has visited the Sudan twice. The Security
Council Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict
has also visited the country.

In our endeavour to protect children in conflict
areas, the Sudan pays special attention to and places
emphasis on three measures: first, the training of
armed forces, particularly those integrated into law
enforcement bodies, on standing operating procedures;
secondly, launching and sustaining awareness-raising
campaigns on the importance of protecting children
from any violations and encouraging the reporting of
any attempts to conscript children into armed forces;
and thirdly, the full and strict scrutiny of age during the
selection of recruits.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the readiness
of my country to cooperate fully with Mrs. Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and the Security Council Working Group on
Children in Armed Conflict. We also affirm our full
commitment to the international legal framework on
children, to which the Sudan is party.

