Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My country
welcomes your initiative, Mr. President, to organize
this debate on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
outstanding quality of his report (S/2016/395, annex).
My delegation would also like to assure him of its full
support for the work that he and his Office are currently
undertaking on the ground.

More than 20 years after the signing of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues,
despite a number of persistent difficulties, on its path
towards reunification and the building ofa solid nation.

My delegation would like to note some of the
progress made by the country, in particular in terms
of the implementation of the reforms approved by the
authorities, which have started to bear fruit and give
rise to new hope. I am referring, to mention just some of
that progress, to Bosnia and Herzegovina's application
for European Union membership, the efforts of the
Bosnian authorities aimed at transferring to the State
assets and property designated as defence property, as
well as the adoption of labour legislation. Of course,
those efforts need to be consolidated.

However, that progress should not lead us to forget

the fragile nature of the situation in the country and the
region. There are still causes for concern. I would like
to refer to the difficulties that the authorities seem to
face in certain areas, such as the publication of the 2013
census results, the European coordination mechanism,
the implementation of the decision of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court on Mostar, as well
as the follow-up to the requests of the International
Monetary Fund. Other causes for concern include the
decision made to hold a referendum, which clearly
jeopardizes the sovereignty and integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the calls made by a number
of Republika Srpska officals for the secession of that
entity.

Other developments that threaten the sovereignty
and integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina have been
observed, including the ongoing questioning of the
authority of the judicial authorities of the State. The
refusal by the principal authorities of Republika Srpska
to implement the decision of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court regarding the unconstitutionality
of the provisions of the Republika Srpska law on
holidays is one of several examples of that.

For all ofthose reasons, my delegation would like to
reaffirm its commitment to respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as guaranteed by the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the country's
Constitution and international law.

Turning now to another area, counter-terrorism
is one of the acute challenges facing Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in a context where complex migration
flows and the return of foreign terrorist fighters are
likely to generate additional risks for the security of
the country. It goes without saying that tangible results
will not be achieved in that fight without the necessary
strengthening, at all levels, of cooperation between the
authorities.

Senegal also welcomes the outstanding work carried
out by the European Union Special Representative in
the promotion and implementation of the reconstruction
programme, as well as the socioeconomic programmes
involving cooperation between the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska. Along
those same lines, my delegation welcomes the interest
shown by the European Union in continuing its military
operation through the multinational stabilization force
in Bosnia and Herzegovina with the support of the
Security Council, which authorized the extension of its
mandate by 12 months.

Furthermore, as underscored in the report of the
High Representative, the presence in the country of the
European Union military mission with an executive
mandate remains crucial. Nevertheless, we believe
that the international community should continue
to support the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
develop greater resilience in the face of socioeconomic
challenges. What is at stake here is the strengthening of
the security and defence forces of the country, one of
the priorities of the mandate of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR). We encourage EUFOR
to continue its support, which in the long term will
enable the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
fill a number of strategic and operational gaps.
In conclusion, I would like to encourage the
European Union to continue its reform programme
for the restoration of peace, social cohesion and State
authority in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I reaffirm
the unreserved support of Senegal for the work
accomplished by the High Representative.

