Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank
Ambassador Vilovie, Ambassador Urbina and you,
Mr. President, for briefing the Council on the work of
the Security Council Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and 1267
(1999), respectively. China wishes to express its
appreciation for the effective work of the three
ambassadors and their teams.

In accordance with the provisions of Security
Council resolution 1822 (2008), the 1267 Committee is
undertaking a review of the consolidated list in an
orderly manner. The review process is likely to
improve the completeness and accuracy of the
sanctions list, enhance the relevance, effectiveness and
fairness of the sanctions regime, and reinforce the
authority and status of the Committee.
We note that the review process is arduous,
requiring the support of all Member States. We
encourage Member States to provide the Committee
with detailed and reliable information and to cooperate
with it so that the review process can be completed on
schedule. We support the Committee's continued
discussions on how to improve the listing and
de-listing procedures to ensure that the relevant
information contained in the sanctions list truly reflects
changes in the corresponding situations and that the list
becomes a true living document.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), with
the assistance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), has carried out an
enormous amount of effective work in terms of
Preliminary Implementation Assessments (PIAs) and
country visits. China commends their efforts made in
that regard. CTED recently updated and enhanced the
survey on the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States and conducted an overall
assessment of the progress and the gaps in such
implementation. That will be very helpful to the work
of the CTC during the next phase. We believe that lack
of resources and capacity are the major difficulties
facing many States, in particular the developing
countries, in their efforts to implement the resolution.
We hope that through consideration of the Preliminary
Implementation Assessment (PIA) and technical
assistance the CTC will continue to strengthen its
dialogue with Member States, while giving full
consideration to the specific difficulties they face,
objectively assess their effective implementation of the
resolution and focus on enhancing Member States'
capacity-building in the fight against terrorism
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001).

The 1540 Committee assisted by the 1540 expert
group, achieved remarkable progress in its
comprehensive review of the implementation of the
resolution, outreach assistance and international
cooperation. China appreciates those efforts and for the
next phase, in accordance with resolution 1540 (2004)
and other relevant resolutions, the Committee should
continue its efforts to carry out its programme of work
in a comprehensive and balanced manner.

China attaches importance to the role of the 1540
Committee and has always participated actively and
constructively in the work of the Committee. We stand
ready to continue to actively support the work of the
Committee in promoting the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), galvanizing consensus on
non-proliferation and enhancing international efforts
and cooperation in non-proliferation.

Over the past months, violence and terrorist
activities have continued unabated at the global level,
posing grave threats to international peace and security.
United Nations counter-terrorism missions continue to
face many challenges ahead. China believes that, in
view of the grave challenges facing the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the Security Council
counter-terrorism regime should continue to push for
implementation of relevant counter-terrorism
resolutions, while at the same time paying closer
attention to the needs of the developing countries in
combating terrorism. Respect for their national
counter-terrorism strategies and methods must be
ensured, while assisting them in strengthening their
capacities to combat terrorism.

China urges strengthened coordination between
the three Committees and their experts groups in order
to use resources efficiently and avoid overlap in their
work.

China supports the three Committees within their
respective mandates and actively participates in the
relevant work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) to promote the
comprehensive and balanced implementation of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, so that the counter-
terrorism efforts of the Security Council and the
General Assembly will be mutually complementary and
coordinated. China will continue to maintain the
central role of the United Nations in the global efforts
to combat terrorism.

