Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I should like to
begin by thanking you, Sir, for organizing this meeting,
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. John
Holmes, for his statement.

Notwithstanding the pronounced focus on the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
over the past decade, the deplorable fact remains that
civilians continue to fall victim to violence. Persistent
violations include the deliberate targeting of civilians,
the indiscriminate and excessive use of force, and
sexual and gender-based violence in violation of
international law, human rights law and refugee law.
Indeed, in many instances we have witnessed attacks
on relief workers, humanitarian aid convoys and others
engaging in humanitarian assistance to civilians
suffering the effects of war.

Indonesia has been and will continue to be firmly
committed to addressing the impact of armed conflict
on civilians. We are cognizant of the five core
challenges to their protection identified in the

Secretary-General's report (S/2009/277). We concur
that the failure of parties to comply fully with their
obligation to protect civilians in armed conflict is key.
In this respect, all parties to armed conflicts should
adhere to relevant international law, including the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel and its Optional Protocol.

We value the Security Council's efforts,
consistent with its Charter-mandated responsibilities,
in protecting civilians in armed conflict, which merit
the wide support of regional and international actors
alike. At the same time, it is worth underscoring that
the best protection from armed conflict is its
prevention and resolution. The Council should spare no
effort in this area.

By the same token, the Security Council should
lend its full support to the efforts of regional
organizations in addressing dire humanitarian
situations. A culture of protection must continually be
promoted through regional and international
organizations. This would sustain attention on the issue
and promote concrete action by the various actors.

It is Indonesia's view that that there are at least
three key prerequisites with regard to this crucial issue.
First, respect for humanitarian principles needs to be
continuously maintained. The rapid and unimpeded
access of humanitarian personnel should be ensured,
consistent with international humanitarian law.
Likewise, humanitarian personnel are subject to the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality,
independence, and respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national unity of States.
Secondly, in the conduct of hostilities, parties should
do everything feasible to protect civilians and civilian
objects. Thirdly, examples of good practices should
also be noted and, where feasible, implemented to
ensure that populations in urgent need enjoy consistent
assistance.
Finally, let me reiterate that all efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflict must be founded on the
tenets of human rights, security and development -
the three pillars of the United Nations. These three
principles should be reflected in the next report in
commemoration of the tenth anniversary this coming
November. The tenth anniversary should also serve to
maintain the momentum by strengthening the United
Nations system's capacity to work in a coordinated,
coherent, comprehensive and cooperative manner with
Member States and other stakeholders. An approach
that includes development and humanitarian
dimensions is required, and must be supported by the
political will of States to ensure that civilians are
protected in times of armed conflict and in times of
peace.

