Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Tonight's meeting is a sombre
occasion to reflect on a development that we had all been
trying to avoid for quite some time. This year alone, the
Security Council was repeatedly confronted with crises in
its relations with Iraq. Laudable efforts by the Secretary-
General, by the Security Council as a whole and by
several of its members more than once created hope that
full implementation of Iraqi obligations under the Security
Council resolutions would be achieved by peaceful means.
On the other hand, already earlier this year, at the time of
endorsement of the Secretary-General's Memorandum of
Understanding reached with Iraq, the Council made it
clear, in its resolution 1154 (1998) of 2 March 1998, that
any violation of its obligations would have the severest
consequences for Iraq.

That was a clear message of the seriousness the
Council has attached to the disarmament work in Iraq. It
was also but one in a series of opportunities provided by
the Council to Iraq to de-escalate tensions and to proceed
with the unfinished business of disarmament.
Unfortunately, Iraq failed to take full advantage of those
opportunities.

It is deplorable that we find ourselves today in a
situation characterized by military action against Iraq. We
would have preferred instead to be in a position to
proceed immediately with a comprehensive review, for
which the Security Council was patiently and diligently
working in the past few months. We particularly regret
that the Iraqi leadership themselves have prevented that
review by failing to live up to their latest unequivocal
commitment of 14 November 1998 to full and
unconditional cooperation. It should have been clear to
them that the perpetuation of crises could sooner rather
than later lead to a forceful action. They should have
understood better the repeatedly and unanimously stated
position of the Security Council that hindering the
disarmament work is not acceptable.

 

We have reached the point where it is difficult to
predict how the Council could best deal with Iraq in future.
At this moment, we wish to emphasize that we share the
Secretary-General's concern for human lives and for the
fate of humanitarian relief efforts. It is necessary to explore
all possible ways to continue to address the humanitarian
needs of the Iraqi people. We wish to welcome the
Secretary-General's readiness to play his part in this
important task.

