Mr. Medan (Croatia): Allow me at the outset
to thank the Malaysian presidency of the Council
for convening this debate. Croatia aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union, and with that to be delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. I would like
to make several remarks in my national capacity.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UNICEF for their unwavering
efforts in pushing this agenda forward, and in particular
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, who intensely and tirelessly advocates for
the rights and well-being of children affected by armed
conflict across the globe. Her active engagement in a
case-by-case approach has significantly contributed
to the integration of child protection into a number
of peacemaking activities. In our view, her role is
indisputable and its independence, authority and
impartiality have to be fully supported.

Violations committed against children during
armed conflict are today, more than ever, part of the
changing nature of the armed conflict landscape. We
are witnessing the practice of using children as suicide
bombers, and a rise in attacks on schools and hospitals.
All those acts represent grave violations of international
human rights and international humanitarian law. It is
especially worrying that millions of children worldwide
are being displaced by armed conflict, many of them
unaccompanied or separated from their families, which
only further heightens the risk of their being exposed to
a number of grave violations, including abduction and
sexual violence, ill treatment and abuse.

While it is crucial to invest all possible efforts in
preventing the recruitment of children and securing
their release from armed groups, we must focus the
same attention on the effective implementation of
policies for the successful reintegration of former
child soldiers and for addressing their long-term
psychological and social needs. We should also provide
all necessary support services to refugee and displaced
children. Our involvement needs to have a special
focus on the protection of girls, who are particularly
vulnerable in armed conflicts as potential victims of
rape, sexual violence, sexual exploitation, and early and
forced marriage.

Member States must ensure that their military
and police personnel uphold the highest human rights
values and receive predeployment training in line
with the United Nations standards, with a special
focus on child protection work. In that vein, we should
strengthen our responses to sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations missions and demand full
accountability at all levels. We absolutely cannot
tolerate the fact that some of those who come to protect
become perpetrators themselves.

Croatia fully supports the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign and its aim to end and prevent the recruitment
and use of children by Government armed forces
in conflict by the end of this year. We particularly
welcome the fact that all Governments identified by
the Secretary-General for their recruitment and use of
children in their security forces are now engaged in
an action plan process. We also take this opportunity
to once again call on all countries to become parties
to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in
Armed Conflict.

We wish to once again reiterate our strong support
for the children and armed conflict agenda, and for the
objectivity and impartiality of the tools established
to monitor and hold parties accountable for grave
violations of children's rights.

In light of the twentieth anniversary of the
creation of the children and armed conflict mandate
by the General Assembly, we have to take pride in
the development of a solid normative and institutional
framework on that matter. But we also have to chart
a new way forward in ending the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict and addressing all grave
violations committed against them.
In that regard, we view it as essential that the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, established under
resolution 1612 (2005), maintain its impartiality and
objectivity and continue to document the existence of
grave violations against children based on facts on the
ground. In that way, we will strengthen accountability,
ensure compliance with international legal standards,
and add to the further success of the children and armed
conflict agenda.

To that end, we pledge here today our full and
unequivocal support to finally bridging the gap between
commitments and the actual practice towards ensuring
a childhood free from fear and violence for all.

