Ms. Mohammed: I am honoured to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, who could not join us because
of pressing commitments on the continent. I wish to
start by warmly congratulating the delegation of the
Republic of South Africa for the distinguished manner
in which it has conducted the work of the Security
Council during this busy month of October.

I would like to mention, in that regard, the
contribution of the President of the Security Council
to ensuring the success of the thirteenth annual
consultations between our two Councils, held in Addis-
Ababa last week. It was a clear illustration of the
strategic partnership we aspire to consolidate between
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations. This
topic also testifies to the strategic importance of
the issue at hand and bears witness to the continued
support of South Africa to the AU-United Nations
partnership, which enjoys unprecedented momentum.
I thank the President for giving us this opportunity to
brief the Council and share our reflections on the state
of our partnership.

SincethesigningoftheJointFrameworkforEnhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security and the subsequent
Framework on Development, in 2017, the frequency of
ourjoint efforts has increased as we seek to effectively
address the complex peace and security challenges in
Africa. I firmly believe that our strategic cooperation
will continue to strengthen as we increasingly conduct
joint analyses and response, exchange information and
develop a common understanding of our respective
comparative advantages.

In the course of our enhanced partnership, we have
made significant progress. One of our key achievements
can be seen in the joint field visits, the most recent
headed by the Deputy Secretary-General and the
AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security to
the Horn of Africa over the past few days within the
context of the solidarity missions of women, peace
and security, which both Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Hanna Tetteh and I were honoured
to join. At the risk of repeating some points made by
Special Representative Tetteh, I should like to highlight
the following.

In the Central African Republic, joint AU-
United Nations efforts resulted in the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation. In
accordance with the recommendations made during the
seventeenth AU-United Nations Joint Task Force, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations and the
AU Commissioner for Peace and Security conducted
a joint visit to the Central African Republic earlier
this month. The AU and the United Nations remain
actively engaged to support the full implementation
of the Agreement, especially in light of the upcoming
presidential elections in 2020.

In a similar vein, our combined efforts have
contributed to positive developments in the Sudan. The
accelerated implementation of the Sudan's 17 August
Constitutional Declaration and the agreement governing
the transition is a priority for both the AU and the
United Nations. It is worth noting that the removal of
the Sudan from the list of State sponsors of terrorism is
critical to the Sudan's economic recovery.

In South Sudan, while some progress has been
made, both the United Nations and the AU play a
role in supporting the South Sudanese parties in their
path towards peace and stability by resolving the
outstanding issues relating to the peace agreement and
redeploying efforts to support elections at the end of the
transition period. The importance of accelerating the
full implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan cannot be overemphasized.

In Somalia, the AU and the United Nations have
underscored the need for the resumption of dialogue
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states towards achieving necessary milestones
in the road map towards elections in 2020-2021. Working
with United Nations colleagues in Addis Ababa, the AU
has already begun a conversation on the development of
a political strategy to facilitate coherence in our long-
term engagement in Somalia.

In Libya, the situation remains a source of concern
for the African Union. The AU has openly expressed its
frustrations and the need for the it to be more involved
and not sidelined. It is therefore imperative for the
United Nations and AU to have a coordinated approach
in the support we can offer to Libyan actors to support
the peace process.

In Mali, the collaboration among the AU, the
United Nations and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the role played
by each organization are critical to contributing to a
more secure environment in the region and working to
finalize a harmonized strategy on the Sahel. There is a
need for international partners to continue to support
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and provide the resources
and assistance required by the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel to fully play its role in combating
terrorism and transnational organized crime.

With regard to other parts of the Sahel region, the
AU, the United Nations and ECOWAS have remained
committed to supporting regionally owned and driven
initiatives to combat the complex peace and security
challenges. Despite our coordinated efforts, we continue
to bear witness to widespread violent extremism, drug
smuggling, human trafficking, transhumance issues and
intercommunal violence. Socioeconomic inequalities
are being further exacerbated by climate-related
security risks in the region.

In addition to the joint AU-United Nations efforts
I have mentioned, our organizations continue to work
together to support free, fair and credible electoral
processes, strengthen good governance and promote
the protection of human rights across the continent.
The AU and the United Nations, in cooperation with the
relevant regional economic communities, will continue
to work with Member States ahead of upcoming
elections to foster national cohesion and inclusive
political and electoral processes.

There is an increasing need to enhance our joint
regional approaches to climate security, especially
for the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and other affected
areas. The impacts of climate change are exacerbating
existing tensions across those regions and have
manifested as increased intercommunal tensions and
clashes in various parts of the continent. While the
AU has deployed various efforts towards ensuring the
provision of timely responses in disaster situations,
joint preventive efforts should also be considered.

While recognizing the progress in our joint
efforts in the prevention and management of conflicts,
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations
should be enhanced with regard to peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction. Furthermore, our
organizations should enhance joint work in technical
areas such as mission planning and management,
financial management and accountability for
peace operations.

From the African Union's perspective, the strategic
partnership with the United Nations should be based
on shared values, mutual respect and solidarity. While
increased joint analysis and planning can certainly
strengthen the partnership, the lack of joint response
has been a major source of frustration for both
organizations. Joint priorities must be reflected in our
joint analysis to foster a harmonized approach and result
injoint responses. A demanding area in the partnership
has been the joint assessment of ongoing missions,
particularly the African Union Mission in Somalia, and
the dynamics that tend to characterize the conclusions
that guide the elements of mandate renewal. Where
there have been disagreements between the two bodies,
the view of the United Nations has often prevailed.
While there are different considerations behind those
dynamics, there is a perception that the African
Union's position does not matter in the grand scheme
of things, which undermines rather than enhances the
relationship. I believe that dynamic was also evident in
the efforts to address the Libyan crisis.
In conclusion, the relationship between our two
Councils essentially drives the partnership of the two
organizations. I commend the Councils for regularly
engaging in joint briefings by senior officials in
both the AU Commission and the United Nations
Secretariat, as it provides an opportunity to broadly
discuss our perspectives and findings on various
conflict situations and enables us to develop a shared
understanding of the dynamics on the ground. It is
therefore vital to continue strengthening both political
and institutional engagement between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council, taking
into account our mandates, comparative advantages
and common objectives.

