Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I should like at the outset to welcome the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and the Chairman
of the Independent Inquiry Committee, Mr. Volcker.
We thank Mr. Volcker for the report and commend him
and the other members of the Independent Committee
for their work. We have received the report, which is a
comprehensive, detailed document. We will need time
to examine it, and we will clearly pay close attention to
that task.

However, having familiarized ourselves, before
this meeting, with the preface of the report, and having
listened today to Mr. Volcker and to the Secretary-
General, I would like to say, by way of preliminary
comment, that I share many of their conclusions. The
United Nations humanitarian oil-for-food programme
was authorized by the Security Council nine years ago
as a measure aimed at easing the humanitarian
suffering of the Iraqi people that resulted from the
many years of comprehensive sanctions and embargo.
The programme was in operation until March 2003,
when it was suspended for reasons that are well known.

We believe that it is unfair to describe the
humanitarian programme in solely negative terms. As I
see it, in the report Mr. Volcker sets forth a true
understanding of the essence and nature of the
humanitarian programme. I would like to remind the
Council that he notes that the programme was designed
correctly but that it was undermined in terms of its
implementation. As we know, that is a frequent
occurrence with operations that are of much lesser
magnitude.

A discussion is currently under way on United
Nations reform. The Secretary-General has proposed
measures to improve the activities of the Secretariat; in
general, we endorse and support them. We call on the
Secretary-General to continue to make further efforts
in that direction.

Despite the mistakes and miscalculations, the
corruption and the grievous errors in implementation of
the programme in general, it did show that broad
actions of this type are possible and that the United
Nations is in a position to provide assistance to
civilians living under difficult conditions. Furthermore,
as we see it, only the United Nations is capable of
carrying out assignments of such a comprehensive,
global nature. Unfortunately, recent events have
demonstrated that major international humanitarian
operations will still be called for. Right now, the most
important thing is to adopt the necessary and correct
conclusions as to how they are to be executed and
managed.

