Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the opportunity today to discuss an important
and often overlooked aspect of the Council's work. I
thank the Permanent Representative of Sweden and the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Chile for their
very useful briefings.

There are 25 subsidiary organs of the Security
Council; more than half are sanctions committees.
Sanctions are one of the few tools we have, short of
force, to deal with situations that threaten international
peace and security. They can and do have a useful
impact, whether that is constraining the flow of arms
into a conflict, incentivizing individuals to refrain
from activities that jeopardize prospects for peace, or
signalling to a belligerent State that its actions will not
be tolerated.

Intheareasofcounter-terrorismandnon-proliferation,
United Nations sanctions form a central element of
the international community's efforts to reduce the
capacity of relevant parties to do harm.

The implementation and overall effectiveness of
these measures rely on the effective functioning of
the sanctions committees. By that I mean timely and
informed decision-making, clear strategic direction
and flexibility to respond to changing circumstances.
It also means transparency through engagement
with key stakeholders to understand any unintended
consequences of the sanctions measures. While, in our
view, there is little evidence to suggest that unintended
consequences are prevalent, we need to be prepared to
respond to any such consequences in a flexible manner.

For 10 of us around this table, chairing such bodies
is part of our Council responsibilities. There are three
times as many committees now as when New Zealand
was last on the Council, in 1994, but there is no forum
to discuss them in any comprehensive way. For that
reason, New Zealand has welcomed the initiative of
Venezuela in organizing this meeting. In our View,
there are several questions we need to ask. Are the
frameworks that administer sanctions committees
working as effectively as they could be? Are they
sufficiently integrated into the Council's wider
work? Are we satisfied that their measures are being
implemented properly and, if not, what should we do
about it? I wish to make three main points.

First, sanctions committees have allowed formal
process to get in the way of outcomes. Decisions that, 20
years ago, would have been within a Chair's ambit are
now expected to be agreed by all committee members
by consensus. As Chair of two sanctions committees, I
am prevented from doing the simplest of tasks. I cannot
invite someone to a committee meeting, send a letter
or do due diligence on allegations of non-compliance
without the agreement of all 15 members. Being
unable to agree on the simplest of follow-up actions
on allegations of non-compliance is, quite frankly,
ridiculous. It is absurd that my predecessor, Sir Jim
McLay, was told he could not convene an open briefing
of the then Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee without
the Committee's agreement, even though there was a
Chapter VII resolution requesting him to hold such a
briefing.

That prescription of process and the archaic
formalism of the committees frustrate efficiency and
strangle innovation. It also needlessly takes up valuable
time of ambassadors and experts. Process is important,
we agree, but we should not allow it to obstruct our
primary goal as a Council - maintaining international
peace and security. We must remember that sanctions
committees operate entirely in informal mode. There are
no rules of procedure, no records. They operate under
guidelines that have no formal status. Yet somehow we
have allowed them to become so constrained by their
working methods that they are in effect subject to 15
vetoes. That is nonsense.

Secondly, there needs to be greater coherence
between the work of the subsidiary bodies and the
related discussions in the Council's broader work.
Sanctions are not imposed in isolation but, save for a
few formulaic briefings, if we are lucky, we discuss
them as if they were. That needs to change. We need
to include sanctions in our conversations on country-
specific situations. Ifnot, we lose sight oftheir purpose.
Most of the committees have expert bodies that produce
excellent reports. Too often, though, those reports are
buried in the Committee and the valuable information
they contain never reaches the decision makers. We need
to find processes that enable those experts to present
their information to the wider Council and which will
allow for the Chair to provide honest assessments of the
effectiveness and continuing purpose of the committees
that they chair. Let us be frank: that does require the
permanent members to change their approach and to
stop trying to vet and censor everything a Chair says
or does.

Thirdly, we need to help elected members better
prepare for their participation in subsidiary bodies.
In my experience, it is the permanent members who
participate most actively in sanctions committees,
while it is the elected members who are saddled with the
administrative tasks and frustrations of chairing them.
Elected members do not campaign to be on the Council
to simply to make up the numbers. We see two key ways
to address the matter. For one, we believe the Council
should appoint committee Chairs, including perhaps
by spreading the burden to permanent members also,
through a transparent process, well before their term
commences. That would be fairer and more inclusive
and would promote a more positive atmosphere in the
Council. The change to the election of new members in
July provides an opportunity for this to be done. Early
appointment would also allow incoming members to
better prepare for their new responsibilities.

We also support convening regular informal
meetings for experts who support the committee
Chairs, in order to discuss cross-cutting issues and
assist with the passing on of expertise to incoming
members. That would help address the lack of
institutional knowledge for elected members and would
afford a smoother transition between Chairs. It would
also provide a forum for achieving greater coherence
among the subsidiary bodies and promote the use of
best practices. Ultimately, as with broader working
methods in the Council, such issues are unlikely to be
resolved overnight, or via a resolution or presidential
statement. Much of the practice of sanctions bodies
is unwritten. The main reform that we would like to
see is a change to the current culture of formality and
exclusivity. That is a simple matter of behaviour, which
can and must change.

