Mr. Holliday (United States of America): Madam
President, allow me to welcome you and to thank you
for having convened this meeting today. I wish also to
thank you for your leadership - and Chile's
leadership - on this issue, and also for having shown
the compelling film we saw earlier in the meeting.

I should like also to thank Special Representative
Otunnu, both for his statement this morning and for the
Secretary-General's report on children and armed
conflict. It is very important that the Security Council
and our Governments, as Member States, keep the
issue of children and armed conflict in our focus.

The United States recognizes the terrible
consequences of using children in armed conflict in all
regions of the world. The use of child soldiers is
contributing to violence and great suffering. Through
children, we know innocence, love, tenderness and
hope. They are the benchmarks of humanity. We are
measured by how we care for our children, how we
nurture and nourish them, educate them and shelter
them. It is our duty as members of the Council to do as
much as we can to eliminate the tragedy of children in
armed conflict.

The Secretary-General's report describes the
terrible circumstances where the use of child soldiers
continues. My country fully supports the request for all
parties listed in the annexes of the report to halt the
recruitment and use of child soldiers in violation of
international obligations.
The child-soldier problem is particularly dire in
Burma, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, parts of the Republic
of the Congo, Liberia and northern Uganda. To
highlight a few of these problem areas, Burma is
thought to have the largest number of child soldiers in
the world. Human Rights Watch recently documented
the widespread forced recruitment of boys as young as
11 by Burma's national army. Many are forced to fight
against armed ethnic opposition groups and to carry out
human rights abuses such as rounding up villagers for
forced labour, burning houses and even attacking
civilians.

The Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers
recently reported that children may account for 35 to
45 per cent of new recruits into the national army and
for 70,000 or more of Burma's estimated 350,000
soldiers. Child soldiers are also used in ethnic armies.

We encourage Burma's neighbours to provide
protection to any child soldiers who desert from the
national or ethnic armies and to allow international
relief organizations, including the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), to provide assistance to
resettle and reintegrate them into society.

Colombia's children have long been affected by
that country's devastating conflict, including some
11,000 who are currently fighting in irregular armies,
including paramilitary and Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrilla forces. Boys and
girls, some as young as 10 years old, are often recruited
forcibly and used as combatants, spies, messengers,
porters, kidnappers, guards, cooks, sexual companions
or slaves, even for placing and removing bombs. Girls
in guerrilla and paramilitary groups are particularly at
risk of sexual abuse.

In Cote d'Ivoire, armed forces continue to recruit
young Liberians from refugee camps in the western
part of the country. Equally as tragic, Congolese armed
forces continue to have children in their ranks, despite
commitments to demobilization. Charles Taylor,
Liberia's former President, stepped down in August,
and, on one positive note, shortly after Taylor's
departure, 80 ex-child soldiers who had been fighting
in the ranks of either Government or opposition forces
were under the care of the United Nations in Monrovia,
and we salute the efforts of the United Nations in
Liberia. There is still a great deal more to be done in
that country, however.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) has waged a
civil war against the Government of Uganda since the
mid-19805. UNICEF estimates that between June 2002
and May 2003, the LRA abducted 8,400 children from
northern Uganda to serve as soldiers. UNICEF also
estimates that during the past 16 years of fighting,
more than 14,000 children have been abducted by the
LRA. The United Nations estimates that an average of
20 children are abducted on a daily basis.

Children are forced to participate in acts of
extreme violence and are often compelled to help beat
or hack to death fellow child captives who have
attempted to escape. Girls as young as 12 are given to
commanders as de facto wives. Some abducted
children have managed to escape, while others have
died from disease, mistreatment or combat wounds.

Although I have specifically mentioned only six
Governments that need to take immediate action to
eliminate the use of child soldiers, the other
Governments mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report that harbour child soldiers must also take action.
Of course, I have also mentioned, in addition to
Governments, armed groups that have perpetrated these
horrible acts.

The United States fully supports the following
measures: a specific request by the Council that the
Secretary-General submit another list to the Security
Council next year naming all Governments and armed
groups that illegally recruit and use child soldiers, not
just in countries that are currently on the Council's
agenda; active monitoring of Governments and armed
groups that have already been named; and direct
dialogue with the Governments and armed groups
concerned by the Council or the Secretary-General in
order to develop action plans to eliminate the use of
child soldiers.

Again, a positive note: the number of States
parties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict continues to increase. This past year
realized an increase of 21, to a total of 66 States
parties, demonstrating important leadership on the
effort to end the phenomenon of child soldiers.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report and
are reviewing its specific recommendations closely. We
look forward to working with the other Council
members on a closer review of the report. Last week's
Arria-style meeting, under the leadership of
Ambassador de La Sabliere, was a solid step in that
direction.

