Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to hold this
meeting at the very beginning of your presidency. I
also wish to express appreciation to your great country
for organizing the conference on Somalia last month,
which was, by any standard, most successful. The
presence here of its Under Secretary of State for this
meeting is a further demonstration of the commitment
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to assisting the peace process in Somalia. I also
wish to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Mahiga for the excellent work he is doing and
the Secretary-General for the serious attention he has
always given to Somalia.

The London conference did indeed help draw the
attention of the world to the urgent need to assist the
people of Somalia to bring to a close a tragedy that has
lasted too long. There are in fact hopeful signs of
progress in Somalia, and the London conference, far
from taking place amid despair, was preceded by some

encouraging developments in the country. No doubt,
most of the progress was made in the security domain,
but the series of defeats sustained by Al-Shabaab and
the expansion of the areas controlled by the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) represent
significant turning points on the road towards
stabilization of the situation in Somalia.

Those gains were not made without sacrifice. It is
therefore proper to express our gratitude to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Uganda and
Burundi, as well as to the TFG security forces. Kenyan
and Ethiopian forces have also been helping,
highlighting the increased cooperation for peace among
the countries of the region. The liberation of Baidoa on
the eve of the London Conference helped to validate
the view that the momentum has turned against
Al-Shabaab. Subsequent events in Baidoa have also
made it clear that Al-Shabaab has absolutely no
popular support, and the reception that the TFG and
Ethiopian troops received in the town also
demonstrates how much the people long for peace. It
needs no emphasizing how much Baidoa was used by
Al-Shabaab and its foreign supporters to violate
Security Council resolutions, and how much that
exacerbated the humanitarian tragedy in Somalia.

It is indisputable that, because the crisis in
Somalia is political, its resolution also requires a
political approach. On this front too, the TFG has been
moving in the right direction, even before the London
conference. The local peacebuilding strategy -
articulated by the TFG in January in a document on the
TFG approach to stabilization and reconciliation in the
newly liberated areas - appears to signify seriousness
of purpose on the part of the TFG authorities to take up
the political challenge with great determination. The
tasks that have to be undertaken by the TFG between
now and August are also clear and have been articulated
in the September 2011 road map. Furthermore, the
outcome of the second Somali National Consultative
Constitutional Conference, held in Garowe, has laid the
foundation for the successful completion of the
transition period and for the post-August 2012 political
framework.

Nevertheless, the challenges the TFG is grappling
with cannot be understated. That is why the enhanced
support of the international community is so critical in
virtually all areas. First of all, the security environment
needs to improve even further and Al-Shabaab must be
kept on the run without letup. Those challenges are not
yet overcome. Resolution 2036 (2012) certainly goes a
long way in that regard. The increase in the authorized
force level of AMISOM. to over 17,000 and the
reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment,
including force enablers and multipliers, is a major
move that could contribute to a much better opportunity
to stabilize the recently liberated areas.

No less significant is the ban on the export of
charcoal, which has until now been a major source of
revenue for Al-Shabaab. It is our hope that those sellers
who did not mind that funds were going to Al-Shabaab
through the charcoal trade will now be dissuaded from
continuing the practice. Let me add here our further
hope that the maritime component in the expanded
support for AMISOM. will soon receive the approval of
the Council.

It would not be an exaggeration if one were to
say that there is now a window of opportunity for
consolidating peace in Somalia. At the country level,
Al-Shabaab is on the run and is unlikely to regain
momentum if the regional and the international effort
to marginalize the hardcore elements of the terrorist
group is pursued in a principled manner and in line
with what is called for by international law and Security
Council resolutions. Indeed, as our Prime Minister,
Meles Zenawi, said at the London conference,

"Al-Shabaab is a terrorist organization, espousing
an extreme interpretation of a great religion, and
is inimical to peace and stability in Somalia and
the wider region. That ideology of violence and
mayhem can and must be defeated. There is no
compromise with the hard core of Al-Shabaab
12-25146
and the things they stand for. Assisting Al-Shabaab
in any shape or form is not only in conflict with
many United Nations Security Council resolutions,
and hence with international law, but constitutes a
crime against the well-being of the peoples of our
region."

The region is firmly united on this point, as it is
on doing whatever is necessary in the security area to
contribute to laying the foundation for peace in
Somalia. That, in fact, has been one of the major
developments in the Horn of Africa - the close
coordination and cooperation among the members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to help Somalia achieve peace and to ensure that the
region will have security. IGAD has also been working
in close cooperation with the African Union (AU) for
peace in Somalia. Moreover, the triangular cooperation
among the United Nations, the AU and IGAD has been
rather remarkable.

All those developments have been assets for the
effort to achieve peace in Somalia. The London
conference has contributed to the further strengthening
of that cooperation among stakeholders in the peace and
security of Somalia. We are hopeful that the upcoming
Istanbul conference will enhance that promising process.

