President wrote in his Manifesto: The World. The
21st Century:

"We should also have learnt from past wars
and conflicts that it is impossible to ensure our
own security by undermining the security of
others. That is why a global coalition of States for
peace, stability, trust and security under the United
Nations auspices should be set up. Our common
task for the next decade should be to end wars
and conflicts in Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen, Libya,
and Syria, in eastern Ukraine and the Palestinian-
Israeli confrontation."

Our specific regret is that major humanitarian
crises in the region are overwhelming, thereby
impacting millions of people in several countries with
great shortfalls in funding and supplies. We are also
witnessing the destruction of critical infrastructure that
support human life. My delegation therefore presents
the following observations for consideration, while
bearing in mind the questions raised in the concept note
(S/2018/524, annex).

First, in order to counter the causes of recurring and
potential new conflicts, a thorough and comprehensive
plan of action needs to be implemented by Governments,
the United Nations and international organizations in
strict adherence with international conventions and the
new reforms of the Secretary-General.

Second, the political deterioration of State
authority that is being usurped by non-State actors
and armed groups calls for further action. Therefore,
peacekeeping operations must be accompanied by
preventive diplomacy, mediation and sustainable
peace. The political and diplomatic settlement of
conflicts should prevail over the use of force. There
has to be full engagement of the United Nations, the
good offices of the Secretary-General and his Envoys
and Special Representatives, as well as upholding
Council resolutions cooperatively. A united Security
Council is important for sending strong messages to
warring parties, so as, inter alia, to stop the rhetoric
and inflammatory language, as well as the use of force
by all sides, and to uphold human rights.

Third, it is critical to reach agreement among
warring parties, while honouring ceasefires and
allowing unhindered humanitarian access by land, air
and sea to those most in need. Those who perpetrate
horrific brutalities, such as using hospitals and schools
for purposes of war or sexual violence as a weapon of
war, should be brought tojustice. We also need to review
the Council's sanctions regimes and halt unilateral
sanctions and embargoes that hurt innocent civilians.

Fourth, conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa region are like a vortex drawing in neighbouring
countries and even other Powers, thereby resulting in
proxy wars in an attempt to change the balance of power.
A united Security Council is all the more important to
withstand those undesirable trends.

Fifth, now is the time for the entire United Nations
system and Council members, including its five
permanent members, in the first instance, and 10 elected
members, in partnership with other international and
regional stakeholders, to find middle ground in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the investigation into
the use of chemical weapons, among others. We need to
safeguard the credibility ofthe Council as an apex body
of the United Nations. Investigations into all violations
must be thorough, objective and impartial so that the
international community can fairly identify their
perpetrators in full compliance with international law.

Sixth, Kazakhstan believes that unilateral steps,
especially the use of force, should not be taken for
whatever reason by any country or group of countries
without the approval of the Council. In addition, the
principles of territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty should always be observed under the
Charter of the United Nations. At the same time, it is
critical in global relations that civilians be protected
from all categories of perpetrators - as in the case
of the use of chemical weapons in Syria - who must
be thoroughly investigated and dealt with based on
objective facts and evidence under international law.
As host countries, Governments must also ensure the
security ofUnited Nations personnel and peacekeepers.
Seventh, due to the vacuum of functioning State
institutions, terrorist groups have found a strong
foothold in unstable areas, which has resulted in the
massive exodus of refugees from numerous countries.
The burden is borne by hosting countries like Jordan
and Lebanon that require international support.
Refugees from the Middle East and North Africa
have changed the political, demographic and security
landscape of Europe, thereby demanding a new global
compact on migration.

Eighth, effective strategies to prevent and address
conflicts and related scourges involving terrorism
require, besides political intervention, the three-fold
strategy that Kazakhstan has proposed. That comprises
strengthening the security-development nexus, as
well as deploying a revamped regional and innovative
whole-of-system approach with the United Nations
delivering as one. We also believe that the international
community needs to coalesce in prioritizing further
measures to eliminate international terrorism to ensure
a safer world. Governments must act under international
law and manage shared challenges and opportunities
along the way. We should also work towards the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
other types of weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East.

In conclusion, we would also like to refer to the first
presidential statement of the year, adopted in January,
which, during its presidency, Kazakhstan introduced
on preventive diplomacy and sustaining peace. The
Council, within its mandate to maintain international
peace and security, accordingly noted

"the importance of continuing to strive towards
sustainable peace and achieving a world free of
Violent conflicts by the United Nations Centenary"
(S/PRST/2018/1, p. I).

It is therefore good that we now have a targeted
time frame since the goal is a dream with a deadline.
We hope that today's discussion will help us to
move constructively forward, through dialogue,
confidence-building measures and the equal distribution
of resources. Those have been presented in profoundly
reflective treatises and manifestos on war and peace,
including our own initiatives.

