Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Allow me, as well, to commend you for your leadership
in bringing this significant and urgent issue before the
Chamber. As a small island developing State, Trinidad
and Tobago remains at the forefront of this pressing
challenge. The convening of this open debate presents
an ideal opportunity for the international community to
assess fully the interconnectivity between international
terrorism and organized crime.

My delegation notes with appreciation the very
informative and comprehensive interventions delivered
by the briefers, which we believe constructively added
to the debate.

In the Caribbean, transnational organized
crime and its attendant cross-border activities have
evolved into a major threat to regional security as the
countries within the region grapple with increased
criminal activity, which has moved from random acts
of criminality to criminal activities that are being
carried out in an increasingly organized and highly
professional manner. These indicators undeniably point
to a changing dynamic of illicit cross-border activity in
an increasingly sophisticated and technological global
environment. Transnational organized crime represents
a threat not only to peace and security, but to the rule
of law, human rights and socioeconomic development.
For our region, the confluence between
international terrorism and organized crime cannot
be ignored. Trinidad and Tobago is a uniquely diverse
society, founded on a rich history of inclusion, tolerance
and the peaceful coexistence and harmony of all its
citizens in a pluralistic, multicultural and multi-ethnic
society. To this end, we are committed to safeguarding
our citizens and supporting international efforts to
combat terrorism, and have taken a comprehensive and
inclusive approach to the issue of countering terrorism
and, in particular, to addressing the potential threats
posed by returning foreign terrorist fighters.

Our approach has involved the establishment of
a national counter-terrorism policy and strategy, the
improvement of the national legislative framework,
the enhancement of the national capacity and the
deepening of collaboration with local and international
partners, inclusive of civil society and academia, while
maintaining respect for human rights and dignity.
Most notably, in 2017 Trinidad and Tobago approved
its counter-terrorism strategy, which was founded on
three mutually reinforcing pillars, namely, protect and
prevent, pursue, and respond and recover.

In addition to policy development, we have
recognized that legislation is a key pillar of the national
response to terrorism. In this regard, Trinidad and
Tobago has conducted a review and amendment of
key legislation pertaining to terrorism, in particular
its Anti-Terrorism Act. One example is the significant
amendments that have been proposed through the
Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill 2018, which speaks
specifically to the threat posed by returning foreign
terrorist fighters and addresses technical deficiencies
in terms of compliance with resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1373 (2001). In this context, special consideration
is being given to the implications of this legislation for
women and children.

In conveying our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate, I wish to reiterate my
country's commitment to countering the threat of
terrorism, including the financing of terrorism, and to
taking active measures to create enabling environments
to resist the fostering of foreign terrorist fighters.

