Ms. Wilson (Australia): As others have noted,
a range of events over the past year remind us of the
ongoing threat to peace and security posed by the use
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). Non-State
actors are becoming increasingly sophisticated and
creative in their ability to source sensitive information
and materials relevant to the delivery and design
of WMDs. Today, we are all faced with the global
mobility and connectivity of terrorist groups. We know
that those seeking WMDs will exploit the weakest link
to pursue their goals. That has been demonstrated not
only by non-State actors but also by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, whose proliferation
activities we strongly condemn. In the face of those
threats, the Council's leadership and global cooperation
are essential. We need to work together to bolster
non-proliferation norms, strengthen export controls,
continue to share information and support developing
countries' non-proliferation efforts. Export control
regimes and multilateral counter-proliferation efforts
must adapt and remain relevant, capable and equipped
to succeed.

Resolution 1540 (2004) remains a centrepiece
of the international non-proliferation regime. It has
established and reinforced the strong international
norm that proliferation involving non-State actors is
unacceptable. Australia welcomes the attention that
Spain, as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), has given to revitalizing the
implementation of the resolution, including by helping
to mobilize resources and expertise to assist States
in strengthening their national practices. We need to
strive for the universal implementation of the resolution
in order to maximize the impact of our collective
endeavours.

During the 1540 Committee's open consultations
convened by Spain last June, Australia offered three main
thoughts on how the resolution could be strengthened.
We supported, first, extending the mandate of resolution

1540 (2004), given that the fight against proliferation is
an ongoing one; secondly, better leveraging of linkages
with other United Nations instruments and multilateral
non-proliferation and export regimes, including the
Australia Group; and, thirdly, practical measures
identified in the United States non-paper for the 1540
Committee to monitor, coordinate and share experience
in assistance provision. We look forward to continued
cooperation with the Chair of the 1540 Committee in
finalizing the comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) at the end of
this year.

During the June open consultations, we also
drew the attention of Member States to our hosting,
in partnership with the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, of the first Asia-Pacific regional
training session on the Secretary-General's mechanism
for investigation of alleged use of chemical and
biological weapons. We can confirm that the training
will be held in Canberra from 17 to 28 October. Member
States from the region will bejoined by INTERPOL, the
World Health Organization and the World Organization
for Animal Health. Australia supports the training
as a practical mechanism for coordinating counter-
proliferation and counter-terrorism efforts.

The International Atomic Energy Agency must
be supported in its central role in the global nuclear
security architecture to coordinate nuclear security
activities among international organizations and other
initiatives. We should all access and utilize existing
mechanisms, such as the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism. The focus of the Global Initiative on
achieving operational and practical outcomes is its core
strength. Its guidance documents have been pivotal in
informing Australia's national approaches in the area
of nuclear security, such as nuclear detection capability
and radiation monitoring at the border.

In conclusion, weapons of mass destruction and
their potential to fall into the wrong hands threaten
global peace and security. Malaysia's initiative today
in convening this open debate and the determination of
Spain to re-energize the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) are very timely and welcome indeed.
Australia, too, will continue to play an active role in
support of our collective interests to halt the potential
for WMD proliferation and use.

