Mr. Wehbe (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you for convening
this meeting of the Security Council, although it was
somewhat delayed, since we had requested it on Friday.
We do not understand the delay, in view of the fact that
the situation in the region is boiling.

All of us have stated our views about the grave
danger in the region, noting especially that recent days
have witnessed catastrophic developments on the
Palestinian scene, developments without precedent
since the war crimes of the Second World War. Many
of us thought that, especially with the advent of the
new millennium, we had seen the last of the deliberate
destruction of buildings with their residents -
including children, women and old people - still
inside and the wide-scale destruction of infrastructure.
But that is the reality in the occupied Palestinian
territories, where the Israeli occupying forces commit
the most heinous and atrocious crimes against
Palestinian civilians, without being deterred by any
party, and without even the minimum of respect for
international law and international humanitarian
values. In addition, they have no respect for standards
on which the peoples of the world have agreed, as
embodied in conventions that have become symbols of
human values and civilization.

Israel is armed to the teeth with all kinds of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, which
constitute an arsenal of weapons of mass destruction
and murder; in full view, its bulldozers demolish the
homes of the children and the dispossessed among the
Palestinian people. Israel is pursuing its daily hobby:
killing and destruction. This represents the worst kind
of defiance and contempt for international legality and
ethical norms and values.

We have heard that the Security Council has
adopted 28 resolutions on this matter. Israel has paid
no heed to those resolutions. Can there be any greater
defiance of international legality? If another State had
failed to comply with only one resolution, the world
would have been up in arms.

Syria has warned over and over again that what is
currently taking place in the occupied Arab territories
is part of a strategy pursued by the Israeli Government,
which has made its defiance of international law and of
Council resolutions a regular policy. We have stated
before, and we state again here that the Israeli
Government has no peace strategy. Its strategy does not
require in-depth analysis: it is built on waging wars,
perpetuating occupation and suppressing the
aspirations of our people in the occupied territories to
realize their hope for freedom, dignity and an end to
the occupation.

A case in point with regard to the anti-peace
Israeli policy is the statement made by the Israeli Prime
Minister a few days ago. He said that Arabs have no
right to the territories occupied in 1967. He added that
Israel has sovereignty over those territories. Do we
really need further proof that the Israeli Government
does not want peace, that it insists on occupation and
that it resorts to military force, which is nothing but a
bankrupt policy, as His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan
said this morning?

Today the Palestinian people is facing the worst
kind of unjust occupation, siege and systematic
assassinations, without seeing any serious initiative to
put an end to the atrocious modern-day massacre that
Israel is committing before the eyes and ears of the
world. More than 70 days have gone since the
beginning of the monstrous siege of Nablus, without
the international community doing anything to save
those hundreds of thousands of women, children and
other innocent civilians. This applies also to other
cities in the territories.

We are talking about the destruction of
Palestinian institutions. Israel has killed over 80
Palestinians in a month and a half. It was not asked to
put an end to its machine of death and vengeance. No
one made a move, even though the world knows that
the Israeli pretext of fighting Palestinian violence no
longer holds. Does this silence indicate a new
international law in progress? One based on condoning
war crimes and violations of human rights to satisfy
Israel and accommodate the whims of its leaders in
shedding more Palestinian blood? Is this a new
international law that has replaced existing
international law, international humanitarian law and
the Geneva Conventions?

The Arabs and the international community
agreed on the conditions for the establishment of a just
and comprehensive peace in the region on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), as well as on the principle of land for peace. At
the recent Beirut Summit, the Arab leaders adopted a
comprehensive peace initiative based on international
law and relevant Security Council resolutions.
Nonetheless, Israel insists on occupation and daily acts
of aggression against the Arabs. Against this
background, the Arabs are more determined than ever
to uphold their inalienable rights and continue to
believe in international legitimacy as the road leading
to a just and comprehensive peace.

Before Council members is a draft resolution that
the Arab Group has endorsed unanimously. It expresses
grave concern over the tragic and violent events
engulfing the Palestinian territories since the year
2000, including the re-occupation of the Palestinian
Authority's headquarters. The draft resolution reiterates
the need to respect international humanitarian law,
including the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 1949.
The draft resolution demands that Israel withdraw its
forces from the Palestinian cities. Syria supports this
draft resolution and believes that it is the lowest
common denominator on which Council members can
agree. Would our Council then open a window of hope
to the Palestinian people who have been living under
an unjust siege and unacceptable practices?

This is what we urge the Council to do. We hope
that we will be able to open this window of
opportunity, and we urge the Council members to
support the minimum requirements included in this
draft resolution.

