Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join others in
thanking Mr. Mladenov for his accurate briefing and
dedicated work in very challenging circumstances.

As Mr. Mladenov said, yesterday's events once
again show the great the risk of escalation in the
absence of progress in the political, economic,
humanitarian dimensions. The current situation is
simply not sustainable. In that context, I will focus on
three issues - first, yesterday's escalation; secondly,
the crisis in Gaza; and, thirdly, developments in the
West Bank.

On my first point, the escalation we witnessed
yesterday, in the early hours of 29 May, Palestinian
terrorist groups fired rockets and mortars towards
Israel. Those rockets and mortars landed in civilian
areas, one of them in the playground of a kindergarten,
as others have already indicated. Luckily, no one got
hurt. The Kingdom of the Netherlands condemns
these indiscriminate attacks from Gaza into Israel.
As our Swedish colleague just said, these attacks are
unacceptable and must stop immediately. The rocket
and mortar attacks were the beginning of a day of
attacks and counter-attacks - the heaviest since the
hostilities in 2014.
Yesterday's events showed again how fragile the
situation is and how quickly things can spiral out of
control. Yesterday's events followed weeks of protests,
with more protests announced. We must prevent new
and further escalation. We once again call on all parties
to exercise restraint and to prevent incidents that would
put the lives of both Palestinians and Israeli civilians at
risk. Civilians on both sides of the fence on the Gaza
border should not have to live in fear.

That brings me to my second point, the crisis in
Gaza, which has been discussed recently in the Chamber
on several occasions. We welcome the consensus in the
Council that the situation is most concerning and needs
to be addressed. Now the challenge before us is to come
to consensus on how the Council should act.

We welcome the initiative taken by Mr. Mladenov
to come up with a plan to fast-track urgently needed
projects for water, energy and health. For that approach
to succeed, the combined effort of the international
community and the cooperation of all parties is
needed. Crises should not be treated as an excuse to
delay further action. On the contrary, they are an extra
reason to redouble efforts to improve living conditions
on the ground.

In that regard, we reiterate our support for an
appropriate public statement by the Council on the
current crisis. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
welcomes the initiatives taken by members to address
parts of the puzzle. We thank Kuwait in particular for
its efforts in that regard. We should be able to come to a
statement that does justice to our shared concerns.

A sustainable political solution is needed to the
humanitarian crisis for the security of Palestinian
and Israeli civilians. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
supports the Egyptian initiatives to achieve a return of
the Palestinian Authority as the legitimate Government
in Gaza, and we welcome Egypt's constructive role in
maintaining calm between the parties.

That brings me to my third point, on the worrisome
developments in the West Bank. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is deeply concerned by the intention of
the Israeli authorities to enforce the demolition of all
structures in the Khan Al-Ahmar community. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands stresses that Area C is
of critical importance for the Viability of a future
Palestinian State in the context of the two-State
solution. We recall that demolitions and confiscations
of homes and humanitarian assets and the obstruction
of the delivery of humanitarian assistance are contrary
to Israel's obligations under international law.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands condemns the
announced plans to approve new settlement expansion.
The continued Israeli settlement activity is illegal under
international law. It remains an obstacle to peace, as
reaffirmed by resolution 2334 (2016).

In conclusion, this week has shown that on both
sides steps are taken that undermine the viability of the
two-State solution. This week's events are an alarming
reminder that the current status quo is unsustainable.
We call upon all parties to reverse these trends and to
take positive steps that contribute to the possibility of
sustainable peace. We call upon all parties to make the
two-State solution possible.

