I will address the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on the Force: adapting to the challenges of COVID-19 and working to continue to implement the mandate. Since early March 2020, the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) has been implementing a detailed COVID-19 action plan designed to maintain operational capability and limit the potential for the spread of the virus within the mission. This plan includes screening on entry to all 14 positions and restrictions on movement between positions, with most national and international staff working from home. The UNDOF COVID-19 Crisis Management Team, comprising the mission leadership and special staff officers, meets weekly and as required to discuss new control measures as well as updated United Nations and World Health Organization advice. As the restrictions are being lifted in Syria and Israel, risk analysis is being conducted on projects that require national civilians to enter camps, and mitigating protective measures are being put in place. A very collaborative approach has been taken during these meetings, which has ensured the buy-in of everyone involved. Dedicated quarantine and isolation facilities have been identified in both Camp Faouar and Camp Ziouani, and specialized medical equipment has been sourced. I am confident that the UNDOF Level 1+ hospital has the capacity to deal with mild cases of COVID-19. However, more serious cases will require medical evacuation to a home country or designated United Nations COVID-19 treatment facility. To date, UNDOF has had NO COVID-19-positive cases. This is entirely due to the precautionary measures taken by each of the 1,016 military and 52 civilian members of the UNDOF team. Although the COVID-19 pandemic has been a significant challenge to UNDOF, it has had little impact on UNDOF's ability to fulfil its mandate. In Syria, curfew and inter-governorate travel restrictions have now been lifted, which has allowed us to resume night patrols. There are also some positive indications that inspections of Syrian military positions in the area of limitation on the Bravo side, which had been stopped for security reasons, may resume on a phased basis. In the Israeli-occupied Golan, or Alpha side, most COVID-19 restrictions have also been lifted. It is anticipated that Alpha-side inspections will recommence soon. While many of the COVID-19 restrictions have been lifted on both sides of the ceasefire line, the Quneitra crossing remains closed. It should be said, however, that both parties have been very supportive to the mission by allowing specialized personnel and medical equipment to cross. UNDOF observes the 14-day quarantine requirement of both parties when personnel cross. It is hoped that, when both Israel and the Syria open their borders, transit through the Quneitra crossing will resume at the level it was prior to 2014. This will ensure that UNDOF has freedom of movement as provided for in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement of 1974. Although the Lebanese-Syrian border is closed, it is open to commercial vehicles and, therefore, there has been no impact on our fuel, water and food supplies. Stock levels held by the mission have been increased as a contingency. In line with the Secretary-General's direction, all rotations of contingents and individual personnel have been postponed with effect from 4 April to 30 June. All leave was cancelled with effect from 4 March. Planning is ongoing to resume rotations in line with the United Nations transitional measures for the partial resumption of uniformed rotations in a COVID-19 environment. Liaison between UNDOF and both parties is ongoing despite the COVID-19 restrictions. UNDOF Liaison Officers have been able to communicate with representatives of both parties. Meetings with the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate have continued as usual, and a meeting was facilitated by Israeli Chief of the International Cooperation Unit at the A gate of the Quneitra crossing. Over the last two weeks, UNDOF mission leadership has conducted video- teleconference meetings with troop-contributing country embassies and others in order to update them on ongoing issues and challenges, including implications of COVID-19. I shall now provide update on our return to the Bravo side. Despite the COVID-19 restrictions, UNDOF continues to progress plans towards full mandate implementation on the Bravo side following the partial withdrawal of the Force in 2014 due to security concerns arising from the internal conflict in Syria. Phases | and 2 of the plan were completed with the return of the Force headquarters and the Force Commander's reserve to Camp Faouar in 2017 and the re-establishment of a credible presence in the area of separation with the resumption of patrols and the reconstruction of a number of United Nations positions. Phase 3, the consolidation phase, commenced in October 2019, with a view to ensuring a strong and resilient Force deployment. This phase commenced with the Uruguayan contingent reaching full operational capability in the south of the area of separation and the implementation of a new Force structure, enhancing command and control and reporting. Planning is almost complete on the fourth and final phase. Phase 4 will see the enhancement of the operational capability of UNDOF through the addition of two mechanized platoons, which will staff two new posts - one in the centre and another in the south of the area of separation. These new positions are located in strategically significant locations that will significantly enhance UNDOF's situational awareness and operational capability. UNDOF has worked hard to increase its operational footprint. This has been primarily achieved through patrolling. UNDOF now has access to over 95 per cent of the area of separation for patrolling purposes. In May 2019, UNDOF conducted 325 patrols. In May of this year, UNDOF conducted 999 patrols. This additional patrolling has significantly increased the situational awareness of mission and its ability to report more effectively. Let me now address the challenges of operating in a sensitive environment. UNDOF operates in a complex and sensitive environment. There have been ongoing violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement of 1974. UNDOF has reported violations wherein Israeli forces attacked targets within Syria and, most significantly, on 30 April, the Israel Defense Forces conducted a number of attacks on positions within UNDOF's area of separation and area of limitation. Other military violations include the presence of unauthorized military equipment in the area of limitation and an increased number of aircraft and drones flying over the area of separation. On the Bravo side, there is an ongoing presence of Syrian armed forces within the area of separation and many instances of civilians crossing the ceasefire line on a daily basis. The deteriorating security situation in the Dara'a governorate is cause for concern to UNDOF. First, there has been a notable shift in security-related incidents moving closer to the UNDOF area of operations, with some cases occurring in the immediate vicinity of UNDOF patrol routes. There is no indication, however, that UNDOF is being targeted. Secondly, the attacks have grown in frequency, scale and severity, with assassinations occurring almost every day and a number of reports of significant exchange of gunfire taking place between competing groups. Thirdly, a new trend has emerged whereby the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham is claiming responsibility for attacks in the Dara'a governorate, some of which occurred within the UNDOF are of operations. Inconclusion, UNDOF continues to use its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire between Israeli and Syrian forces and to see that it is scrupulously observed. Despite the challenging environment in which we are now operating, UNDOF will continue to implement its mandate with impartiality. I thank Council members most sincerely for their ongoing support to UNDOF.
