Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
First of all, Belgium associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.

Today's open debate on multilateralism is very
timely. Given the scope of the challenges we are facing,
we want to emphasize more than ever our support for
multilateralism and the importance of investing our
resources and energy in it. A month ago, in his address
to the General Assembly, my Prime Minister delivered
a passionate statement encouraging multilateralism, in
which he said,

"Putting human beings at the centre and establishing
the rule of law as the basis for international order
is what should drive the engine of multilateralism."
(A/73/PV10, p. 33)

For centuries Belgium was a battleground for the
Powers surrounding it. Thanks to close cooperation
among countries and our respect for diversity and
mutual dependency, we are now living in the longest
period of peace in our history to date. That is why we
firmly believe in the usefulness of the United Nations,
its Charter and the universal values that inspire
it. Belgium supports a constructive and integrated
approach to the three pillars of the work of the United
Nations - sustainable development, human rights
and peace and security 4 as the best way to prevent
conflicts and achieve lasting peace. That belief must
now be translated into concrete multilateral action. We
must demonstrate that effective and joint steps taken
here in the Security Council can make a difference
for men, women and children on the ground. That
will certainly be the goal of Belgium's mandate on the
Security Council over the next two years. Three key
words will guide our work.

The first is prevention, which can be achieved by
analysing and addressing the root causes and drivers of
conflicts in an integrated and comprehensive manner,
in close partnership with regional and subregional
organizations, the countries most concerned and civil
society. The fight against impunity is also a crucial
preventive tool. The second is protection, above all
of civilians - men, women and children - with a
particular emphasis on children in armed conflict
and respect for international humanitarian law. The
third is performance, which is about strengthening
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and
prioritizing support for political solutions and the
protection of civilians.

I would also like to emphasize three areas where
we must step up our efforts in supporting a rules-based
international order in the area of peace and security. We
should all ensure that the international norms that we
have all agreed on are consistently respected. All Council
members therefore have a responsibility to ensure that
their actions in the Council do not contribute directly
or indirectly to violations of international humanitarian
law, human rights or non-proliferation regimes. In that
regard, efforts such as the France-Mexico initiative on
the veto and the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group remain extremely
relevant. Secondly, we must be able to take advantage
of existing multilateral instruments so as to provide
concrete solutions to situations on the Council's
agenda, and those instruments must in turn reinforce
the work of the Security Council. In that respect, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) plays a very important role in Syria. That is
why Belgium has allocated €2 million for building new
laboratories so that the OPCW can remain on the cutting
edge in its research and verification activities. And the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty could play an
important and useful role in forging an agreement with
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

Lastly, if we want to build a rules-based
international order, we must also ensure that those
rules are truly respected. We have developed important
instruments - not only the International Court of
Justice, the International Criminal Court and the
Permanent Court of Arbitration, but also a range
of instruments for verification and the attribution
of responsibility. While there is of course room for
improvement where they are concerned, we must also
be able to use them when appropriate in order to make
multilateralism more effective.

