The President: The Security Council will now
proceed to the election of five members of the International
Court of Justice, in accordance with Article 13 of the
Statute of the International Court of Justice, to fill the five
seats which will become vacant on 5 February 1997 on the
expiry of the terms of office of the following Judges:
Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui (Algeria), Mr. Stephen Schwebel
(United States of America), Mr. Mohamed Shahabuddeen
(Guyana), Mr. Vladlen S. Vereshchetin (Russian Federation) and Mr. Luigi Ferrari Bravo (Italy).

The consolidated and updated list of candidates
nominated by national groups is contained in documents
S/l996/723/Rev.1 and S/l996/723/Rev.l/Corr.1, which
reflect all the information concerning notifications received
by the Secretary-General of nominations by national groups.
Documents S/ 1996/724 and S/l996/724/Corr.l contain the
curricula vitae of the candidates.

The Security Council also has before it a
memorandum by the Secretary-General, contained in
document S/1996/722, describing the present composition
of the Court and setting out the procedure to be followed in
the conduct of the election.

I should like to remind the Council that, under Article
10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council shall be considered as elected."

The required majority in the Security Council is eight votes.

If more than five candidates obtain the required
majority, according to the procedure which has been
followed in the past and which is set forth in paragraph 14
of the Secretary-General's memorandum, a new vote will
be held on all the candidates.

 

This rule will also apply to any subsequent ballots,
if the number of candidates obtaining the absolute
majority is greater than the number of vacancies
remaining. If, on the other hand, in the first ballot the
number of candidates obtaining the absolute majority is
less than five, the Council will proceed to a second ballot
on the remaining vacancies, and balloting will continue in
the same manner until five of the candidates have
obtained the required majority of votes.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will receive
a ballot paper containing the names of all the candidates.
No withdrawal will be accepted once the ballot papers
have been distributed. However, it would be possible to
withdraw between ballots. Members of the Council will
be requested to place an "X" in the boxes next to the
names of the candidates for whom they wish to vote.
Only those candidates whose names appear on the ballot
paper are eligible for election.

I should like to remind members of paragraph 11 of
the Secretary-General's memorandum, which specifies
that

"Each elector may vote for not more than five
candidates on the first ballot". (5/1996/722, para. 11)

Any ballot paper containing votes for more than five
names will be considered invalid. When five candidates
have obtained the required majority of votes, I shall
communicate the result to the President of the General
Assembly, and I shall request the Council to remain in
session pending the receipt from the President of the
General Assembly of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to select
two delegations to serve as tellers.

>l< >l< >l<

The President: The names of the delegations of
France and the United States of America have been
drawn. I request each of those delegations to appoint one
member to serve as teller.

 

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Legal (France)
and Mr. Rosenstoek (United States of America) acted
as tellers.


The President: May I take it that the Council is now
ready to proceed with the election of five members of the
International Court of Justice?
It is so decided.

I request the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot
papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in the
boxes next to the names of the five candidates for whom
they wish to vote.


The President: I take it that all members of the
Council have now voted, and I ask the Conference Officer
to collect the ballot papers.

>l< * >l<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind the Council that, as we
agreed during our consultations, the ballots will not be
counted until it has been verified that the ballot papers in
the General Assembly have been collected. The Council
will remain in session pending the receipt of that
information.


The President: I have now been informed that the
ballot papers have been collected in the General Assembly.

The counting of the ballots in the Security Council
will now begin. The tellers will now count the ballots.

As agreed in our consultations, there will be two
independent countings of the ballots, one by each teller.


The President: The result of the voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8

 

Number of votes obtained:

Mr. Stephen M. Schwebel 15
Mr. Vladlen S. Vereshchetin 15
Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui 14
Mr. Pieter H. Kooijmans 8

Mr. Francisco Rezek
Mr. Mohamed Shahabuddeen
Mr. Jose Antonio Pastor Ridruejo

U1CJ\O\
Mr. Mehmet Giiney

Mr. Francisco Orrego Vicufia
Mr. Patrick Robinson

Mr. Murat K. Azimov

ONION

Accordingly, the following candidates have obtained
the required majority of votes in the Security Council:
Mr. Stephen M. Schwebel, Mr. Vladlen S. Vereshchetin,
Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui and Mr. Pieter H. Kooijmans.

Since fewer than five candidates have received the
required eight votes, the Council will now proceed to a
second ballot for the remaining vacancy, in accordance
with rule 61 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

I would like to remind members that each member
may vote for no more than one candidate.

All candidates are eligible for voting except those
who have received the required majority of votes in the
previous ballot.

Any ballot paper containing votes for more than one
candidate will be invalid.

May I take it that the Council is now ready to
proceed with the election of one member of the
International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

I request the Conference Officer to distribute the
ballot papers.

I request members of the Council to place an "X" in

the box next to the name of the candidate for whom they
wish to vote.

 


The President: I take it that all the members of the
Council have now marked their ballots. I ask the
Conference Officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l< * =l<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected.

The tellers will now count the ballots. There will be
two independent countings of the ballots, one by each teller.

>l< >i< >l<

The President: The result of the voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 2
Number of valid ballots: 13
Required majority: 8

Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Francisco Rezek
Mr. Mohamed Shahabuddeen
Mr. Patrick Robinson
Mr. Mehmet Giiney
Mr. Murat K. Azimov
Mr. Francisco Orrego Vicufia
Mr. Jose Antonio Pastor Ridruejo

ooonLm

Since, after a second ballot, the number of candidates
who have received the required eight votes is still less than
five, the Council will now proceed to a third ballot for the
remaining vacancy, in accordance with rule 61 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

I would like to remind members that each member
may vote for no more than one candidate.

All candidates are eligible for election except those
who have received the required majority of votes in the
previous ballots. Any ballot paper containing votes for more
than one candidate will be invalid. Please mark an "X" in
the box for only one candidate.

May I take it that the Council is now ready to proceed
with the election of one member of the International Court
of Justice?

It is so decided.

I request the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot
papers.

 

I request members of the Council to place an "X" in
the box next to the name of the candidate for whom they
wish to vote.


The President: I take it that all the members of the
Council have now voted, and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l< * >l<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected.
The tellers will now count the ballots. There will be
two independent countings of the ballots, one by each
teller.


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8

Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Francisco Rezek
Mr. Francisco Orrego Vicufia
Mr. Mohamed Shahabuddeen
Mr. Murat K. Azimov
Mr. Mehmet Giiney
Mr. Jose Antonio Pastor Ridruejo
Mr. Patrick Robinson

OOOOw-lkoo

The following five candidates have received the
required majority of votes in the Security Council:
Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui, Mr. Pieter H. Kooijmans,
Mr. Francisco Rezek, Mr. Stephen M. Schwebel and
Mr. Vladlen S. Vereshchetin.

I shall communicate the result of the vote to the
President of the General Assembly in writing.

I request the Council to remain in session while we
wait for the President of the General Assembly to inform
the Council of the result of the voting in the Assembly.

The meeting was suspended at 12.35 p.m. and
resumed at 12.40 pm.

 


The President: I should like to inform the members
of the Council that I have just received from the President
of the General Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the 54th
plenary meeting of the General Assembly, held today
for the purpose of electing five members of the
International Court of Justice, the following candidates
obtained an absolute majority of votes in the General
Assembly: Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui, Mr. Pieter
Kooijmans, Mr. Francisco Rezek, Mr. Stephen
Schwebel and Mr. Vladlen Vereshchetin."

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the same candidates, the

 

distinguished jurists Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui, Mr. Pieter
Kooijmans, Mr. Francisco Rezek, Mr. Stephen Schwebel
and Mr. Vladlen Vereshchetin have been elected as
members of the International Court of Justice for a term
of office of nine years, beginning on 6 February 1997.

I should like to congratulate them and wish them
every success in the high office to which they have been

elected.

I should also like to thank the tellers for their
assistance.

The Security Council has thus concluded its business
for this meeting.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.

