Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Zarif for presenting
the report of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2012/603). We welcome the
participation in today's meeting of the Prime Minister
of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeie, and we share his views.
We have carefully listened to the statement made by
Mr. Thaci.

Russia's position with respect to the non-recognition
of the unilaterally declared independence of Kosovo
remains in place. Resolution 1244 (1999) continues to
be ofthe utmost relevance and remains obligatory for all
as the international legal basis for the settlement of the
Kosovo crisis and for ensuring security in the region.
We continue to believe that UNMIK remains, pursuant
to the Council mandate, the primary international civil
presence in Kosovo. It must play a fully active role in
moving the settlement process in Kosovo forward.

In that context, we support the position of the new
Government of Serbia, calling for the participation
of the United Nations in the negotiation process
between Belgrade and Pristina. We insist that UNMIK
carry out its obligations with respect to the foreign
representation of Kosovo in international organizations
and mechanisms.

We are concerned with the decision of Kosovo to
establish the so-called new administrative office in
northern Mitrovica, whose financing is to be covered
by funds that had been previously earmarked for the
needs of the northern part of the city through UNMIK.
That decision has already drawn a negative reaction
from the Serbian people in Mitrovica, and can only lead
to further destablization in the region as a whole.

Unfortunately, the situation in the enclaves is truly
dismal, above all with respect to security, which was not
duly reflected in the report on the activities of UNMIK.
According to data, a dozen or so ethnically motivated
killings took place over the past year. No appropriate
investigation is being conducted by the Kosovo police
or by the international presence, including the European
Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX). Against that
backdrop, Serbs are in constant fear for their lives. In
the enclaves there are frequent cases of houses built for
Serbs being set on fire, and of the distribution of flyers
calling for reprisals and for Serbs to leave Kosovo. A
glaring example was the killing of Serbian returnees on
6 July in Talinovac, near the city of Urosevac. Another
noteworthy incident took place on 28 June. As a result
of clashes of Serbs with Kosovar police, dozens were
wounded and beaten, including children.

There is also a continuing difficult situation
with respect to the confiscation of Serbian property.
According to far from complete data from the Kosovar
property agency, there are no fewer than 20,000 cases
of confiscated private property, including houses,
apartments and land. According to statistics from Serbs
themselves, the list ofillegally seized property exceeds
30,000. A destabilizing factor is the activity of the
Kosovar Albanian authorities who, under the pretext
of implementing the Belgrade-Pristina agreement, are
preventing the use of Serbian licence plates, forcing
Serbs to fill out State documents, including for
citizenship in the so-called Republic of Kosovo, and to
pay back taxes.

In carrying out those measures, EULEX is
playing an active role by implementing decisions of
the so-called Kosovar Minister of the Interior. We
have repeatedly spoken of the regrettable situation of
property belonging to the Serbian Orthodox Church.
The monasteries of Devie and Visoki Decani have
been subjected to acts of vandalism and the monks are
subject to attacks. Pilgrims in buses are pelted with
stones, despite security provided by the police. There
is a clear disconnect between the policy for the return
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and the growing
outflow from the region of members of national
minorities, which shows that the Kosovar Government,
with the acquiescence of the international presence,
systematically hinders the return of individuals forced
to leave the region, who number upwards of 200,000,
and that it has not acted to return their property or to
uphold their fundamental human rights and freedoms.
Without a deep-rooted change in the attitude of
Pristina and the international presence, resolving those
issues will be impossible.

We stand for the comprehensive and full
investigation of crimes committed in Kosovo against
ethnic minorities. Passing over such incidents in
silence or brushing them aside is unacceptable. That
fully pertains to the investigation of findings of illegal
trafficking in human human organs, discovered by the
Rapporteur of the Council of Europe, Mr. Dick Marty.
We are displeased by the slow pace of that process,
led by EULEX. The findings contained in the Marty
report direct imply the participation in those crimes by
current leaders in the region. Investigations must be
impartial and reliable. That is the very reason that we
would once again support Serbia's proposal to transfer
investigations to the United Nations.

To conclude, we would once again like to stress that
UNMIK should not become a passive observer to the
growing issues of national minorities, the protection
of the Serbian cultural heritage and the return of
local IDPs. The lack of an appropriate reaction to
those matters could seriously destabilize the region.
Noting the openness of the new Government of Serbia
to continuing dialogue with Pristina, which should
move to a political level, UNMIK must more closely
cooperate or participate in the negotiation process and
forthcoming meetings.

