Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We are convinced that the work of the Council
will be crowned with success, thanks to your able
guidance.

Holding this series of public meetings of the
Security Council within the framework of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee will certainly contribute to
strengthening international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism and against all threats to international
peace and security. It also expresses the earnestness
and the transparency with which the Council is
addressing this issue.

On behalf of my delegation, I express our
appreciation for the efforts made by Ambassador
Greenstock, who has successfully led the Counter-
Terrorism Committee created pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001). Lebanon believes that the United Nations
is the ultimate reference regarding issues of
international peace and security and respect for the
rules of international law. Therefore, Lebanon
underscores the key role played by the United Nations
in combating terrorism, which we condemn in all its
forms. Lebanon also reaffirms its firm commitment to
respect international legitimacy and the need to
implement the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001).

Lebanon reaffirms that it is also prepared to
cooperate constructively with the General Assembly in
its efforts to develop a comprehensive convention to
combat international terrorism, a convention that is in
keeping with the rules of international law and the
principles of national sovereignty, particularly the
distinction between terrorism and the struggle against
foreign occupation, a convention that always seeks to
pursue the principles of justice and law.

In that regard, I wish to recall that even before
the events of 11 September 2001, Lebanon had to
combat terrorism on its own soil. Indeed, the Lebanese
army confronted local forces inscribed on the terrorist
list, and was able to prevail against them. Since the
events of 11 September, Lebanon has been cooperating
closely with the United Nations, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the international community to fight
the scourge of terrorism.

To date, Lebanon has acceded to 10 of the 12
international conventions pertaining to the fight against
terrorism, adopted by the United Nations and its
specialized agencies and organs. Lebanon is ready to
accede to the two remaining conventions - the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings and the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. I
wish to point out here that the protocols and
international conventions to which Lebanon has
acceded are in force today in Lebanon and take
precedence over national legislation. For its part, the
Lebanese Parliament authorized the Government in
1999 to ratify the Arab Convention for the Suppression
of Terrorism, whose provisions are also in force today
and take precedence over national legislation.

It is difficult for any human society to achieve a
climate of security without seeking political, economic
and social justice. That is why we believe that purely
security-oriented approaches or partial, phased
solutions cannot alone succeed in combating and
eliminating terrorism. Rather, such approaches must be
accompanied by other efforts that take into account
political and other requirements for achieving just and
comprehensive solutions to present conflicts in various
regions of the world, in particular the Arab-Israeli
conflict.

Indeed, if we find peaceful, comprehensive and
just solutions to those crises, we can ease tension in
those regions and eradicate most sources of violence
and terrorism. Here, I cite the words of the Secretary-
General when he addressed the Council on Friday,
4 October:

(spoke in English)

"[We] must act with equal determination to solve
the political disputes and long-standing conflicts
which generate support for terrorism.

"... Only then can we truly say that the war on
terrorism has been won." (S/PV.4618, p. 4)

(spoke in Arabic)

Lebanon hopes to continue its cooperation with
the Council and with the international community at
large in the effort to find just and comprehensive
solutions to the scourge of terrorism, which afflicts the
entire international community.

