Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Ambassador Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-
Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for their briefings.

France welcomes the positive developments that
have taken place in recent months in Guinea-Bissau,
particularly the appointment of the consensus Prime
Minister Aristides Gomes. That is an important first
step towards the full implementation of the Conakry
Agreement, which, we remain convinced, is the only
way to help Guinea-Bissau out of the political and
institutional crisis it has been enduring for many
long months.

I would also like to acknowledge the central role
played by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and, more generally, by the P5
group - ECOWAS, the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union
and the United Nations - in achieving those results.
It is crucial that Guinea-Bissau continue to enjoy
significant regional and international support in the
months and years to come. The Council, in particular,
bears that responsibility.

While the progress made in recent months is
encouraging, other important measures are eagerly
awaited in the coming weeks, the most important of
which is the holding of parliamentary elections as soon
as possible. France regrets that they did not take place
on the announced date of 18 November, and takes note
ofthe new date of 10 March. All commitments must now
be honoured. We see that as an important test to gauge
the real willingness of the various actors to advance
the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement.
We therefore expect the Guinea-Bissau authorities to
become fully mobilized in the technical preparations
for those elections, including at the highest level.
Here, I am referring in particular to the finalization
and validation of the electoral list, which, like the
now closed voter census, cannot serve as a pretext for
indefinitely postponing the holding of elections that are
so important for the country's equilibrium.

The international community, for its part, is playing
its full role in supporting the upcoming electoral
process through the financial assistance provided by the
main donors and the technical assistance of the United
Nations Development Programme and the European
Union. We have therefore raised our expectations of the

Guinea-Bissau authorities. In our view, the successful
holding of the forthcoming elections is a necessary
precondition for changes in sanctions. In that regard,
I again congratulate the Guinea-Bissau military
authorities on their commitment to non-interference in
political affairs, which they have honoured.

The restoration of lasting peace and stability in
Guinea-Bissau also requires progress in other areas in
the medium term. In that regard, constitutional review
should enable the Guinea-Bissau institutional system
to avoid being subjected to the kind of blockages seen
in recent months. Also important is the fight against
organized crime and, in particular, drug trafficking,
which requires not only a firm commitment on the part
of the Guinea-Bissau authorities, but also the continuous
support of the international community, especially the
various United Nations actors present on the ground.
Of equal importance is security sector reform, without
which, as recent history has shown, there can be no
long-term stability in the country.

Finally, France has taken good note the Secretary-
General's recommendations for the future of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau following the strategic review conducted a few
weeks ago. We hope that the discussions on this topic
will take into account the objectives of extending the
scope of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General's good offices role, optimizing coordination
between the various actors of the international
community on the ground and providing the most
effective technical support, which Guinea-Bissau needs
more than ever now and for years to come.

It is still too early to know whether Guinea-Bissau
is truly on the road to sustainable stabilization. The
coming months, and in particular the effective holding
oflegislative elections, will continue to provide us with
answers. In that regard, the supporting role of the region
and, more broadly, of the international community and
the Council is all the more important.

