Mr. Choi: The Ivorian people demonstrated
unfailing determination during the post-electoral crisis.
With the contribution of the international community, a
painful chapter in the history of Cote d'Ivoire has now
been closed. At the same time, a new chapter, with
multiple challenges, has been opened.

There exists a very fortunate window of
opportunity for the Ouattara Administration and the
international community. Efforts are now under way to
address the following four major post-crisis tasks: the
restoration of law and order; national reconciliation;
the holding of legislative elections; and economic
recovery.

First, the restoration of law and order in the south
of the country is of primordial importance. Currently,
the Forces republicaines de Cote d'Ivoire provide the
security environment, with some gendarmerie and
police assistance. Although challenges remain in the
Yopougon district of Abidjan, as well as in the western
2
part of the country, by and large, the former pro-
Gbagbo armed elements and supporters are not likely
to mount a substantial challenge to law and order.

Secondly, with regard to national reconciliation,
it benefits from the deep-rooted Ivorian political
culture, characterized by tolerance, non-violence and
compromise. The appointment of the Chair of the
Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission and
the meltdown of Mr. Gbagbo's supporters augur well
for the achievement of reconciliation in the country.

Thirdly, the legislative elections are planned to
take place before the end of the year. Preparations
began as the Independent Electoral Commission Chair,
Mr. Youssouf Bakayoko, started work towards the end
of last month. However, as Ivorian protagonists
envisage a somewhat ambitious plan for the legislative
elections, including an increase in National Assembly
seats and the inclusion of people who have now
attained the age of majority on the voters list, a strong
commitment by the electoral management body is
necessary to meet the challenge of holding the
elections before the year is out. It goes without saying
that the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI), with the international community, is ever
ready to assist the Electoral Commission.

Fourthly, with regard to the country's economic
recovery, despite some concerns, most experts bank
their optimistic views for a positive economic recovery
in Cote d'Ivoire on the resourcefulness of the Ivorian
people, the fundamental robustness of the Ivorian
agricultural sector and the willingness of the
international community, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, to cooperate with the Ouattara
Administration.

All such efforts related to those four tasks appear
to be moving in the right direction. However, there is a
need for a rapid restoration of law and order
throughout the country, as that is the precondition for
the other tasks to be carried out successfully. For that,
a clear vision for the establishment of a national
security structure, including command and control, has
to be developed. That would allow for the effective
deployment of police and gendarmerie elements
throughout the country, which, in turn, would allow the
military elements to be rolled back to their barracks.

The Ivorian authorities are doing their best to
expedite the restoration of law and order throughout
the country. The appointment, on 7 July, of all top
11-41823
commanders of the Ivoirian security structure,
including the military, the gendarmerie and the police,
was quite an encouraging sign.

To accompany the Ivorian Government, UNOCI
has taken two safeguard measures in the western part
of the country, where we see a certain degree of
security deficit.

The first measure relates to the establishment of
eight new UNOCI military camps in the west,
including four in the border area with Liberia. UNOCI
has also begun work to set up a military camp in
Aboisso, along the Abidjan-Accra axis road, given the
presence of former pro-Gbagbo supporters in Ghana.
UNOCI intends to complete that project before the end
of the month. Once completed, the nine military camps
will be reinforced, with UNOCI civilian staff working
on human rights, the rule of law, civil affairs, child
protection, gender equality and HIV/AIDS with their
colleagues from the United Nations country team.

The second safeguard measure relates to the
rehabilitation and equipment of a number of prefect
and sub-prefect offices in the west. UNOCI has been
consulting with the United Nations Peacebuilding
Office for the Peacebuilding Fund to finance the
project with around $5 million dollars.

We feel confident, as President Ouattara and his
team, who showed remarkable patience and sangfroid
during the crisis, are working day and night to
successfully meet the post-crisis challenges for the
benefit of the Ivorian people.

