Mr. Shaikh: I express my sincerest gratitude to
the French Mission for having invited me. It is a great
honour to be with the members of the Security Council
to share some of my thoughts on the use of children in
armed conflict.

I went through a period of six years ofradicalization
into extremism when I was a teenager, after a period of
travel to Taliban-controlled areas owing to an identity
conflict, a poisonous ideology received from other
teens, and a search for meaning and belonging. It was
only after the terrorist attacks of 9/11 that I turned away
from that way of thinking. I ended up studying Islam
properly and went through a period of de radicalization.
I then began work as an undercover operative with
the Canadian Security Intelligence Service and the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police's Integrated National
Security Enforcement Team, where I would spend too
much time seeing how children, teens and adults were
exploited by extremists.

I have been intimately involved on the counter-
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) file, where
I saw on social media - in real time - children and
teenagers being employed by extremist groups, such as
the Taliban, Al-Qaida and its affiliates - Al-Shabaab,
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and so forth - and,
of course, ISIS and its affiliates, such as Boko Haram.

In my training of police and intelligence services,
I use a video that haunts me every time I play it. It
shows a three-year-old whose parents make their boy,
not two feet tall, take a knife the size of his arm, which
he then uses to behead his teddy bear. What will come
of this boy when he turns 10 or 15? Will he even live
to 20? This is the real life story of where we are today
and what we will deal with tomorrow. Let us not wait
until the child suicide bomber has hit at home for us to
take action.

Around the world, non-State armed groups,
including Violent extremists, are using children to
sow violence, carry out attacks, build their ranks and
prolong their beliefs and agenda into the future. The
recruitment and use of children are carried out in a
systematic and intentional manner. This is no accident;
these groups realize that they can gain an advantage
by using children that does not come with adults. They
recruit children for a number of tactical and strategic
reasons - children are easier to forcibly or coercively
recruit and indoctrinate; the use and indoctrination of
children from a young age can help perpetuate their
fight and make them more difficult to defeat; security
forces often View children with less suspicion, making
them useful as spies, couriers and suicide bombers;
the reluctance of security forces to face children in
battle; and the diminishing of community support for
Government if the security forces target children owing
to their use by adults.

If members have not already become aware of
the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers - a timely document currently being generated
by the Canadian Government and with the direct input
and support of the Romeo Dallaire Child Soldiers
Initiative - they need to. The use of children by such
groups around the world is a growing threat, as they
adapt to the international community's interventions
and learn from what other groups are doing.

We also know that that is a fundamental moral and
ethical dilemma for professional security forces, who
may under-react, overreact or not react at all. The results
of that can be catastrophic for all involved, in particular
the children. We must respond to that challenge
preventively. It is far better to ensure that children are
never recruited and used in the first place than to address
their disruptive childhood trauma and indoctrination
after the fact. We need a comprehensive, coordinated
and holistic response involving Governments, the
United Nations and civil society, based on the strength
and areas of responsibility for each.

One key takeaway for the members of the Council
is that youth Violence is on a continuum. Whether
it is extremism of a religious or racial nature, urban
street gangs, banditry or piracy, the challenge is the
same - robbing the innocence of children and leaving
them to die. A preventive approach must be holistic,
while addressing the factors that lead to recruitment,
how children are used, the need to demobilize and
rehabilitate them, what works and what does not, and
bringing together a wide range of groups that help
address violent extremism - Government and security
forces, the United Nations system and civil society.
Security forces, whether military, police, peacekeepers
or corrections personnel, have an important role to play,
and must be prepared to address the issue.

The security sector has a critical role to play in that
prevention-oriented approach, and must be adequately
prepared and trained. Working in partnership with
other governmental and non-governmental actors, with
sensitivity to their roles and the need for neutrality, is
key. As I have been taught by the Romeo Dallaire Child
Soldiers initiative, security sector actors, such as the
military, police and peacekeepers, must understand
the specific reason why children are used by non-State
armed groups, including Violent extremists, and how
their actions can help counter that or make the problem
worse if they are not careful. As with all efforts to
counter Violent extremism, security sector actors
must build mutual trust and respect with the affected
communities, preventing the marginalization and
mistrust that can help fuel recruitment. A key aspect of
such an approach is ensuring that security sector actors
are adequately prepared, with training, doctrine and
policy to guide and inform their actions.

With children being intentionally and systematically
used across the world in all forms of conflict, whether
by armed groups, State forces or Violent extremists,
it is ever-more critical to address the problem head
on. A robust, holistic and inclusive approach that
puts children's rights upfront will allow us to protect
children from harm, prevent violence in communities
around the world and help create a more peaceful and
equitable society for all.

Once again, I thank Council members for having
me today. The issue of children and armed conflict is
one that we can all agree must be dealt with quickly
and competently. God bless the States Members of the
United Nations with peace and security.

