Mr. Kubis: During my first briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.7443), last May, I conveyed my
initial impressions as mixed but cautiously positive.
Two months later, my initial impressions remain valid,
although I increasingly appreciate the scope, depth and
complexity of the problems and challenges.

Since last summer's onslaught by terrorists of the
so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
Iraq has been living through one of the most difficult
phases in its modern history. While the problems may
seem daunting and persistent, there is hope, and there
are opportunities and, notably, a vision for the way
out of the crisis, as expressed in the national political
agreement. The real issue is its implementation.

Iraq's political process is moving forward, but
without the neededvigour. The Government has achieved
many successes and deserves our acknowledgement and
support. Prime Minister Al Abadi is seeking actively
to fulfil the promises of the Government's programme,
but has not always met with success. The political forces
that have backed the Government and its programme
often cooperate reluctantly, as if the existential threat
posed by ISIL and the economic and social difficulties
were already a thing of the past. The unity behind the
creation of the current Government has not yet fully
been translated into unity of purpose or action.

There are signs ofa growing understanding, though,
that the time has come for comprehensive political
agreements, particularly for, as some leaders have
described it, a historic national reconciliation. Several
plans and blueprints have emerged recently, promoted
by key leaders and political forces. Also, the national
reconciliation commission has developed an action
plan, an initiative owned and led by the Government.
The so-called Baghdad document is currently being
widely consulted and will benefit from inputs from
all Iraqi components, allowing for further ownership
of and inclusion in the process. This could provide a
starting point for further consultations, including
with different opposition groups. The United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) supports these
processes.

This development is most welcome, although
political compromises are urgently needed to accelerate
the implementation of the national political agreement
and ministerial programme. In this regard, institutional
and legislative reforms remain key to preserving
Iraq's unity, encouraging political reconciliation
and defeating ISIL. Regrettably, the absence of
consensus has halted the reform process. The national
reconciliation legislative package, which includes key
bills such as the national guard, the general amnesty
and the justice and accountability laws, has seen
limited progress since my previous briefing to the
Council. All three bills are currently before the Council
of Representatives, but progress has been stalled due
to lack of trust between Iraqi communities and the
absence of the necessary political will. I have informed
my interlocutors in Parliament and in the Government
that painful compromises are needed to ensure that
these bills are passed instead of being returned to the
Council of Ministers. Iraq and its people do not have
the luxury of time.

Effective partnership between Baghdad and
Erbil is equally critical to Iraq's unity and stability
in fighting ISIL. In the recent period, the two sides
have increasingly expressed disappointment with
the implementation of the oil and revenue-sharing
agreement signed last year. The period was also marked
by the taking of some unilateral steps that work against
the interests of both sides and the country as a whole.
Both sides urgently need to renegotiate the deal and
reach a truly sustainable and comprehensive agreement.
UNAMI supports any option that will provide for such
sustainability, reinforce confidence and partnership
among the two sides, and keep them united in fighting
ISIL.

One year after the fall of Mosul, a third of Iraq
remains under the control and governance of ISIL.
In the reporting period, the military offensives of the
Iraqi security forces, with the critical support of the
popular mobilization forces, tribal Sunni volunteers
and the international coalition, have yet to significantly
change the situation on the ground. Tikrit was liberated
in March, but Ramadi fell in May. The Government's
ongoing offensive in Anbar aims to reverse this setback.

The human cost of the conflict remains far too high.
Since I last briefed the Council, UNAMI recorded a
minimum of 1,200 civilians killed and more than 2,000
wounded as a result of armed conflict or terror attacks.
UNAMI continues to receive widespread reports of
attacks targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure,
extrajudicial killings, abductions, rape and other forms
of sexual violence, forced recruitment of children,
wanton destruction and looting of civilian property, and
denial of fundamental rights and freedoms. Minorities,
women and children continue to be particularly
vulnerable to the horrors and indignities inflicted
by ISIL. The recent terrorist outrage during the Bid
holidays near a Shiite mosque in Khan Bani Saad, in
which over 120 civilians were reported killed and some
170 injured, bears further witness to this tragic fact.

Iraq is a mosaic of different ethnic and religious
communities. Each component of the Iraqi people
has suffered from a range of violations and abuses
perpetrated at various times over recent decades. These
Violations and abuses have undermined trust among
communities and eroded national identity. Exacerbating
this sense of injustice are actions taken in the current
phase of the conflict by ISIL and by some armed groups
fighting against it, which aim at or result in forced
demographic changes and the targeting of communities
considered to be undesirable.

To restore trust and to rebuild unity among the
various communities that form the Iraqi people, it is
necessary to ensure justice and accountability for
violations and abuses, whenever they have taken
place and by whomever they were perpetrated, and to
eliminate discrimination and marginalization wherever
it occurs. Taking action to ensure the protection of
diverse ethnic and religious minority communities
and their full and equal participation in the economic,
social and political life of Iraq will be challenging, but
such action is required of the Government if the future
cohesion of Iraq is to be assured.

The humanitarian situation is of the gravest
concern. At least 8.2 million, roughly one in four Iraqis,
need urgent assistance, and half of them need food
assistance. More than 3 million people are internally
displaced, and partners estimate that nearly 1 million
more are likely to be displaced by continuing conflict
and Violence in the months ahead. Close to 300,000
refugees, mostly from Syria, have sought safety in
the country. The Government is continuing to lead
the operation, providing resources for cash stipends,
distributing assistance and helping to erect camps for
populations fleeing violence. Humanitarian partners
are working around the clock to provide assistance, but
funds are running short. Close to 80 health facilities
will be closing in the weeks ahead unless support is
received. Food rations have already been cut and scores
oflife-saving programmes are scheduled to shut down.

The implications of this situation are enormous
and profoundly worrying. I thank the donor community
for its pledges in response to the recent humanitarian
response plan launched in cooperation with the
European Union in Brussels on 4 June, but I urge the
international community to do more to help desperately
vulnerable Iraqi communities. We are very worried by
reports that communities and families are being forced
to look to ISIL for life-saving assistance, even as United
Nations-sponsored programmes are closing for lack of
funding.

At the same time, internally displacedpersons (IDPs)
in increasing numbers are starting to return to liberated
areas. The stabilization efforts led by the Government
with the support of the United Nations family using
the United Nations Development Programme Funding
Facility for Immediate Stabilization are commendable,

but much more remains to be done to ensure that
returns are voluntary, sustainable and dignified and
that conditions are in place for people to be able to go
out once they return to their homes. We are encouraging
the Government to take all the necessary steps to
guarantee their safety by exerting further pressure on
armed elements temporarily controlling liberated areas
in order to prevent occasional revenge attacks and
other violations committed against IDPs and establish
effective local control over security.

Permit me now to turn to the seventh report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution
2107 (2013) (S/2015/518), on the issue ofmissing Kuwaiti
and third-party persons and property. Iraq-Kuwait
relations are on the ascendant. Iraqi leaders and the
United Nations have noted with gratitude the generous
donation of $200 million for the needs of IDPs. There is
much goodwill between the two sides, which can only
grow if tangible results are achieved on the issue of the
missing Kuwaiti persons and property. I intend to visit
Kuwait to discuss this matter.

I would now like to turn briefly to the issue of the
residents of Camp Hurriya. We need to alleviate Iraq's
burden. I urge all countries to consider hosting the
Camp's residents or to use their influence in assisting
in their relocation.

I have one more reminder to make: on our United
Nations national staff member taken hostage. In
his report, the Secretary-General urges the Iraqi
authorities to redouble efforts to secure his release. I
strongly support his appeal. We should remember that
88 days have already elapsed without having received
any credible information about our colleague, with no
positive resolution of the case.

From the lessons learned over the years from the
implementation of UNAMI's mandate and through a
consultative process, the Secretary-General has spelled
out his recommendations on where emphasis should
lie with respect to future UNAMI and United Nations
country team mandates and activities. The Council's
decision later this month on our mandate will provide
clear guidance and establish a refocused political
framework for the United Nations, including UNAMI.

With the continued support of the Council, I
remain confident that we can and we will work hand
in hand with the Government of Iraq, political forces
and civil society to achieve results in all areas, while
in paraticular increasingly mobilizing regional
support and cooperation. At this critical juncture, the
Government of Iraq, its leadership and, most of all,
Iraqis themselves need continuous and massive support
and assistance from the international community.

