Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank you, Sir, and the representatives of the
United States and Japan for convening this very
important meeting.

I also thank Mr. Jenea, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his very enlightening briefing
on the situation.

The Security Council is once again meeting
following a serious and unjustifiable violation by North
Korea of its international obligations, which threatens
international peace and security. With the launch of a
ballistic missile two days ago, North Korea continues
in its posture of an inexcusable headlong rush. It is
confirming its stubborn and proclaimed determination
to flout the authority of the Security Council. It continues
to ignore the numerous appeals and calls to reason,
which we have continuously addressed to it. Finally,
it persists with an irresponsible provocative attitude,
which threatens to leads us straight to an escalation.

France has condemned the missile launch, just as it
has condemned the numerous ballistic missile launches
carried out by Pyongyang in recent months. All of
North Korea's actions fuel a dangerous and provocative
spiral of regional instability and even threaten peace
and international security. Today, the countries of
the region are directly threatened. I reiterate France's
full solidarity with them, but let us be fully aware
that everyone is now affected by this threat. It is a
global threat.

The systematic and determined effort, initiated
at the highest level of the North Korean regime, to
develop its nuclear programmes speaks for itself. This
new ballistic missile launch, which follows in the wake
of previous launches and nuclear tests, represents
another step towards North Korea's acquisition of
an operational nuclear capacity. It is a deliberate,
methodical and fully acknowledged assault on the
non-proliferation regime, which is at the heart of
our security system and which we cannot afford to
tolerate. Let us make no mistake - North Korea's
nuclear programme is one of the main threats to the
non-proliferation regime that we have forged together,
step by step, in recent decades. The non-proliferation
regime itself is the backbone of international peace and
security, which we are responsible for protecting. This
dangerous forward push must cease immediately and
without preconditions.

Sanctions are never automatic or an end in
themselves, but when our messages, appeals and
even our warnings are deliberately, repeatedly and
systematically ignored, a determined response is
necessary. Negotiation is always the first choice,
but the current situation does not allow for it at
all. The deliberate, repeated and outright violation
by whomsoever of our decisions cannot be subject
to bargaining. It is up to North Korea to sincerely
demonstrate, through concrete action, that it is ready
to invest in a negotiated settlement. Otherwise, we will
have no other choice but to respond firmly.

Nuclear proliferation is essentially what is at stake.
In the face of this threat, weakness and lack of action
are not options. We have been brought together by a
shared sense of urgency and a common determination
to ensure that the authority of the Security Council is
upheld. We must therefore shoulder our responsibilities
together. The entire international community must
pursue its efforts to ensure the effective implementation
of measures already adopted, but we must also confirm
our decisive commitment to putting an end to the
irresponsible action of North Korea. Our goal must be
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. Time is of the essence. The
firm and unambiguous message conveyed through
today's meeting is an important step in this direction.

France has been at the forefront of establishing a
non-proliferation regime and intends to stay there. In
the Security Council and in the European Union, France
has always responded with determination and firmness
to any attempt to undermine that regime. France has
contributed to building consensus with its partners to
ensure that a firm response is provided. I would like to
reassure the international community that my country
will continue to do so with determination. We will
therefore work with all our partners for the adoption of
a Security Council resolution aimed at imposing new,
robust and operational measures. We will also pursue
similar measures Within the European Union.

When the basis of our collective security is
threatened, there is no room for equivocation. Given
the risk that the situation could continue to deteriorate,
the Council must and will assume its responsibilities.

