Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): On behalf of the
Chairmen of the three subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council, I would like to give an update on the
continued cooperation among the Committees and their
expert groups, as requested by the Council in recent
resolutions pertaining to the three Committees. I will
also give an abbreviated version of this joint report and
would refer members of the Council to the full text,
which will also be circulated.

The three Committees attach great importance to
the coordination and cooperation among their expert
groups - namely, the Monitoring Team, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the 1540 Committee experts. The
Committees welcome the continuing efforts of the
expert groups regarding joint outreach activities,
exchange of information and joint meetings, and
encourage the groups to further enhance the
coordination of those activities.
10-6374]

On the occasion of previous briefings, a
comparative table was issued to highlight the main
aspects of the respective mandates and areas of
competence of the three Committees. Today, in order to
highlight the ongoing cooperation among the three
expert groups, we also intend to distribute a table
prepared by the groups. That table will also be posted
on the respective websites.

Cooperation is of the utmost importance when it
comes to outreach and exchange with Member States
and international organizations. Cooperation has
increased with regard to the coordination of Visits to
Member States and participation at relevant
conferences, joint visits to States and participation in
workshops organized by one of the expert groups or
under the auspices of one of the Committees. The
Committees continue to believe that those coordinated
Visits and workshops are very important tools to
enhance the dialogue with Member States, to help
improve the understanding of the distinct although
connected and complementary mandates of the three
Committees and to assist Member States in the
implementation of the relevant resolutions. As an
important step in that regard, we welcome the recently
finalized common strategy of the three expert groups to
engage with international, regional and subregional
organizations.

In accordance with the needs expressed by
Member States, the three expert groups have
commenced exchanging information on the technical
assistance needs of particular countries, with a View to
furthering cooperation in that domain while bearing in
mind the different mandates and roles of each
Committee with regard to technical assistance.

Information exchange is another important area
of cooperation, which is also dealt with in greater
detail in the joint report.

In addition to outreach activities and internal
exchange of information, the three expert groups
continue regular meetings among the heads of each
team, as well as at the expert level, in preparation for
visits, workshops and other joint activities.

Moreover, the CTC invites the Monitoring Team,
the 1540 Committee experts, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) and other relevant
United Nations offices on a regular basis to meetings
with international and regional organizations. The 1540
Committee working group on cooperation with
10-63741

international organizations has also invited the other
two expert groups to meetings with international
organizations.

One point that I would like to refer to in greater
detail is the issue of co-location. The co-location of the
three expert groups would greatly contribute to
enhanced cooperation and information exchange
among them. In that context, I would like to recall that
in resolution 1904 (2009) and as recently reaffirmed in
the presidential statement adopted on 27 September
2010 (S/PRST/2010/19), the Security Council
reiterated the need to enhance ongoing cooperation
among the three Committees and their respective
expert groups and requested the Secretary-General to
make the necessary arrangements for the groups to be
co-located as soon as possible. In order to underline the
importance of this matter, the three Chairmen recently
wrote to the Secretary-General to draw his attention to
that request by the Security Council.

As the three expert groups are also members of
the CTITF, the Task Force provides an additional
framework within which the groups can further
coordinate their activities and share information.

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors continue to be a
global threat to international peace and security that
requires a global answer. Cooperation and coordination
are therefore crucial elements in those efforts. The
three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council and
their respective expert groups are committed to
continue to cooperate and to coordinate their work,
within their respective mandates, in order to contribute
to an effective and efficient approach within the overall
United Nations framework, and within the broader
efforts of the international community. We recently
convened a meeting with representatives of the three
Committee Chairmen and the three expert groups to
exchange information about the status of ongoing
cooperation and to explore further ways to enhance it.

Ambassador Apakan, Ambassador Heller and I
have prepared some personal observations on the
aspects of cooperation based on our experience as
Chairmen of these three Committees. Given the limited
amount of time available, I will also not read out those
observations. However, copies will be distributed in
the Chamber. Nevertheless, we hope that those
observations will find interested readers, in particular
as the upcoming mandate renewal of CTED at the end
3
of this year could be the next opportunity for the
Security Council to provide further guidance on these
areas of common interest.

