The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Liberia to participate in this
meeting.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Toga Gayewea McIntosh, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Ellen Margrethe Loj, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia, to participate in
this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Royal Highness Prince Zeid
Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein, Chair of the Liberia
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Jordan, to participate in
this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2011/497, which contains the twenty-
third progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia.

I now give the floor to Ms. Loj.

Ms. Lfljz I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to present the
twenty-third progress report (S/2011/497) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL). In doing so, allow me to extend my
appreciation to the members of the Security Council
for their support for the work of the Mission. Council
members will already have had a chance to read the
report itself, so I will focus my brief remarks on events
and developments since it was issued last month.
All year, Liberians have been preparing for
presidential and legislative elections. Liberia's now 29
political parties have been organizing themselves for
the vote, negotiating alliances and nominating their
candidates. Sixteen presidential candidates have been
presented, including the incumbent, and over 800
legislative candidates are competing for the 88 House
and Senate seats being contested.

The National Elections Commission has also
been hard at work. On 23 August, Liberians voted in a
national referendum to consider four proposed
amendments to their Constitution. In general, the
referendum went well, with no serious security
incidents. With UNMIL back-up, the National
Elections Commission put in place and successfully
implemented an early deployment plan for material
distribution, and the voting and counting processes
largely went smoothly. Aside from some procedural
issues, a printing error on the ballot, and relatively low
voter turnout at 34 per cent, the referendum was
technically a generally well-conducted electoral event.
Liberians were free to express themselves through the
ballot box.

Three of the proposed amendments were
elections related and, had they passed, would have
applied to this year's electoral process. On 31 August,
however, the National Elections Commission
announced that all four propositions had failed,
including the proposals to move the elections from
October to November, out of the rainy season, and to
change the electoral system to simple majority for
legislative seats. Therefore, election day will remain
11 October, and the National Elections Commission
will face the exceptionally challenging task of
organizing numerous run-off elections shortly
thereafter. The Commission is in discussions with
political parties and other stakeholders about the
implications of the referendum results for the election
process, and a case has been filed with the Supreme
Court to discount the invalid votes. If this petition is
successful, it would mean that the simple majority
proposition would pass.

The referendum was a critical rehearsal for the
National Elections Commission, as well as for UNMIL.
Analysing what was done well and what could have
been done better will be important for the coming
elections. UNMIL's role continues to be focused on
coordinating international assistance, filling critical
logistics gaps, and employing the Mission's good
11-49483
offices to ensure an environment conducive to peaceful
elections. In this context, I have continued to engage
with political parties to encourage them to reach
consensus on modalities of the process. The Mission
has also drawn up an elections security plan with
national partners, including contingencies.
Furthermore, inter-mission cooperation arrangements
have been discussed with a view to seeking
reinforcement from our sister mission in Cote d'Ivoire
so that, should the electoral environment begin to
threaten public order, we will not be caught unawares.
This is especially important given the tendency for
elections in post-conflict countries to lead to violence.
The Secretary-General's suggestion in this regard will
shortly be forwarded to the Council for its
consideration.

These elections come at a critical time for the
subregion, as they follow the Ivorian crisis. That crisis
has caused an increase in security and humanitarian
concerns along Liberia's borders. The movement of
suspected Ivorian fighters and Liberians alleged to
have participated in the Ivorian conflict poses a threat
to both Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia in the border areas,
and authorities continue to make arrests in connection
with a major weapons cache discovered in June near
the border. Liberia still hosts over 170,000 refugees,
and Ivoirians continue to cross the border in fear of
reprisal attacks at home. A revised Emergency
Humanitarian Action Plan was launched on 30 August,
requesting $166 million to cover humanitarian needs
through the end of this year. Securing this assistance is
critical not just to covering the needs of refugees, but
also to addressing the needs of host communities that
have shared their meagre resources over the past nine
months.

Given increased border challenges, UNMIL has
worked closely with the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire to strengthen our inter-mission
cooperation, including increased coordination of
border patrolling, information-sharing and joint tasking
of air assets to ensure that inaccessible areas along our
700-kilometre common border are monitored as closely
as possible. Within their limited capacity, Liberian
security institutions have stepped up their operations
along the border, and cooperation between the Ivorian
and Liberian security institutions has gradually
increased. But these operations have reminded all of us
that Liberia's security agencies will not be fully and
independently operational until mobility, communications
11-49483
and other equipment needs are available and
sustainable.

Planning for the elections and addressing
developments along the border with Cote d'Ivoire have
consumed the planning and operational capacity of
Liberia's security institutions. Planning for the
handover of security responsibilities from UNMIL to
national institutions has continued, but the challenges
of the past few months have slowed the process. The
work of the joint transition planning working group
will have to gain momentum again after the elections.
We expect that it will provide a picture of the
outstanding financial and technical gaps, as well as the
progress made, in advance of the technical assessment
mission in early 2012.

But planning for transition is just the first step.
The Government and the international community will
have to continue to build the capacity of the security
sector to prepare for the actual handover of security
responsibilities. After lengthy consultations, the
National Security Reform and Intelligence Bill was
finally enacted in August. The adoption of the
legislation is an important step towards rationalizing
Liberia's security agencies, and towards a more
structured and affordable security sector.

The Government's prioritization of security
sector reform, rule of law and national reconciliation
for the engagement pf the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) is consistent with the need to consolidate critical
gains in these areas and to better prepare the country
for the UNMIL transition. The completion of the first
of five planned regional justice and security hubs, in
Gbarnga, is expected by the end of this year. It will
begin some functions even before that with the
deployment of 70 police support officers before the
elections. The hubs will be a critical step in effectively
decentralizing rule of law and security agencies and
increasing access to justice and security in distant parts
of the country. I am sure that the Chairman of the PBC
country configuration for Liberia will go into greater
detail about the work of the PBC in Liberia. Let me
just underline the importance of donors responding
positively to the need for assistance in establishing
these hubs.

Elections have not been Liberia's only focus over
the past few months. The country has continued to
recover economically, with a number of new economic
concessions approved and international investment
3
continuing to increase. A number of pieces of
important legislation have been adopted, and the 2011-
2012 national budget is almost eight times bigger than
it was six years ago. While economic recovery and
development are crucial to attaining long-term
sustainable peace, in the coming months all eyes will
be focused on Liberia's elections and the country's
ability to pull off a national event of that magnitude.

Liberia has had eight years of unbroken peace.
This is something Liberians can be proud of,
considering that it represents the longest unbroken
peace in three decades. The elections provide an
opportunity to consolidate the peace that Liberian
citizens cherish so much. To do so, it is critical that
voters can take to the polls and express their voices
free of intimidation or fear. It is equally important that
the election results be respected as the basis for true
reconciliation and representation, rather than discord
and division.

All Liberians - political leaders, candidates,
opinion leaders, civil society organizations and the
general population - have a duty and responsibility to
ensure that the gains made thus far are consolidated
and that peace becomes truly irreversible. I am
confident that Liberians will demonstrate to each other
and, indeed, to the international community that they
are committed to the road to sustainable peace, that
they have made good use of the space the international
community and the Mission have given them, and that
they are conscious of the investment made over the
past eight years.

I cannot underline strongly enough the
importance that these elections be free, fair and
peaceful. They are the second elections since the end of
the conflict, but they are the first being organized and
run by Liberians. However, if the elections are
successful, it does not mean that the work is finished.
Liberians will still require considerable assistance and
support in rebuilding their lives and their country. This
process will have to continue to be a joint undertaking
between Liberians and the international community.
Much progress has been achieved, and I trust all
Liberians and international partners alike will continue
to stay the course and ensure that this progress is truly
irreversible.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Laj
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to His Highness Prince Zeid
Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein.


