The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

I welcome Special Representative Staffan de
Mistura. I should like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative and colleagues here today for their
kinds words about Ambassador Richard Holbrooke. As
Vice-President Biden said here in the Council last
week, Ambassador Holbrooke was one of the United
States greatest warriors for peace and served so ably
here in this Chamber and far beyond. We will all miss
him very much.

We continue to be impressed by Special
Representative De Mistura's strong and effective
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We also deeply appreciate the
work of all United Nations staff in Afghanistan, who
operate under difficult conditions on behalf of the
international community and in support of the Afghan
people.

At last month's NATO summit in Lisbon, the
Afghan Government and its international partners
committed themselves to a clear plan to move forward.
Together, we agreed that early 2011 will mark the
beginning of a transition to Afghan-led responsibility
for security, and we established a goal of having
Afghan forces take the lead in security across the
country by the end of 2014. Our ultimate goal in
Afghanistan is to help Afghans build a State that can
stand on its own, with support from the international
community, and never again be a sanctuary for
terrorists.

This transition of security responsibility, coupled
with an enduring commitment to Afghanistan beyond

2014, is key to the success of our long-term efforts.
The transition will be a gradual, conditions-based
process, not a single event. Just as the NATO-
Afghanistan partnership agreed at the Lisbon summit
affirms the international community's broader enduring
support to Afghanistan, so too will the United States
continue to support Afghanistan's development and
security as a strategic partner.

Training is the critical ingredient to making
transition possible. Our allies and partners
demonstrated their sustained commitment to this
mission in Lisbon by meeting International Security
Assistance Force requirements for Afghan National
Security Forces trainers. Our actions prove that we are
implementing a transition strategy, not an exit strategy.
As transition progresses, we will look to UNAMA to
play an important and growing role in supporting local
governance, monitoring the human rights situation, and
supporting Afghan-led efforts to reintegrate former
combatants who seek to return to the fold of Afghan
society.

The United States welcomed the Afghan
Independent Electoral Commission's certification of
the final results of the 18 September Wolesi Jirga
elections. These important elections, administered
under challenging circumstances, were the first
parliamentary elections run entirely by Afghan
institutions since the fall of the Taliban in 2001. We
look forward to the formation of the new Parliament so
that it can begin taking up its important constitutional
role on behalf of the Afghan people.

As we move beyond this year's election, it will be
important for UNAMA to remain engaged with Afghan
electoral institutions to press forward with long-term
electoral reform. We commend UNAMA's plans in this
regard.

As we are meeting at the height of the Fifth
Committee's consideration of United Nations budget
issues, let me briefly underscore the importance of
meeting UNAMA's resource requirements. This
Council has given UNAMA an extensive mandate, and
its ability to fulfil it while ensuring its staff's security
requires adequate resources. The United States urges
all Member States to carefully consider the recent
budget request for UNAMA and to offer their full
support to fund that vital Mission.

Despite many challenges, real progress has
occurred in Afghanistan this year. Together with the

Afghan National Security Forces, we have broadly
arrested the Taliban's momentum, and even reversed it
in some important areas. In many places, the gains we
have made are still fragile and reversible, but we are
unquestionably clearing more areas of Taliban control
and more Afghans are reclaiming their own
communities.

Civilian development assistance has been critical
to those advances. We must press forward in 2011 with
even greater energy and determination. This will be a
critical year. To sustain those gains and security over
time, political and economic progress in Afghanistan
are urgently needed. Going forward, we must all
continue to focus on the delivery of basic services,
transparency and accountability. We should also not
lose sight of the tremendous challenges facing Afghan
women, and we must continue to support their efforts
to further advance their security-related, political,
economic and social gains.

The United States will continue to stand with the
Afghan people as they work to build a stronger
Afghanistan for the benefit of all its citizens.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Italy.

