Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): As a
country associated with the European Union, Bulgaria
aligns itself with the statement that will be made
shortly by the Permanent Representative of Spain on
behalf of the European Union.

Bulgaria is very concerned at the situation in the
Middle East. Despite the international community's
expectations, the violence is continuing at
unacceptably high levels, and efforts to reduce that
violence to more acceptable levels remain ineffective.

The tension in the region is being generated
mainly by the terrorist acts perpetrated against Israeli
civilians and by the disproportionate use of force in the
occupied territories. We are confronted with a vicious
circle, with both parties accusing each other and
neither one seizing the opportunities offered to them by
the international community, and by Security Council
resolutions in particular, to turn the situation around
and to resume the peace process.
Bulgaria strongly condemns the deadly attacks
carried out by Palestinian suicide bombers and is
saddened to note that these attacks are almost starting
to be perceived in the region as something habitual,
even routine. But these suicide attacks only distance
the Palestinians even further from their principal
objective, which is to live in their own State.

It will be difficult to perceive the Palestinian
Authority as a good neighbour and partner as long as
the civilian population of Israel continues to live in
conditions of increasing insecurity that are affecting its
very survival.

Bulgaria is firmly convinced that any forceful
response on the part of the Israeli army should be
carefully weighed and targeted, because, if this is not
the case, the temptation to match force with force will
become ever stronger.

The Palestinian Authority should be strengthened
and consolidated, not destroyed. In time - not too
long from now, we hope - this will allow the
Palestinian Authority to become Israel's partner in the
pursuit of peace.

Bulgaria commends the initiatives taken by the
international community aimed at reducing the tension
and at bringing both parties back to the negotiating
table. In this respect, we deeply appreciate the efforts
being undertaken by Javier Solana, William Burns and
George Tenet. It is true that their efforts have not yet
yielded any tangible results. However, we remain
convinced that a lasting peace can be achieved only
through the efforts of the international community, the
"quartet" and the Security Council.

In the final analysis, it is the political will of both
parties to the conflict that will help the international
community to help them.

Let me elaborate on Bulgaria's stance on certain
specific problems in the Middle East conflict.

Bulgaria welcomes the idea of holding free,
democratic and well-organized elections in the
territories controlled by the Palestinian Authority. Such
elections would very likely strengthen the legitimacy
of the Palestinian Authority and facilitate the peace
process.

Bulgaria reiterates that Yasser Arafat's right to
move freely throughout the territories controlled by the
Palestinian Authority should not be restricted.

Today's situation makes it difficult to achieve
unity of action on the part of the Palestinians and
strengthens the positions of those among them who are
working against the peace process through
irresponsible and irrational actions.

Bulgaria welcomes any initiative that might help
to reduce tension in the region, including the holding
of a high-level conference, which would allow for an
end to the violence and for the resumption of the peace
process.

Bulgaria is doing its best to remain in contact
with the parties involved in the conflict. In this respect,
I should like to inform the Council that the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Israel, Mr. Shimon Peres, will visit Sofia on 17 and 18
June and will be received by the highest authorities of
my country.

Bulgaria supports the idea contained in resolution
1397 (2002): a Vision of a region where two States,
Israel and Palestine, live side by side within secure and
recognized borders. This is the basis of our policy and
underpins our efforts here in the Council.

