Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Ms. Ursula Mueller for their briefings.

A negotiated political agreement as the basis for an
inclusive dialogue is the only way to resolve disputes
and address the legitimate concerns of all Yemeni
people, including those from the south of the country.
We therefore acknowledge the efforts being made in the
region to bring peace to the people of Yemen.

We are optimistic about the progress achieved
and wish to thank the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for its
mediation efforts, which have helped to bring about
the signing of the Riyadh agreement between the
Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional
Council. The agreement marks a pivotal moment that
opens the door to broader consultations that could lay
the foundations for peace to be achieved across Yemen.

While we welcome all of the efforts to exercise
restraint, which have led to a decrease in the number
of air strikes within and outside Yemen, we stress
that protecting the civilian population and civilian
infrastructure are fundamental principles of
international humanitarian law, and therefore condemn
the attacks carried out across the country.

Turning to the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement, we echo the call made on the parties
to abide by the ceasefire in that governorate and to
guarantee the necessary freedom of movement to the
staff of the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen so as to allow them to carry out
the required monitoring. At this crucial juncture, it is
more necessary than ever for the parties to refrain from
escalating the situation.

We wish to highlight the situation of persons
internally displaced by the war, migrants and refugees,
many of whom are women and children, and the
exceptional work being done by United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations in
providing assistance to those vulnerable groups. These
efforts must be underpinned by humanitarian access
and security guarantees.

The humanitarian needs of women, children and
other vulnerable groups must figure prominently on
the agenda, and assistance must be provided to Yemen
to allow it to improve its economy and therefore to
meet the basic needs of its people. Allow me also to
note our concern at the current state of the abandoned
floating storage and offloading facility, the FSO
SAFER oil tanker, in Al-Hudaydah. We must not allow
a potential oil spill that would lead to an unprecedented
environmental disaster in the Red Sea, and we call on
all actors, especially the Houthis, to allow the United
Nations assessment team to access the tanker.

This concern has been repeated countless times
in the Council, but nothing happens. It is crucial that
in the light of the advances towards peace in Yemen,
efforts continue to be made to seek a political solution,
including through the significant participation of
women and young people in the conflict-resolution
processes in Yemen.

The Council remains united in the face of the
situation afflicting the people of Yemen, recognizing
that the only answer is a political solution that once
and for all lays the groundwork for putting an end to
the conflict.

