Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to express, on
behalf of the Government of Japan, our appreciation to
you, Madam President, for your leadership in
convening this debate. I would also like to express my
Government's sincere gratitude to Secretary-General
Kofi Annan and his Special Representative for
Afghanistan, Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi, for their
statements this morning. In particular, we appreciate
Ambassador Brahimi's briefing for its keen insights
regarding the steps to be taken in addressing the
situation in Afghanistan.

It is essential to attain peace in Afghanistan and
to help reconstruct and develop the country in order not
only to eliminate the hotbed of global terrorism but
also to ensure the long-term stability and prosperity of
the neighbouring countries and of the region. However,
if we look to the past, we can hardly claim that the
United Nations and the international community have
given sufficient attention to the difficulties confronting
Afghanistan. We must therefore renew our efforts now
in order to ensure that the people of Afghanistan will
be able to live in peace.

The Government of Japan, together with many
Member States, strongly condemns the terrorist attacks
against the United States on 11 September and supports
actions against terrorism being undertaken by the
countries concerned on the basis of Security Council
resolutions. Needless to say, our wish is that, as soon as
possible, the day will come when the objectives of the
ongoing use of force will be achieved so that the
international community will be able to engage in
reconciliation and reconstruction in Afghanistan.

As can be seen from what is happening in Kabul
today, the military situation in Afghanistan is changing
rapidly. However, even at a time when military actions
are under way, efforts are needed to ensure the security
of non-combat areas and to provide humanitarian
assistance. Once the military actions are brought to an
end, those efforts must be further strengthened and
rehabilitation and administration must be commenced
in a seamless manner. Also while military actions are
under way, it is necessary to explore ways to attain
political stability in the country. Furthermore, it must
also be emphasized that it is essential to provide clear
prospects for the reconstruction and development that
will take place after military actions end in order to
promote efforts to seek political stability in
Afghanistan.

Needless to say, in pursuing political stability in
Afghanistan it is of the utmost importance to respect
the will of the Afghan people. However, the realities in
Afghanistan are such that it is difficult to ascertain the
will of the people. The activities of Secretary-General
Annan and Ambassador Brahimi to explore a path
towards political stability in Afghanistan are therefore
especially important. The Government of Japan intends
to provide strong support and cooperation for these
activities.

With regard to the future Government of
Afghanistan, Japan has been making it clear that such a
government must meet the following requirements,
which were also underlined in the "six plus two" joint
ministerial declaration issued yesterday. The
government must represent every ethnic group in
Afghanistan and have the broad support of the Afghan
people. It must adhere to international law and
establish friendly relations with its neighbours. It must
not support terrorism and must commit to prohibiting
the production of narcotics. Furthermore, the
Government of Japan considers that the convening of a
Loya Jirgah under Zahir Shah, the former king, is one
of the options to prepare for an establishment of such a
government.

With winter approaching, there is an urgent
humanitarian requirement for the international
community to deliver food and other vital goods to the
people of Afghanistan, and it is important that Member
States join together in supporting the humanitarian
activities of United Nations organizations. The
Government of Japan has already extended emergency
economic assistance, including assistance to Afghan
refugees, to Pakistan and other neighbouring countries.
It has also pledged to provide up to $120 million for
the assistance efforts for Afghan refugees and
displaced people in Afghanistan to be undertaken by
United Nations agencies and other humanitarian
organizations.

The Government of Japan is preparing to play an
active role in the efforts both to attain peace in
Afghanistan and to help reconstruct the country, and
has appointed as the Prime Minister's Special
Representative for Afghanistan the former United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Sadako
Ogata, who has long experience in the area of
humanitarian assistance.

Since 1996 my Government has been calling for
the holding of a conference for peace and
reconstruction in Afghanistan, and I would like to take
this opportunity to reaffirm the Japanese Government's
preparedness to host, at as early a stage as possible, a
conference that would contribute to the peace and
reconstruction of Afghanistan in cooperation with the
countries and organizations concerned.

