Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are happy to see you, Mr. President,
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council.
We would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres;
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Diop;
Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat; and European Union Special
Representative for the Sahel, Mr. Losada Fernandez,
for their detailed briefings. We also welcome to the
Chamber the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Burkina
Faso, Chad, Mauritania and the Niger.

We are concerned about the situation in the Sahelo-
Saharan region. In spite of the efforts that have been
made, terrorism - and as we were informed by our
interlocutors during the Security Council's recent visit
to the region, I emphasize that I mean terrorism, not
extremism - remains a very serious threat to security
and stability in that part of the African continent. On
top of that, there are also transnational issues that have
destabilizing effects, such as drug trafficking, the illegal
arms trade, the smuggling of various goods, separatist
tendencies, acute internal conflicts and complex
humanitarian and socioeconomic circumstances.

The situation in the Sahel is a reminder of
the destructive nature of frankly reckless outside
interference by force in the internal affairs of sovereign
States. It is worth recalling, as we have often done,
that the regime-change operation in Libya, which was
done in violation of international law and the relevant
decisions ofthe Security Council, has been a catalyst for
instability in the region. We welcome the establishment
by the countries of the region of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) to combat the
terrorist threat, which was unanimously endorsed in
resolution 2359 (2017). We believe that the Joint Force
is an appropriate response to regional issues along the
lines of the principle of African solutions to African
problems, which in our view is the only way to achieve
sustainable peace in Africa. The Joint Force will help
to address a whole range of tasks, not only counter-
terrorism efforts but also the work of eliminating the
transborder criminal groups that are the terrorists'
allies.

We support the Joint Force's operational deployment
on the ground and its participants" determination
to achieve that as soon as possible, and urge them to
strengthen their collaboration on that. However, going
on the conclusions ofthe Security Council mission to the
Sahelo-Saharan region, it appears that the countries of
the G-5 Sahel are deploying their contingents at varying
speeds and that some are falling behind. In that regard,
I would like to underscore that only a genuine joint and
coordinated effort on the part of all members of the G-5
Sahel can have effective results. The members of the
G-5 Sahel need and deserve support in responding to
the challenges they face. We believe it is Vital that the
international community give them support.

We should carefully consider the options that the
Secretary-General proposes in his report on resolution
2359 (2017) (S/2017/869) with regard to United Nations
involvement in such efforts. However, we believe it
will also be important to consider gradually expanding
United Nations cooperation, based on the fourth option,
especially since the mandates of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the countries of the G-5 Sahel coincide
where providing support to the Government of Mali
and restoring its authority throughout the country are
concerned. But there are a lot ofproblems that will have
to be solved in that regard, so it would not be a good
idea to get ahead of ourselves until the tasks mandated
by the Security Council are fulfilled.

It is still quite clear that, in order to achieve long-
term security, development and stability in the region,
besides enhancing counter-terrorism measures, State
institutions will have to be strengthened to ensure
systemic economic and social development and
universal respect for human rights and the rule of
law. In that regard, we enthusiastically commend the
programmes for developing remote regions that have
been adopted by the Governments of Burkina Faso
and Mauritania.

We believe that the foundation for making progress
in the areas we have mentioned is the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which has not yet been
exploited to its full potential. It will be essential to get
more out of the Strategy's existing mechanisms and to
involve the countries of the Sahelo-Saharan region and
of Africa as a whole in it as much as possible, with an
emphasis on relevant steps to be taken by the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the G-5 Sahel itself. The views of regional
partners should be a top priority in that process.

In conclusion, we would like to point out that in an
age of globalization, terrorism, too, has become global.
We can eradicate its threat only by uniting in the
broadest possible front, which Russia has been calling
for for a long time. Furthermore, my country has begun
providing support to the security forces of a number of
countries of the Sahel and will continue to do so. After
all, the effectiveness of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel
will ultimately depend on improving the potential of its
national armed forces.

