China thanks Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. During our last video-teleconference on the Middle East, including the Palestinian question (see S/2020/263), many of us expressed some optimism at the signs of coordination between Israel and Palestine in fighting the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. However, coming into this month, we witness more worrisome developments. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has recorded the persistent demolition of Palestinian-owned structures. Acts of violence against Palestinian civilians continue. Settlement activities are ongoing, while plans for annexation are reportedly being advanced. China takes note of the recent letter from President Abbas to the Secretary- General, as well as the statement of members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries circulated for today's meeting, and shares their concerns. I would like to highlight the following. The first issue is to put an end to unilateral acts that may aggravate conflict and tension. China is greatly concerned about the alleged plan to annex the occupied Palestinian territory, which goes against international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). We urge the relevant parties to refrain from taking any such unilateral steps. The Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire should be heeded. The relevant parties should cease all settlement activities and stop the demolition of Palestinian homes and the destruction of Palestinian properties. Measures should also be taken ry Pa to prevent violence against civilians.'sf'Secondly, strengthening preparedness and response with regard to COVID-19 must be given top priority. The vulnerability of the occupied Palestinian territory under this pandemic is clear. Mr. Mladenov has repeatedly warned about the dire humanitarian situation and possible catastrophe, especially in the Gaza Strip. We encourage Israel and the Palestinian Authority to sustain and enhance cooperation on the public health and security fronts, wherever the pandemic necessitates. The relevant parties should fulfil their obligations under international law in order to ensure the delivery of essential services and humanitarian aid to those in need. We call for the lifting of the blockade against Gaza, which hinders pandemic responses. UNRWA has intensified its efforts to help the Palestine refugee community to address this unprecedented health crisis. Its critical work is highly recognized. The international community should continue to support the work of UNRWA, including through increased and stable financial support. The third matter is to continue pursuing a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the question of Palestine. In his letter to the Secretary-General, President Abbas called for the necessary mechanisms towards ending this conflict and called on the Security Council to adopt such mechanisms. The international community should turn the current crisis of the pandemic into an opportunity, invest more efforts in pushing for a political process, commit to the two-State solution and work towards the early resumption of peace talks between the Palestinians and the Israelis. The relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative should be observed. Any new initiatives should, without exception, meet those basic international parameters. The Council should work with the international community to advance the Middle East peace process. China maintains its principled positions on the Palestine issue, and we stand ready to help the Palestinian people in their fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. The Chinese Government has provided emergency medical supplies, including testing kits, protective gear, protective goggles and N95 face masks, to the Palestinian people. Chinese charity institutions are also doing the same. We will continue to do so. We remain committed to supporting the just cause of the Palestinian people to restore their legitimate national rights and establish a Palestinian State, with full sovereignty, based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
