Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Sir, for convening today's meeting. I also
thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for his
briefing. I welcome Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime
Minister of Haiti, to the Council's meeting.

The powerful earthquake that struck Haiti on
12 January caused unprecedented destruction and
damage and raised new difficulties and challenges to
the Council's efforts to stabilize Haiti. My country was
saddened by the heavy losses suffered by MINUSTAH
staff during the earthquake. We pay tribute to Mr.
Mulet and all MINUSTAH personnel for their courage,
dedication and sacrifice. There is a Chinese saying
that, when trouble occurs in one place, help arrives
from all sides. The past three months have witnessed a
continuous outpouring of international support,
sympathy and generous aid for Haiti.

Following the earthquake, the Chinese
Government lost no time in providing various kinds of
assistance to Haiti and has continued its vigorous
efforts to help the Haitian Government and people
weather their difficulties. It is gratifying to note that
the post-disaster security situation in Haiti has
remained calm and that steady progress has been made
in the relief and recovery efforts. China is convinced
that, under the leadership of the Haitian Government
and with the international community's support and
assistance, the Government and people of Haiti will
soon rebuild their homes, heal their wounds and create
a bright future of peace, stability and sustainable
development.

International attention is focused on the post-
disaster situation in Haiti and its reconstruction. We
support ongoing assistance of the United Nations and
the international community to Haiti in its efforts to
achieve stability and rebuild as soon as possible. The
post-disaster recovery and reconstruction process in
Haiti will be long, arduous and challenging. All parties
must fully respect Haiti's sovereignty and insure that
the Haitian Government and people play a leading role

in the stabilization and reconstruction process. The
United Nations should continue to play an important
coordinating role in the stabilization process and in
international efforts to assist Haiti in its post-disaster
reconstruction.

China appreciates the report recently submitted
by the Secretary-General (S/2010/200) and take note of
its recommendations on the future role of MINUSTAH.
China also understands that some parties concerned
hope that the United Nations will provide greater
assistance and support to promote political stability,
maintain security, support elections, strengthen the rule
of law and rebuild Haiti's State capacities.

China's view is that the major organs and
agencies of the United Nations, regional organizations
and major donors should perform their respective
duties pursuant to their mandates. At the same time,
there should be a clear division of labour and enhanced
coordination to avoid duplication and wasted
resources.

For more than five years, MINUSTAH has made
significant contributions to the security and stability of
Haiti. In the current circumstances, MINUSTAH's
important role in Haiti's stabilization process is self-
evident. China favours strengthening MINUSTAH's
capacity so that it may better fulfil its current mandate.
As a peacekeeping mission, MINUSTAH's core
function is to maintain security and stability in Haiti.

With respect to promoting political stability in
Haiti, restoring State capacity, supporting elections and
strengthening the rule of law, the Mission may provide
appropriate support and assistance within its mandate
and capacity, but should refrain from taking on every
activity while at the same time deviating from its
central task of peacekeeping. As authorized by the
Council in its resolution 1908 (2010), the force level of
MINUSTAH has been increased by a total of 3,500
personnel. The full deployment of the additional forces
will take some time.

On the issue of increased police personnel and
the reconfiguration of MINUSTAH's military
component, China deems it necessary for the Security
Council and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to carry out a comprehensive assessment
and take a prudent approach in decision-making. China
also hopes that the United Nations will soon rebuild
MINUSTAH's facilities to ensure the safety and
security of its staff.

