Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for convening this open debate. Brazil
highly appreciates the topic chosen for this meeting
of the Security Council. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and also commend
tThe Most Reverend and Right Honourable Justin
Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Ms. Mossarat
Qadeem for their briefings.

It has been too long since the Security Council last
convened an open debate on mediation - a critical part
of our toolbox for conflict prevention and settlement.
While it is true that mediation has been gaining
increased attention at the United Nations, especially as
a component ofthe surge in diplomacy for peace, called
for by the Secretary-General, there is much more that
the Council could do to support it.

Brazil aligns itselfwith the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation, in which
we have been proud to participate since its creation.

Brazil has consistently been a supporter and a
practitioner of mediation. Based on the notion of
non-indifference, Brazil has, upon request, assisted
several parties in settling their disputes. Our current
role as guarantors of the negotiations between the
Colombian Government and the Ejercito de Liberacion
Nacional exemplifies our genuine commitment to
facilitating the peaceful settlement of conflicts. The
Tehran Declaration, brokered by Brazil and Turkey in
2010, on the Iranian nuclear dossier, is another example
of our commitment to diplomacy and dialogue.

I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing and to voice my country's
appreciation for the creation, under his leadership, of
the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation.

The Council has already acknowledged that
mediation is an important means for the peaceful
settlement of disputes. While it is useful at all stages of
a dispute, it should be particularly encouraged before
tension escalates into armed conflict. Once violence
flares, peacemaking becomes more challenging and
the human costs rise, often dramatically. In order
to enhance the United Nations readiness to employ
mediation, the Mediation Support Unit must count
on adequate human and financial resources. The
establishment of a special account for special political
missions, separate from the regular budget, could free
resources for mediation support.

Capacity-building is also instrumental in promoting
early mediation. The United Nations should continue
to support regional and subregional organizations
in reinforcing their own mediation tools, as well as
to assist national and local institutions. Experience
demonstrates that actors other than the United Nations
can be very effective mediators and, in some cases, may
stand higher chances of success. Even in cases where
others may be better placed to mediate a dispute, the
United Nations should still be ready to provide political
and technical assistance, if needed, to those taking
the lead.

Inclusivity and national ownership are key to
effective mediation. More often than not, externally
driven processes fail to account for all interests, lacking
the roots needed to ensure long-term compliance and
stability. On the other hand, bottom-up approaches that
concretely involve all perspectives tend to generate
more solid agreements. It may take longer to reach
inclusive solutions, but they last longer.

We cannot overestimate the constructive role that
women and young people can have in mediation. The
situation in Guinea-Bissau provides a clear example
of how gender-sensitive initiatives tend to be more
successful. Last year, as Guinea-Bissau was facing
a prolonged political stalemate, a group of women
facilitators was able to open up lines of dialogue among
actors who had not spoken to one another directly for
a long time. Comprised of 10 women from different
local organizations, the group proved to be an effective
measure to build confidence and de-escalate tensions.
Brazil's national action plan on women, peace and
security incorporates that notion, as it includes actions
to promote women's participation as agents of peace.

Brazil welcomes the fact that the composition of
the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation is gender-
balanced. We would welcome more diversity, especially
from a geographic perspective, when it comes to the
Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers of the
Department of Political Affairs. Establishing longer
periods for the nomination of candidates could be
helpful in that regard.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General, mediation
efforts require a supportive external environment. Due
to its role as the primary guardian of peace and security,
the Council can contribute to creating circumstances
that are conducive to fruitful mediation. For
example, when it firmly supports the work of Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, the Council
strengthens the role of the mediator and encourages the
parties to engage seriously in negotiations.

The Security Council should avoid taking decisions
that could have a negative effect on credible mediation
processes under way. Sanction regimes, for example,
should be designed in close coordination with the
mediators and those in the field. Sanctions are not an
end in themselves; they must always be at the service
of a political strategy aimed at promoting the peaceful
settlement of a crisis.

