Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We
also thank High Representative Valentin lnzko for his
important briefing. We would like to highlight the work
done by his Office in support of the implementation
of the civilian mandate of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace and express our support for
his leadership.

Peru recognizes the unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and considers it
necessary to move to strengthen its independence. For
that reason, we note with concern the limited progress
made on the implementation of the 5+2 agenda,
which has five objectives and two conditions for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We consider the general elections of
7 October and the political process that led up to them
to have been positive to the extent that they were carried
out peacefully and inclusively. It is always important
for citizens to be able to choose their representatives
freely through free and democratic elections. At
the same time, we must deplore the fact that Bosnia
and Herzegovina's electoral procedures could not be
amended to facilitate a more far-reaching democratic
process and that ethnic confrontation prevailed over
the constructive approaches that the country and its
citizens require in order to build sustainable peace.

Faced with such a situation, we must continue to
emphasize the need to strengthen the rule of law, build
inclusive institutions and, in that connection, promote
political dialogue and reconciliation. We cannot
continue to lament incidents of Violence. Political
leaders must live up to their responsibility in that
regard and share a vision for the future that is centred
on the economic and social development of the country.
In that regard, we emphasize the value of diversity and
the importance of safeguarding it in order to build a
strong democracy based on inclusive, transparent and
accountable institutions that guarantee access to justice
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts and prevent
further Violence.

We View positively the efforts aimed at European
integration and compliance with the decisions of
the Constitutional Court. With regard to the latter,
however, we must stress the urgent need to harmonize
local legislation. We underscore the importance of
the amendments to the criminal procedure code that
have been adopted in order to more effectively combat
organized crime and corruption, as well as the need
to complement them with the creation of a specialized
prosecutor's office and criminal chamber. We also
underline the importance of safeguarding the autonomy
of the various parts of the system of administration of
justice and of respecting the role that the press and civil
society organizations are called upon to play in order to
guarantee the rule of law in a democratic society.

We deplore the rhetoric of hatred, ethnic
confrontation, belligerence and the glorification of war
criminals. We believe that the decision of the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska to repeal the report
on the Srebrenica genocide reveals a rejectionism
that must be condemned. We note with particular
concern that those tensions continue to hamper access
to justice, reconciliation and the safe and dignified
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their homes, with full recognition of their ethnic and
religious diversity.

I conclude by stressing the importance of the
parties' full cooperation with the High Representative
and with the European Union-led peacekeeping force
Operation Althea. They can count on Peru's full support
in fulfilling the mandates we have just renewed.

