Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
join my colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on your
presidency, and thanking the Netherlands for theirs. I
also thank the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing.
It was very good to have news of his visit in March
and to see the degree to which the Security Council's
mandate is being actively implemented.

The United Kingdom welcomes the continued
progress in Haiti. We are particularly interested in the
development of the Haitian National Police, the penal
chain committee initiative and the efforts to strengthen
the rule of law, and, like other speakers, we applaud the
new United Nations approach to cholera. It is very good
to see the dedication and support that the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
has given the Government of Haiti in carrying out its
tasks. We are very interested in the way in which the
Government is establishing a solid and sustainable
foundation for Haiti's long-term political stability,
security and development. As the Under-Secretary-
General just said, this is a real vote of confidence in
the country. It is good to hear that the Mission for
Justice Support is actively implementing its mandate,
and we now look to it to deliver a smooth transition
to a non-peacekeeping United Nations presence. In
particular, we support the Mission's intention to hand
over responsibility for ensuring the rule of law, human
rights and security sector reform to the United Nations
country team and the Government of Haiti by October
2019. We want to ensure that the transition is a success.
To that end, the United Kingdom urges the Government
and the United Nations to take the following three steps.

First, the Government should take ownership
of the delivery of critical reforms that will have a
lasting impact on security and development. I want to
particularly highlight the importance of protecting the
independence of the police, enacting new legislation to
empower the judiciary, ensuring that human rights are
protected by strong State institutions and empowering
women to be political leaders.

Secondly, we look to the United Nations to be a
well-integrated organization on the ground that can
ensure an effective transition by implementing the joint
work plan. In particular, there should be a strong focus
on collaboration between the country team and the
Mission; support from the Peacebuilding Fund, as other
colleagues have mentioned; flexible and coordinated
partnerships between mobile teams and the country
team; and close cooperation with other international
and bilateral partners. I alsojoin others in hoping to see
an overall focus on the progress that can be made with
the Sustainable Development Goals. The Secretary-
General's report for May is eagerly awaited. We hope it
will outline the progress needed to deliver an integrated
and sustainable transition in the next 18 months.

Thirdly, the two-year exit strategy should demonstrate
clear progress against the benchmarks that the
Secretary-General has set. The plan for transferring
responsibilities from the Mission to the country team
is a complex one, and it makes the transition even more
complex than it inherently is. We hope that the Mission,
in consultation with the Government, will be able to
develop the necessary indicators. Using clear and
realistic milestones will enable us to track progress.
While we note that many colleagues and the Under-
Secretary-General spoke about the fragility of the
transition, we believe that if we have such milestones
and benchmarks, they will reduce the risk associated
with the exit strategy. In particular, the exit strategy
should also be clearly aligned with the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework 2017-2021.

In conclusion, it is critical that the Mission and the
Government work together in a spirit of solidarity and
mutual respect and trust. Where the United Kingdom
can help, the Council can count on it to do so. At this
point, I would like to mention the sad history of sexual
exploitation and abuse that Haiti has witnessed and to
say that we will work with the Secretary-General to
ensure the implementation of the zero-tolerance policy
throughout the whole of the United Nations.

The time remaining to meet the transition target
of October 2019 is now limited. We hope to see the
adoption of a clear transition plan that will set out how
we will move from peacekeeping to development. What
Mr. Lacroix said in that regard was very encouraging.
However, we do urge the Secretary-General to be
realistic and clear with regard to the division of
responsibilities across the United Nations system. It is
ultimately the Government of Haiti's leadership that
will make the transition a success but, as other speakers
have noted, where we are now presents us with an
enormous opportunity for achieving a successful
outcome not just for the Government of Haiti but for
the entire United Nations family and for peacekeeping
in general.

