Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you, Mr. President, for the initiative of the delegation
of Mexico. As Ambassador Schumacher said, it is
natural for Mexico to take such an initiative, given the
Organization's history and the role that Latin American
countries played in the elaboration of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations.

(spoke in French)

At the outset, I should like to thank the Secretary-
General for his statement and to say how receptive we
are to the message that he came to give us, at a time
when the Organization is trying to strengthen and
consolidate its central role in international relations -
a role to which my country is deeply attached. I should
also like to thank the Secretary-General of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Mr. Jan Kubis, for his statement and to welcome the
presence in the Council Chamber of the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece, Mr. Ioannis
Magriotis. Greece is a country that is a neighbour and a
friend of mine, and my delegation associates itself with
the statement that he will make shortly on behalf of the
European Union, since Bulgaria, as the Council knows,
is an associated country of the Union.

I shall focus on one of the possible dimensions of
the complex relations between the Security Council
and regional organizations. I note that there is a
consensus around this table that those relations are
productive and important. It is clear that threats to
international peace and security are in full
transformation. Increasingly, these new threats are
determining the need to adapt the Council's response to
them in order to ensure peace and security in the world.

On the one hand, in some parts of the world we
are seeing weak States that are experiencing significant
internal difficulties, where the threat to international
peace and security comes from within the States
themselves. On the other hand, we are seeing the
emergence of transnational factors that are threatening
peace, and the first such example that comes to mind is
certainly terrorism. But these threats are not only the
traditional military and political kind; they are also
humanitarian, economic and political. These complex
threats demand an additional effort on the part of
Security Council to adapt to them and to confront
them. And there, in our view, the role of regional
organizations is essential.

The United Nations and the Security Council, in
most cases - in fact, in every case - ensure a flexible
framework with a View to cooperation with various
organizations, which enables them to work the terrain,
so to speak, on solid judicial and legal foundations.

Let us consider the example of other
peacekeeping operations. In the past decade, those
operations grew in size and importance. They went
from the traditional model of observation and hostile
force to much more complex structures in which not
only military contingents but also police contingents
and civilian personnel - including experts from
various spheres - also participate. This civilian
dimension of peacekeeping operations, in our view, is
assuming increasingly obvious importance.

We believe that there is a need to define a
complex, comprehensive approach to the maintenance
of international peace and security - an approach that
should encompass respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms, international law and the rule of
law.

Cooperation with regional organizations in these
areas is increasingly required as an effective instrument
in addressing these challenges. It is becoming
increasingly clear that emphasis needs to be put not
just on the consequences of instability and threats to
the peace but on the causes of conflict.

The Security Council continues to bear the
primary responsibility for defining the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, especially when their
implementation involves regional organizations. We
believe that the Council should expand and strengthen
its cooperation with regional organizations in the
context of their working with civil society structures
for strengthening the rule of law, buttressing local
democracy, promoting decentralization and ensuring
respect for human rights.

The complex structure of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
provides an example of cooperation with regional
organizations such as the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and NATO. Interaction between KFOR and
UNMIK is an important element in the maintenance of
stability in Kosovo.

In conclusion, I should like to say that as of next
year, Bulgaria will hold the chairmanship of the OSCE
for a year. One of the main focuses of the Bulgarian
chairmanship of that important regional organization
will undoubtedly be cooperation with the Security
Council. The task of the Bulgarian chairmanship will
be made easier by the past experience to which
Mr. Kubis referred earlier. I would like to mention in
particular the Common Concept for the Development
of Cooperation between Mutually Reinforcing
Institutions - a document formulated at the 1997
OSCE Ministerial Conference in Copenhagen, which
served as the basis for the Charter for European
Security, adopted in Istanbul in 1999.

One of the priorities for the Security Council and,
I believe, for the OSCE, is combating terrorism. How
does the Secretary General of the OSCE evaluate the
cooperation between that organization and the Security
Council, in particular the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, in this area?

