Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his update on recent developments in the Middle East.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of Israel,
Mr. Meron Reuben, and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, Mr. Riyad Mansour, for their presence and
their contribution to our debate.

In the past month, we have all witnessed the
intensified efforts to find a way to continue direct
peace talks in an environment conducive to progress.
During the Security Council discussions last month,
Bosnia and Herzegovina whole-heartedly welcomed
the resumption of direct talks between Israelis and
Palestinians. We would also like to use this opportunity
to reiterate our full support for serious and responsible
direct negotiations, which represent the only way to
resolve all final status issues and reach a two-State
solution.

The resumption of direct talks represents a major
breakthrough in the Middle East crisis and a significant
achievement by the parties involved. It has also been
strongly supported by many international actors, and
we must again pay tribute to United States Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton and Senator George Mitchell,
who have played an important role, which reflects
President Obama's commitment to peace in the Middle
East. The Middle East Quartet and the Arab League
have also contributed substantially to this process.

My delegation was aware of the tremendous
efforts required from both sides in order to get the
negotiation process moving. Unfortunately, we are
once again confronted with discouraging news from the
Middle East. Bosnia and Herzegovina shares the grave
concerns of others regarding actions that threaten the
continuation of direct talks, in particular the expiration
of Israel's 10-month partial settlement moratorium. We

must underline once again that all settlement activities
on occupied land are illegal under international law
and are contrary to Israel's obligations under the Road
Map. Those activities, therefore, represent an obstacle
on the road to comprehensive peace. Bosnia and
Herzegovina calls upon Israel to respond positively to
appeals by the international community and end all
settlement activities, including in East Jerusalem.

Still, despite this major obstacle on the road to
negotiations, it is our strong belief that their
resumption is a crucially important opportunity that
must not be missed. The Middle East can not afford a
failed peace process. Bosnia and Herzegovina,
therefore, urges the parties directly involved to take the
difficult and necessary decisions to achieve a just
political settlement that should lead to a two-State
solution. We would like to underline that we firmly
believe that this momentum deserves the continuous
and unconditional support of the entire international
community, and we are looking forward to a
comprehensive political dialogue with a clear agenda
and terms of reference aimed at resolving all
permanent status issues - including the status of
Jerusalem - within one year.

With that in mind, it is important to reiterate that
the current situation calls for brave political decisions
and practical steps from both sides. It is also of utmost
importance that both sides avoid provocative actions
that could undermine the success of the negotiations.
Furthermore, respect for international humanitarian
law by all is vital for any lasting solution and
cooperation between the two sides.

We strongly condemn all armed attacks on
civilians and wish to reiterate that Israeli and
Palestinian civilian populations must be protected.
Bosnia and Herzegovina calls for a complete stop to all
violence, in particular rocket fire and terrorist attacks.

Bosnia and Herzegovina advocates a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East,
which can be achieved only on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Road Map and agreements previously reached by the
parties, as well as the Arab Peace Initiative. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is and will remain committed to the two-
State solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable State
of Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.

The continuation and worsening of the situation
in Gaza is of continuing concern to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We recognize positive Israeli activities
towards easing the entry of goods into Gaza, but
reiterate our calls for a full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009) and for the immediate,
sustained and unconditional opening of crossings for
the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and
persons to and from Gaza, including goods from the
West Bank.

Allow me to reiterate our firm belief that only
direct, open and frank negotiations can advance the
peace process and bring it to a successful conclusion.
Bosnia and Herzegovina urges the Israelis and the
Palestinians to invest all their efforts to achieve a just,
lasting, and comprehensive peace.

In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina recalls
that peace in the Middle East should be comprehensive
and reiterates the importance of negotiations on the
Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-Lebanese tracks. As regards
Lebanon, we reaffirm our full support to the Lebanese
authorities and commend the crucial role in southern
Lebanon of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). We call upon all parties concerned
to implement all provisions of resolution 1701 (2006),
to respect the Blue Line in its entirety and to cooperate
fully with the United Nations and UNIFIL. Bosnia and
Herzegovina fully supports the work and the
independence of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

