Mr. Ruzicka (Slovakia): At the outset, let me
welcome the timely initiative of devoting this thematic
debate to such a sensitive, complex and often painful
but extremely important topic.

Allow me to start with some facts and questions.
Several estimates suggest that there have been
only 250 years of peace over the 3,400 years of the
documented history of humankind - and those are
optimistic estimates. The twentieth century was the
most murderous in recorded history. The total number
of deaths caused by or associated with its wars has
been estimated at 187 million, the equivalent of more
than 10 per cent of the world's population in 1913. Is
our planet a safer place today, 100 years on from the
outbreak of the First World War and 70 years from the
end of the Second?

We spent more than $13.4 billion on humanitarian
relief in 2013 alone, and expect approximately the same
amount to be allocated this year. Are we not paying
a price for the inconsistencies in our approach to the
processes ofbuilding sustainable societies and peace in
post-conflict areas?

War is like an avalanche: once it picks up its full
speed, it overcomes everything in its path and leaves
behind only destruction, death and suffering. But the
most important thing may not be to keep looking for the
snowflake that caused the avalanche, but rather to seek
to learn how to prevent it, tame it and create a better,
sustainable peace on the ruins it leaves behind.

To find answers for the future, we should find the
courage to look into the past. That may be the most
difficult part - how to handle the injustices of the
past without creating new injustices in the present and
future. We have to have the strength to look directly
into the cruel face of war and its consequences. We
cannot hide from them.

It has been said that time may fix all of the
injustices of the past. But yet again, treating a wound
may be relatively fast, but a cure requires dealing with
the scars in the memories and the minds of people,
which is much more difficult. Reconciliation may take
decades or generations, and may always maintain the

potential for conflict, but it cannot be achieved without
individual accountability.

Tolstoy's classic novel, War and Peace, indicates
that history is not, after all, produced by the dramatic
moves and posturing of leaders, but by complex
combinations of large numbers of small actions by
relatively unimportant people.

Allow me to share with the Council three
observations. First, reconciliation is a sign of
strength, not of weakness. The Franco-German
reconciliation - the understanding of European
nations that war can no longer be an instrument for the
implementation of policy - brought the perspective of
a longer, more durable peace, at least in Europe.

Herman van Rompuy said that Europeans did not
wish for anybody else, in any region in the world, to
have to endure such traumas as the First and Second
World Wars in order to reach the conclusion that living
peacefully together is by far the best option. Of course,
peace might have come to our continent without the
European Union - maybe. We will never know. But
it would not have been of the same quality - a lasting
peace, not a frosty ceasefire.

The second point I would like to make is that
regional cooperation and good neighbourly relations are
the cornerstones of stability. The project of European
cooperation can be an inspirational example. It may
not necessarily be a universal model, but it has been
working for more than 50 years. It shows that national
security can be sustainable only if there is regional
stability and cooperation, if neighbours want and are
able to coexist and cooperate without prejudices and
if they are able to join their efforts for the sake of the
common interest and face challenges together. Without
those foundations, progress cannot be sustainable.

Thirdly, I turn to the individual security of persons,
which enables them to live in dignity and freedom.
When people have basic rights and freedoms, enjoy
free movement, live in mutual tolerance, have access
to education and enjoy economic activities, then they
might be much more reluctant to start a conflict that
might deprive them of all of those freedoms.

To build a sustainable future and peace in post-
conflict areas, we have to develop a comprehensive
approach, with the participation of all parts of society.
Slovakia has for several years been a strong supporter
of security sector reform. The need for security sector
reform is omnipresent, especially in post-conflict,
war-stricken countries. The concept of security sector
reform is rather complex and goes beyond the traditional
understanding of post-conflict stabilization in the
security field alone. It is also a political process that
should be State-owned and State-led. Inclusivity and
justice within society, as broadly based as possible, will
ensure its sustainability. Security sector reform should
go beyond narrow and simplistic definitions and reflect
the experience, both good and bad, that the United
Nations has acquired over decades of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.

The main goal is to establish the four dimensions
of security, namely, the civic, the legal, the social and
the economic. If we succeed in doing that, then we can
significantly decrease the risk ofa relapse into conflict.

Every human being is born free, has his or her
dignity and is entitled to enjoy the right to live in peace.
That is why we should not only take arms away from
those who are fighting, but we should give them the
prospect ofa decent life by providing stability, security,
education and sustainable peace.

Where, if not in the United Nations, do we have the
capacity to do so?

In conclusion, yes, we must learn from the past, we
must understand the roots of conflicts and we must be
strong enough to overcome differences. We must to do
so if we want to live up to the challenges of the twenty-
first century and prove that our civilization can take
care of itself and of our planet - the only one we have.
