Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, let me express our profound gratitude to you
for having convened this open debate. I also thank
Mr. Robert Serry for his thorough briefing on the latest
developments in the Middle East. As is customary, my
delegation endorses the statements delivered by the
representatives of Egypt, Kazakhstan and Kuwait on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Arab
League, respectively.

At the outset, I would like to express our
profound concern at the protracted deadlock facing
international and regional efforts to reinvigorate the
talks between the Palestinians and the Israelis,
particularly in the light of the legal aspirations of the
Palestinians with regard to September 2011. There can
be no doubt that there is unanimous agreement at the

international level when it comes to the two-State
solution and the need for a comprehensive settlement
in the Middle East, in keeping with international
legitimacy. Consequently, the international community
must be strict and effective in order to create an
environment conducive to negotiations, free from
provocative, illegal, unilateral measures by Israel, so as
to bring peace and prosperity to the region.

We are deeply concerned at the obstacles
impeding direct talks between the two sides. At the
same time, we are convinced that the peace process is a
necessary choice that must lead to a comprehensive,
just and legitimate peace for all peoples in the region.

In this context, Morocco is closely and
optimistically following the several initiatives - by
the United States, the Quartet, the European Union and
other regional and international actors - to promote a
return to direct negotiations. Our hope is that these
efforts will bring about a resumption of serious
negotiations in good faith, in keeping with
international law, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Road
Map and the previously achieved agreements between
the sides.

Morocco warmly welcomed the commitment
made by President Obama of the United States remarks
his speech on 19 May 2011 on a comprehensive and
just peace between the Palestinians and the Israelis and
creation of an independent Palestinian State, within the
1967 borders and living side by side in peace with
Israel.

We express the hope that this position, which is
shared by the entire international community, will
enable the Palestinian people to reclaim their
legitimate rights and establish an independent State
with its capital at Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

In this context, Morocco, whose King,
Mohammed V1, is presiding over the Jerusalem
Commission, would like to state its concerns to the
Council and to condemn the measures taken by Israel
in East Jerusalem with a view to changing its
demographics, legal status and religious profile and
Israel's expulsion of Palestinians in order to build
roads and settlements and Judaize the area. All of these
actions impede a final settlement, and, given the
crucial importance of Al-Quds Al-Sharif in any
comprehensive settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian
question, we call on the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, to assume their full
responsibilities to ensure that Israel end these illegal
practices, respect the international efforts aimed at
bringing about early talks and to cooperate with them.

In these sensitive historical circumstances, the
eyes of the world are focused more than ever on the
United Nations and the international and regional
forces working to uphold their political and moral
responsibilities towards the Palestinian people and to
restart direct negotiations. This could give new
momentum and optimism to the process to achieve the
peace to which we all aspire.

The Palestinian Authority, strengthened by its
national reconciliation, continues to show itself to be
the genuine and effective partner in the peace process
that it has always been, and to demonstrate its
commitment to achieving a lasting solution. The Arab
States, through the Arab Peace Initiative, have
expressed their sincere desire for lasting and just
peace.

Morocco places the issue of Palestine at the very
centre of its regional and international interests, and
will continue its efforts to resolve this matter through
direct negotiations. This will happen only after Israel
withdraws from all Arab and Palestinian territories
occupied since June 1967, and through the creation of
an independent Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its
capital, and respect for the legal rights of the brotherly
people of Palestine.

