Mr. Toure (spoke in French): It is my honour to
brief the Security Council for the first time since my
appointment on recent developments in Guinea-Bissau.

As Council members are aware, on 26 May, the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jose Mario
Vaz, appointed Mr. Baciro Dja as Prime Minister by
presidential decree. Mr. Dja's Cabinet was sworn in on
2 June. The new Cabinet consists of 19 Ministers and 12
Secretaries of State. However, two critical ministerial
positions - Interior and Foreign Affairs - remain
vacant.

The appointment of the new Prime Minister
triggered a political stand-off, whereby members
of the dismissed Cabinet led by Mr. Carlos Correia
refused to leave their offices, claiming that the recent
presidential decree on the appointmentwas not in line
with the Constitution and the Supreme Court's decision
of 8 September 2015. Mr. Correia insisted that he and
his Ministers would hand over their responsibilities
only to a Government nominated by the Parti africain
pour l'independance de la Guinee et de Cabo Verde
(PAIGC), as the party that holds the absolute majority
in the Parliament.
(spoke in English)

The prolonged impasse over the new Cabinet, the
fourth since the legislative elections of May 2014, came
close to a confrontation as security forces strengthened
their presence at the Government palace, following a
48-hour ultimatum issued by the Prosecutor General
on 3 June. Further events - notably the death on
4 June of Ms. Carmen Pereira, a historical figure of the
country's liberation struggle who was also a veteran of
the PAIGC and a staunch supporter of the dismissed
Government - compounded the already tense situation
and raised additional tensions between the sworn-in
Government and the PAIGC over the organization of
her funeral.

In an attempt to defuse tensions, I met with President
Vaz, the dismissed Prime Minister Carlos Correia,
the President of the opposition Parti du renouveau
social, Mr. Alberto Nambeia, and the President of
the PAIGC, Domingos Simoes Pereira, appealing for
restraint, political dialogue and respect for the rule of
law. I also mobilized the international community in
Bissau to explore options for a peaceful solution to the
stand-off at the Government palace and the handling of
Ms. Pereira's funeral. On 8 June, the day ost. Pereira's
funeral ceremony, I issued a condolence note that was
broadcast on the radio, calling on all stakeholders to
remain calm in this moment of national mourning. In
the end, the funeral was held peacefully.

Following intense overnight negotiations involving
representatives of civil society, religious leaders, the
Economic Community of West African States Mission
in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) and the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, on
9 June the remaining members ofthe dismissed Cabinet
and their supporters peacefully vacated the Government
Palace, ending a 14-day stalemate. Earlier on the same
day, following consultations among international
partners, the representatives of the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the European Union and my Office had
issued ajoint communique expressing our support for a
peaceful solution to the impasse.

The peaceful resolution of the stand-off may have
helped avert a potentially serious crisis. However,
further challenges loom ahead. The PAIGC has
initiated legal proceedings challenging the President's
recent appointments. Furthermore, the status of the
15 Members of Parliament expelled by the PAIGC in
January, as well as the ongoing impasse at the National
Assembly, add to the legal confusion and institutional
uncertainty facing the country. Following a decision
of the new Cabinet on 3 June to dismiss the director
of the national radio, the latter has filed a case with
the Supreme Court, challenging the constitutionality of
the presidential decree of 26 May, appointing Mr. Dja
as Prime Minister. As Council members may recall,
it was the same action by this appellant, after having
been dismissed from the same post, that triggered
the Supreme Court's proceedings that voided the
appointment of Mr. Dja in September 2015.

Regardless of the judicial outcomes, a sustainable
solution to the ongoing political crisis can only be
found through genuine political dialogue. Yet, one of
the primary forums for such dialogue - the National
Assembly - suspended its current session on 18 May
as a result of disputes over the agenda and the status
of the 15 Members of Parliament. Earlier today, that
parliamentary session was closed; the next one is
expected to open later this month.

Against this backdrop, and since my arrival
in Bissau, I have engaged in an intensive round of
consultations with national and regional leaders, as well
as international partners. I have specifically sought to
shore up the commitment of ECOWAS to the presence
ofECOMIB. In the lead-up to, as well as on the margins
of the forty-ninth ordinary session of the Authority of
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, I met
with President Olusegun Obasanjo, Special Envoy of
the Nigerian President, in his capacity as Chairman
of the Regional Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau;
Mr. Marcel de Souza, Chairperson of the ECOWAS
Commission; President Alpha Conde of Guinea, in his
capacity as the ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau;
and President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita of Mali to enlist
their support in favour of an extension of ECOMIB and
to help mediate a sustainable solution to the situation in
Guinea-Bissau.

In this regard, we welcome the decision of the
ECOWAS Heads of State of 4 June to extend the mandate
of ECOMIB for another year, on the understanding that
the international community would provide funding,
as appropriate. As Council members are aware, the
Heads of State also entrusted a high-level delegation,
comprising the Presidents of Guinea, Senegal, and
Sierra Leone, to engage with political stakeholders
in Guinea-Bissau and better assess the situation in
the country. In addition, they directed the ECOWAS
Commission to consult with the CPLP with a View to
convening a meeting of the International Contact Group
on Guinea-Bissau. My Office stands ready to provide
any assistance required to ensure the implementation
of these key decisions.

Soon after the ECOWAS Summit, in an effort to
maintain the Dakar momentum, I travelled to Abidjan
to meet with President Alassane Ouattara and had
follow-up conversations with his peers, the Presidents
of Senegal and Guinea. In the days ahead, I shall also
engage with the new Chair of ECOWAS, President
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, and with President Ernest Bai
Koroma of Sierra Leone.

While we focus our energies on finding a political
and sustainable solution, it is also important that we
continue to provide the required support to the people
of Guinea-Bissau, whose lives and livelihoods have
been adversely impacted by the country's recurrent
instability. We have seen in March and April how
strikes in the health and education sectors seriously
affected the school year and deprived citizens of key
preventative and medical services, including maternal
and child health.

The longer the crisis continues, the more likely it
is that we will see a setback to the gains of the post-
electoral period, including positive economic growth,
increase in revenues and commitment to key reforms
in defence and security, justice and public services. In
a country where the official development assistance
amounts to about 15 per cent of gross domestic product
and almost 80 per cent of the budget, the current
suspension of disbursements and direct budget support
from the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank,
the European Union and the African Development
Bank creates financial pressure that could negatively
affect the running of the State, including the payment
of salaries.

The current situation calls for innovative strategies
to deliver services and support the resilient population
of Guinea-Bissau. With the United Nations country
team, I shall continue to engage with partners to support
the population, especially those most vulnerable. That
would contribute to greater stability, while fostering
dialogue with authorities on development and reform
priorities as leverage for peace and development.
The attention given by the Security Council to
the situation in Guinea-Bissau and its support to the
search for a sustainable solution to the political and
institutional challenges in the country are of the utmost
importance.

