Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Nigeria's initiative in convening this open
debate on security sector reform (SSR), and welcomes
you, Mr. President, as you preside over today's meeting.
I am also grateful to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing.
The maintenance of international peace and
security is one of the purposes of the United Nations
as laid down in its Charter. As such, it is a cornerstone
of the work of the Organization. The establishment of
stable, sustainable and secure environments is a basic
premise and foundation for achieving general security,
promoting economic and social development and
advancing progress in various areas in post-conflict
countries. United Nations assistance to the SSR efforts
of countries emerging from conflict and restoring an
effective and professionalized security sector is not
only critically important to those countries, it can
also help the Organization and the Security Council to
better carry out their sacred duties, as enshrined in the
United Nations Charter.

Through its peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities in recent years in places such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Liberia and Sierra Leone, the
United Nations has provided strong support to SSR
efforts in the countries concerned and has mobilized
the international community to step up assistance
to them. It has also continued to cooperate closely
with regional organizations. All of this has produced
positive and results. A shared understanding of the
importance of SSR has grown among Member States.
All parties have participated actively in discussions
on SSR through such platforms as the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Group of Friends of Security Sector
Reform, where proposals and recommendations on
improving the related work of the United Nations have
been exchanged. The Secretariat has also worked hard
to take stock of its experience, improve its working
methods and strengthen inter-agency coordination
through mechanisms such as the Security Sector
Reform Task Force and the Security Sector Reform
Unit, with effective results.

In the meantime, as the situation has evolved, the
United Nations has encountered various new problems
and challenges that arise in offering assistance with
SSR. I would like to make the following four points
on how to better support SSR efforts for countries
emerging from conflict.

First, the United Nations must respect the wishes
and ownership of the countries concerned. The
maintenance of national security comes under the
rubric of national sovereignty. When offering support
for SSR efforts in countries emerging from conflict, the
United Nations and the international community should
always respect the principle of national ownership,
and, on the basis of full respect for the wishes of the
countries concerned, provide constructive capacity-
building training and advisory assistance. There are no
universally applicable best practices for SSR; there can
only be the formula that best fits the specific situation of
an individual country. In offering assistance, therefore,
the international community should take into full
consideration the specific requirements and situation
of each country concerned.

Secondly, the United Nations should strengthen
its overall planning in assisting the SSR process in
countries emerging from conflict. There can be no doubt
about the importance of SSR, but it is not a panacea,
and it cannot turn a country's security situation around
alone. The United Nations should help the countries
concerned to incorporate SSR into their integrated
development strategy, so that it can be promoted in
a comprehensive and complementary fashion along
the with political process, national reconciliation, the
promotion of the rule of law, the elimination of poverty
and the pursuit of economic development. Only in this
way can the United Nations help countries attain lasting
peace and sustainable development.

Thirdly, the United Nations should leverage
its advantages by coordinating the efforts of all
parties concerned. There is a multitude of actors
and stakeholders in the SSR process at the moment.
On the one hand, the United Nations should be a
coordinator among the countries concerned and the
potential assistance providers. On the other hand, the
United Nations should encourage Member States to be
actively engaged in the discussions on SSR through
such platforms as the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
and the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform.
In the meantime, the role of such mechanisms as the
inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force should
be brought into full play, and coordination and division
of labour among various departments of the Secretariat
should also be strengthened so as to foster synergy.

Fourthly, the United Nations should give priority
attention to its coordination and cooperation efforts
with regional and subregional organizations. Over the
years, regional and subregional organizations - and
the African Union in particular - have conducted a
tremendous amount of work in assisting countries
emerging from conflict. They possess a unique
appreciation of the situation and a wealth of experience.
The United Nations should strengthen its cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations in SSR
through workshops, training courses and personal
exchange. The United Nations should also build upon
its successes and beneficial practices and increase its
support for and further motivate those organizations to
participate in the relevant work.

