Mr. Touray (Gambia): In 1991 the former
Yugoslavia witnessed one of the most horrendous
offences against international humanitarian law, to which
the international community, through the Security
Council, responded very fittingly by establishing in 1993
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia to prosecute the persons responsible for those
crimes. The establishment of the Tribunal was and still is
a necessary measure for the process of national
reconciliation and the restoration of peace in the former
Yugoslavia.

 

The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia currently has on its case list 29 accused persons
awaiting trial. This dramatic increase in the number of
accused persons has rendered the Tribunal unable to
expeditiously conclude the trials of all the accused persons.

We also understand that there are 54 public indictees
who are not in custody. If all these people are to be brought
to trial, it is obvious that the Tribunal cannot, under its
existing arrangements, expeditiously conclude all the trials.

We believe that the Tribunal needs additional judicial
support in the form of a third Trial Chamber. The report of
the President of the Tribunal makes a very compelling case
for the establishment of a third Trial Chamber. We agree
with the assessment of the situation.

One important issue for consideration is that the matter
impinges on the right of the accused person to be tried
expeditiously, as guaranteed by the Statute of the Tribunal.
If a third Trial Chamber is not established, this fundamental
right will be violated. For these reasons, we support the
establishment of a third Trial Chamber.

We note with satisfaction the successes registered by
the Tribunal in improving its working procedures. We
believe, however, that more could still be done in this
regard, and we thus urge the members to reconsider their
working procedures with a view to enhancing them further.

The Government of the Gambia has a very strong
commitment to the protection of fundamental rights. Thus,
we will always support legitimate measures that have as
their objective the protection of fundamental human rights.
This draft resolution falls within this category. The Gambia
will vote in favour of it.

