Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
Argentina's assumption to the presidency of the Council
this month. We wish you every success in managing the
Council's work, and we also pay tribute to the United
States for its presidency last month.

We should recall the deeply troubled circumstances
in whose shadow the recent debate on the Middle East
has been taking place, specifically those of 22 July,
when Gaza became the target of the worst kind of attacks
under the hateful Israeli aggression, which lasted for
15 days, resulting in thousands of dead and wounded
and indescribable destruction, worse than in Gaza in
2009. Israel, the occupying Power, has also perpetrated
horrendous violations of human rights and international
law, including of the Fourth Geneva Convention, on the
protection of civilians in time of war.

Israel continues to pursue its policies ofprovocation
and aggression, risking undermining the foundations of
peace and paving the way for a serious period in the
Middle East that represents the antithesis of peace and
security, owing to Israel's intransigence in the face
of every genuine effort to establish a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace between the two parties. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of the Arab Republic
of Egypt to reach a ceasefire agreement between Israel
and Palestine on 26 August.

At the same time, we affirm the inalienable rights
of the Palestinians and the legitimate fulfilment of their
aspirations for a independent State within the borders of
4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We also
reiterate our request that the Security Council shoulder
the responsibility conferred on it by the Charter of the
United Nations to work for and maintain international
peace and security by taking the necessary measures
to address such problematic issues relating to peace
by adopting the draft resolution that the Arab Group
proposes to introduce in the Council. I should like to
make the following points.

We must set a deadline for ending Israel's
occupation of the Palestinian territories. We must urge
the Government of Israel, the occupying Power, to end
its policies of settling and confiscating land, as well
as those designed to evict Palestinian from their lands,
farms and property and detain them in Israeli jails. Israel
must renounce its racist, extremist and systematic plans
aimed at the total Judaization of Jerusalem, and end its
attacks on the city's holy sites. It must lift the blockade
of the Gaza Strip and guarantee open border crossings
to ensure that humanitarian aid can pass through them
and thus meet the basic needs of the people of Gaza. We
must support the Palestinian demands for international
protection of their people and the occupied territories
and for that occupation to end.

While very positive, the results of the recent Cairo
International Conference on Palestine "Reconstructing
Gaza", which collected pledges of $5.4 billion for those
efforts, must lead to concrete, practical steps that can
ensure that we will really be able to rebuild Gaza. We
should use all possible means and resources to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East. We
also welcome the decision ofthe Kingdom of Sweden to
recognize the State of Palestine, and I reiterate the call
to States that have not yet done so to follow Sweden's
example and thus contribute to the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab

Peace Initiative, with the goal of two States living side
by side in peace.

The State of Kuwait reiterates its call on Israel to
implement resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the 4 June 1967 lines.
Kuwait also reiterates its commitment to stand shoulder
to shoulder with the brotherly country of Lebanon by
supporting all measures to protect and safeguard its
security and sovereignty.

