Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would first
like to bow to tradition in warmly congratulating you,
Sir, on your country's accession to the presidency of the
Security Council and to assure you of my delegation's
full cooperation.

I am honoured to take part in this meeting of the
Council, which is convened to pay tribute to a worthy
son of the United Nations - Captain Mbaye Diagne, a
peacekeeper and fallen hero on the field of honour in
Rwanda, with the ideals of the United Nations as his
bible. I would also like to heartily thank His Highness
Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein, Permanent
Representative of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
who had the happy notion of giving the achievements
of this young officer unprecedented recognition, once
again underscoring his beloved country's attachment to
the cause of peace and justice around the world.

I am pleased to be able to extend my gratitude to
all the members of the Council that sponsored today's
resolution 2154 (2014) in a sign of the unanimous drive
supporting the resolve of the international community,
through Mbaye Diagne, to re-establish the protection
of civilians at the centre of its priority concerns. The
resolution, which dedicates an eponymous medal to
his exceptional courage, is irrefutable proof of the
Security Council's commitment to recognizing the
many sacrifices made by thousands of Blue Helmets in
theatres of operations.

Born on 18 March 1958, Captain Mbaye Diagne,
who was married with two children, began his service
in the Senegalese army on 15 January 1983, rising to
the rank of captain on 1 April 1991. His last assignment
within the Senegalese armed forces was as Unit
Commander of the 6th Infantry Battalion. In saving
the lives of hundreds of people, as his conscience
dictated, Captain Diagne embodied the motto of the
National School for Active Officers, where he was
trained - "Intelligence, honour, bravery" - the virtues
that underpin the Senegalese army. In Senegal, he has
thus been posthumously raised to the rank of Chevalier
of the National Order of the Lion and awarded the
Military Cross with silver star, as well as being chosen
as godfather to the 13th class of the National School of
Active Officers, who graduated in 1995. We will keep
the memory of this brave officer in our hearts forever,
in piety and gratitude.

This is also the time to salute the many honours that
the late Captain Diagne has received. From Dakar to
Kigali, from Washington, DC, to Padua, worthy men,
women and institutions have paid tribute to him. In that
regard, he will be receiving the Umurinzi award, which
recognizes heroes of the Rwandan genocide, from
President Paul Kagame, whom I would like to thank,
and through him the friendly and fraternal people of
Rwanda for the honourable treatment they have always
shown to the family of Mbaye Diagne. Just now I was
gripped by the emotion shared by my friend and brother
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda, Ambassador
Eugene-Richard Gasana. Captain Diagne was also
honoured by, among others, Mrs. Hillary Clinton on
behalf of the Department of State of the United States,
as well as by the Garden of the Righteous of the World
of Padua for distinguishing himself with bravery for
such a noble cause.

World peace requires rejection and enmity to yield
forever to acceptance and dialogue with one another.
It implies that the commitment of United Nations
forces be permanently rooted in the universal values
that we have chosen and inscribed in letters of gold in
the Charter of the United Nations. That is the essence
of the virtue that is so eloquently expressed in today's
resolution.

I am happy to conclude by taking this opportunity
to reaffirm my country's commitment, and in
particular the commitment of its armed forces, to the
ideals that unite the community of nations gathered in
within this Headquarters of world peace. To Captain
Mbaye Diagne, to Whom I express the gratitude of the
Senegalese nation, I say, rest in peace in the land of
the heroes of the United Nations, which will forever
enshrine you in posterity.

