I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing. I would like to address four points today. First of all, France welcomed the announcement of the normalization of relations between the United Arab Emirates and Israel, which are both its strategic partners. In a deteriorating regional context, this announcement shows that positive dynamics can be set in motion. The decision taken in this framework by the Israeli authorities to suspend the annexation of Palestinian territories is a positive step, but it is imperative that this project be definitively and irrevocably abandoned. Indeed, this project would not only constitute a serious and flagrant violation of international law, but it would also be an irreversible blow to the peace process and the two-State solution. In this regard, the continuation of settlement remains a major concern for France. The same is true of the demolition of homes and structures, as well as settler violence against Palestinians in Area C and East Jerusalem, as documented in a recent report by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Secondly, I would like to reiterate France's call for the resumption of credible and ambitious negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians as the only method to achieve a just and lasting settlement of the conflict in accordance with international law, the resolutions of the Council and the agreed parameters. These parameters are known: two States living in peace and security, along secure and recognized borders, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. This is not a mantra; it is the only horizon that will allow us to build a lasting and just peace by responding to the legitimate aspirations of the two peoples. While only the parties will be able to conclude such a peace, France stands ready to contribute to it alongside its European, Arab and international partners. Thirdly, I would like to express France's concern over the renewed tensions between Gaza and Israel in recent weeks. This violence must stop before a new cycle of deadly violence begins. France calls for continued efforts to avoid any escalation, the primary victims of which would be the Israeli and Palestinian civilian populations. Beyond this critical security situation, it is absolutely crucial to respond to the humanitarian crisis, which can be addressed only through the lifting of the blockade on Gaza, accompanied by credible security guarantees for Israel. At the same time, progress is indispensable in intra-Palestinian reconciliation. This process requires the holding of national elections. Fourthly, I want to say how disturbing we find the increase in the number of people affected by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. The pandemic also is having considerable economic consequences for the region. The strengthening of cooperation among all actors - the Palestinian Authority and Israel, United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and others - is imperative. In that regard, we call on the parties to implement such cooperation and ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance in accordance with their respective obligations. France is taking part in the solidarity effort called for by the United Nations and the Palestinian Authority, in particular through the action of the Agence Francaise de Developpement and our contributions to the Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19. I also recall the importance of the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in the service of Palestinian refugees, which enjoys France's unfailing support, as evidenced by our latest contribution of €20 million. Second statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations, Anne Gueguen [Original: English and French] On the topic you just mentioned, Mr. President, and the question posed by the Russian Ambassador regarding the letter (S/2020/815, annex) sent by the United States on 20 August on resolution 2231 (2015), I would like to recall the view expressed very clearly by the three European members of the Security Council (E-3) in our letter circulated the same day: "The United States is not a Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) participant State under resolution 2231 (2015) anymore, and therefore [we] do not consider that the United States notification is effective". To be more precise, "the purported notification under operative paragraph 11 of resolution 2231 (2015) is incapable of having legal effect and so cannot bring into effect the procedure foreseen under operative paragraph 11", that is, the snapback procedure. We took note of the converging views expressed clearly by 13 of the 15 members of the Security Council on that matter. As a consequence, we firmly believe that no further steps can take place within the Security Council. Let me also recall that as committed JCPOA participants, we, the E3, believe that we should continue to address the current issues arising from systematic Iranian non-compliance with its JCPOA commitments through continued dialogue among all remaining JCPOA participants, foremost within the Joint Commission and in the framework of discussions being engaged in under the Dispute Resolution Mechanism. We welcome the fact that the Joint Commission will convene in Vienna on | September and enable us to directly address these issues. At the same time, we have serious concerns about the implications for regional security of the scheduled expiry of the United Nations conventional arms embargo, which were also raised by several countries from the region and other Security Council members. The E-3 are willing to pursue work with Council members and JCPOA participants to seek a realistic path forward that could secure the support of the Council. As a reminder, France abstained in the voting on the United States draft resolution (S/2020/797) on 14 August because it did not constitute an appropriate response to the challenges posed by the expiration of the embargo. The draft resolution could not gather enough support and was therefore not likely to advance security and stability in the region.
