Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing and for the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/76).

As Ambassador Citaku recalled, this month marks
10 years since Kosovo became a sovereign State. Let
us reflect on the progress that has been achieved in
this time. The people of Kosovo have participated
in three parliamentary elections since declaring
independence in 2008, as well as two countrywide
mayoral and municipal elections. Kosovo has also
shown solid economic growth and is now among the
top 10 countries for starting a business, according to
the World Bank's Doing Business 2018 report, jumping
from sixtieth to fortieth place in the report's ranking
for ease of doing business. Recent action towards
the full integration of Kosovo's judiciary within the
European Union-facilitated dialogue underscores a real
commitment to progress and stability.

This is not the same country it was 10 years ago when
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) was first established. That is not to
say that Kosovo is without its challenges. Building a
democracy takes time. The genuinely competitive local
elections in the majority of municipalities in Kosovo
were a welcome sign ofhealthy democratic competition,
although we continue to be concerned about allegations
of intimidation in Kosovo Serb municipalities. We also
welcome President Hashim Thaci's public statement on
1 February that Kosovo's Specialist Chambers cannot
and will not be abrogated. We hope to see the initiative
in the Assembly of Kosovo formally removed in the
coming days, ensuring that the important work of the
Chambers to maintain justice and the rule of law will
continue. We continue to urge the Kosovo authorities
to take all possible steps to swiftly resolve the murder
of Oliver Ivanovie, which has increased local tensions
in northern Mitrovica. However, those concerns should
not diminish the progress that Kosovo has made.

Kosovo can continue to build on its progress
by transitioning UNMIK institutions to Kosovo
institutions or other international organizations. While
we appreciate UNMIK's years of work in Kosovo, it
is time for a leaner, more efficient mission to focus on
more tightly defined priorities that take into account all
of the progress Kosovo has made in the past 10 years.
Kosovo's challenges are far less severe than those that
the fledgling nation was facing when UNMIK first
arrived, and it therefore does not require a United
Nations mission of this size. Moreover, Mr. President,
in the Council's open debate yesterday (see S/PV.8175),
that you presided over, the United Kingdom called for
a Security Council that focuses on present and future
challenges. With all of the world's pressing challenges,
checking in on Kosovo's good progress in these
meetings every three months is simply not a good use
of the Council's time.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the long-standing
position of the United Kingdom that it is past time for
the Council to meet less frequently on this issue.

