Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his briefing. We highly appreciate Mr. Ould
Abdallah's unremitting efforts over the years in
drawing the attention of the international community to
the need to resolve the question of Somalia. We
welcome the statement by African Union Commissioner
Lamamra. We also welcome the presence among us of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia and thank
him for his statement.

We are deeply concerned about the current grave
situation in Somalia. To resolve the question of
Somalia, it is imperative to quickly stabilize the
security situation in that country. For that purpose it is
crucial importance to ensure that the Somali security
forces are sufficiently strong. We welcome the recent
Mogadishu meeting of the Joint Security Committee.
We support the further strengthening of the Somali
security forces and appeal to members of the
international community that are able to provide
support to Somalia to do so within the framework of
the relevant procedures regarding exemptions from the
sanctions.

The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
is playing a very important role in the Somali peace
process. Some African countries have pledged
reinforcements to AMISOM; we welcome such pledges
and look forward to the prompt and full deployment of
the Mission. The international community must honour
its commitments as soon as possible and provide even
greater support to AMISOM. We support United
Nations efforts to continue to deploy the AMISOM
support package and request the Secretariat to
complete the contingency planning for the deployment
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation.

We support the continuation of national
reconciliation talks among all Somali parties, aimed at
consolidating the Djibouti peace process.

We condemn recent attacks against the
Transitional Federal Government, civilians and
humanitarian aid agencies and urge all Somali parties
to immediately renounce the use of force and resolve
all problems by political means.

The question of Somalia has become a daunting
challenge to the peace and security of the entire Horn
of Africa region. We appeal to countries of the region
to bring all their influence to bear in encouraging
peaceful talks and securing early and substantial
progress in the Somali national peace process.

