Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Having listened to
everyone's statements, I believe we really have a
consensus around the table, which is a very positive
thing. I too would like to thank Mr. Lowcock,
Mr. Griffiths and General Lollesgaard for their untiring
engagement, and we welcome the progress that has
been made, including with regard to the exchange of
prisoners. While of course we are not there yet, those
efforts must continue in order to make this process
irreversible, as our French colleague just said. We must
move towards the next round and work to ensure that
all the remaining bureaucratic obstacles are overcome.
Mr. Lowcock cited several concrete examples as to how
that could be done. Demining must also be stepped up
so that we can actually access the food that is in the Red
Sea Mills.

As Mr. Griffiths underscored in his briefing, I
also welcome the need and objective of engaging in
the political process, which is extremely important;
we must move in that direction. It is essential for
the political process to produce a comprehensive
solution. What does that mean? We must ensure that
all groups are included in the process. I believe that
Mr. Griffiths mentioned that the southern groups have
already expressed interest in such a process. In this
very complicated country, we must consider all those
groups. Some have mentioned that there is a flare-up of
some conflict in the Hajjah governorate. I believe that
it is paramount for all underrepresented groups to be
part and parcel of the political process, and that their
interests be taken into consideration.

Moreover, with regard to notjust this peace process
but all processes, I want to again repeat what I said
the last time (see S/PV.8441), it is very important that
the interests of women, youth and underrepresented
groups be addressed, especially children. I would like
to echo and again support what Mr. Lowcock said about
the recruitment of youth: what is happening there is
unacceptable, and that should also be a criterion for our
sanctions work.

Everyone around the table has said that there is
no alternative but to move towards a political process.
That also means that everyone around the table agrees
that there is no military solution to the problem, and
therefore, instead of investing in arms, we should invest
more in responding to the plea by Mr. Lowcock for
humanitarian support.

Lastly, with respect to the humanitarian situation,
the figures remain horrendous, with 20 million people
suffering from malnourishment and 250,000 people's
lives endangered, as Mr. Lowcock said. That must
change. I also agree with Mr. Meza-Cuadra that, in our
work on the humanitarian situation, we must concentrate
on women and children and ensure that sexual violence
against women be placed high on the agenda.

In terms of Geneva, Germany will again pledge
substantially, and we call on all partners to do the
same. At this stage, I want to join my French colleague
in highlighting the peace support facility, to which
Germany has already contributed. Beyond the
humanitarian aid, the people must see that the political
process will bear fruit, that there will be stabilization
in the country and that there will be funds for getting it
back on its feet.

