Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): We also thank the
Secretary-General for the presentation of his report on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746)
and the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Momen, for his active involvement and his
statement.
The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses post-conflict peacebuilding reflects the
importance that the international community attaches
to the issue as a preventive tool against the recurrence
of conflict and for the establishment of sustained
security and stability, which are prerequisites for the
maintenance of peace and development. We are all
cognizant that, in different parts of the world, conflicts
still hinder the prospects of regional peace and security.
Further delay in the settlement of these conflicts not only
undermines the regional cooperation and considerably
limits the prerequisites of the peacebuilding efforts of
regional and international actors, but also constitutes a
serious security risk should they one day erupt from a
dormant condition into an active one.

Although each and every conflict and post-conflict
situation is different, a conducive environment that
leads to their individual solutions through peacebuilding
strategies is an indispensable precondition. What
we have learned throughout the long period of living
with conflict and negotiating is that we should
continue to be persistent and patient because the
alternative - destruction and chaos - is unacceptable.

Armenia remains committed to post-conflict peace
initiatives and believes that the Security Council should
further strengthen and advance development initiatives
by supporting such peacebuilding mechanisms as the
Peacebuilding Commission, which helps countries
emerging from conflicts by offering targeted advice to
their recovery, reintegration and reconstruction efforts.
In that respect, it is important that the programmes
adopted be country-specific, needs-based and target-
oriented.

Effective peacebuilding requires active engagement
with local parties. That engagement should be
multidimensional in nature, involving Governments
and civil society, with a particular focus on women and
youth, whose role in post-conflict rebuilding is difficult
to underestimate. Particular attention should also be
paid to rebuilding and re-evaluating the educational
system in countries emerging from conflict.

Moreover, all peacebuilding initiatives have to be
inclusive in order to make a demonstrable difference
in the lives of the people affected. In that regard,
we endorse the recommendations and conclusions
contained in the report of the Secretary-General. In
addition, the contributions of international financial
institutions, regional development banks and the
private sector should play a decisive role in enhancing
the coherence of peacebuilding efforts at the regional
and subregional levels.
Today the post-conflict period in our region
offers a window of opportunity to provide basic
security, deliver peace dividends, build confidence
in the political process and strengthen core national
ownership to lead peacebuilding efforts and lay
the foundations for sustainable development in the
aftermath of conflicts. The successful implementation
of this agenda requires a basic level of political will,
determination and national ownership, which are key
to establishing sustainable peace. With those political
conditions in place, the ability of the United Nations or
any other intergovernmental, regional or national actor,
including civil society, will be enhanced and supported.

Armenia therefore welcomes Morocco's initiative
to hold this open debate, reflect on our experiences and
highlight priority aspects for united, practical action in
the coming year of 2013.

