Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I thank Special
Representative Yamamoto, Ms. Samar and Ambassador
Raz for their contributions.

Poland is ofthe view that the interests ofall Afghans,
including women, young people and minorities, should
be taken into account in the cause of the peace process.
We also strongly believe that peace should not come
at the cost of the progress that has been made in the
area of human rights, particularly women's rights, in
the past few years.

The coming months will be essential to addressing
the shortcomings of the electoral process and the
lessons learned in order to ensure credibility and
transparency and preserve the inclusivity of the political
process during the preparations for the presidential
elections. Strong measures that will preserve the safety,
transparency, accountability and credibility of the
ballot must be taken, and taken swiftly.

We remain deeply concerned about the security
situation in Afghanistan. We reiterate our call to all
parties to protect the civilian population, especially
women and children. Conflict-related violence must
not destroy another generation's livelihood, homes and
property, displacing families and limiting access to
education, health care and other services. We were very
pleased to hear from Ms. Samar about the progress that
has been made with regard to persons with disabilities.

We support and participate in the NATO Resolute
Support Mission, aimed at providing further training,
advice and assistance to the Afghan security forces
and institutions.

As other delegations mentioned, we believe that the
fight against corruption must continue and must deliver
concrete results, which will help maintain and increase
people's confidence in the Afghan State and institutions.
The same applies to the protection of human rights,
with a particular focus on areas such as the elimination
of violence against women, the protection of children
and the prevention of torture and ill treatment.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Poland's
acknowledgement of the crucial role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and all the relevant United Nations agencies
in supporting the Afghan people. Poland remains
committed to supporting the Afghan people, UNAMA
and international partners in achieving a democratic
and self-sustaining Afghanistan.

