Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank Malaysia for
organizing this important open debate.

The past two years have been troubling ones for
efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs). The threat of the acquisition
and use of such weapons by non-State actors is no
longer a hypothetical question. We have seen credible
allegations of the use of toxic chemicals as weapons
against civilians in Syria, by both non-State actors and
by a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant, have demonstrated that they are capable
and willing to use such weapons. Insecure stockpiles
in countries experiencing conflict have heightened
the risk of dangerous weapons or precursors falling
into the wrong hands. The increasing accessibility
of information and rapid advances in science and
technology have brought WMD capabilities within
reach of many dangerous non-State actors.

It was precisely to prevent such outcomes that
resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted. That resolution was
the Security Council's first attempt at a comprehensive
response to the risks relating to non-State actors. It
imposed obligations on all Member States regarding
implementation, monitoring and reporting. The
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004)
currently under way is therefore very timely. It provides
an opportunity to consider whether the existing
regime is adequate and effective, and how it can be
strengthened. New Zealand agrees that consideration
should be given to a new draft resolution later this year
to update the resolution 1540 (2004) framework in the
light of the review.

New Zealand will continue to focus on three
main objectives.

First, we want to ensure that the resolution 1540
92004) framework is fit for purpose and capable of
meeting emerging threats and challenges.

Secondly, we support a sharpened strategic focus
by prioritizing the work of the Group of Experts of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) towards issues and regions of
identified risk, vulnerability and need. In that regard,
New Zealand supports empowering the Group of
Experts to proactively identify and approach States
to propose in-country visits. That would better ensure
resources are targeted to activities and regions where
they can have the greatest impact. Such visits would
of course still require the consent of the host country.
New Zealand also supports a more flexible approach
to engaging States with low risk profiles. While we
recognize the importance of universal implementation
of the regime established by resolution 1540 (2004),
we caution against an approach that measures
success simply by counting the laws enacted or the
reports submitted.

Thirdly, we need to ensure that the compliance
burdens are both necessary and realistic, especially
for small States. That requires restraint in imposing
new obligations, as well as a willingness to consider
flexible approaches. There is little sense in taking a
rigid, one-size-fits all approach to States that do not
produce, store or act as transit points for sensitive
materials. Similarly, we see little value in imposing
additional reporting requirements and new universal
legal obligations that are not realistic or justified for
small States with limited capacities. Exploring flexible,
pragmatic approaches for such States, such as reducing
reporting for low-risk States and affording a greater
role for regional organizations, could help smaller
States improve their implementation while reducing
compliance burdens. Focusing outreach and support in
complementary areas such as counter-terrorism, border
security, non-proliferation and export controls can also
help small States.

That is the approach New Zealand has taken in
supporting the implementation efforts of our partners
in our region, most recently in a workshop we hosted
for Pacific Island countries with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the Pacific Islands Forum
secretariat, the Financial Action Task Force, the Asia-
Pacific Group on Money Laundering and the 1540
Committee Group of Experts.

Reform of the current assistance mechanism is also
important for small States. The input of the Group of
Experts is critical in helping to develop clear requests
for support. We would support a review of whether
the current composition of the Group is adequate for
that purpose.

The recent actions of non-State actors in Syria
and Iraq in making and using chemicals as weapons
has raised questions regarding the adequacy of current
international frameworks. For example, while the
Chemical Weapons Convention clearly prohibits the use
of chemical weapons by anyone, including non-State
actors, there is currently no explicit requirement for
States parties to the Convention to report chemical
weapons-related activities by non-State actors in their
territory to the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Nor is there a duty on
States parties to investigate such activities. We welcome
the ongoing discussions in the OPCW on options for
addressing this issue. We also welcome the OPCW
establishment of a rapid response assistance team for
dealing with alleged incidents.

There may also be scope for the Council to
complement these efforts. For example, we would see
merit in considering steps the Council might take to
encourage and support States to monitor, investigate
and report possible chemical weapons activities by
non-State actors within their jurisdiction, as well as
to reaffirm the various investigative tools available to
the international community. We could also consider
ways to ensure regular reporting to keep the Council
fully apprised of incidents of chemical weapons use by
non-State actors so that it can respond appropriately.

In addition, consistent with its recent decision
with respect to Libya, the Council could signal its
commitment to considering authorizing the transfer
of chemical weapons or precursors to other States for
destruction in situations where they have been seized
from non-State actors or are at risk of falling into their
hands. That would, of course, have to be done in close
cooperation with the OPCW.

Finally, we echo the comments made by the
Secretary-General and High Representative Won-soo
that we must restart progress on the disarmament and
non-proliferation agenda. It is only through complete
and verifiable nuclear disarmament that we can be sure
to eradicate nuclear-related weapons of mass destruction
and to eliminate their chances of being used.

