Mr. De Mistura: I thank you, Madam President,
for giving us the opportunity as the year draws to a
close to review, together with the Security Council, the
situation in Afghanistan from the United Nations point
of view during a period of many developments. But
before doing so, I would like on behalf of all of my
Afghan, United Nations, and national and international
colleagues, and frankly of the whole international
diplomatic community in Kabul, to pay tribute and to
pay our respects to the memory of Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke. I was told by someone that his last words
to an Afghan doctor who started treating him when he
went to the hospital were "Please work for peace in
Afghanistan".

We are grateful to him and we thank him for his
passionate commitment to assisting the Afghan people
in seeking their own political stability. I would like to
conclude this reflection with a few seconds of personal
prayer and silence.

Thank you, Madam President.

My presentation, which will be short as the report
has already been issued, will focus on the following
topics: the security situation and its linkage to the
NATO summit in Lisbon, transition, aid coherence/
realignment, human rights, reconciliation, regional
engagement, the serious issue of the drugs affecting
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, the elections,
and some brief remarks on the budget.

With regard to the security situation, the
combined increased activities by Afghan and
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) forces
are intensifying and are showing results. At the same
time, we are detecting from anti-Government elements
attempts to show on their side some spectacular attacks
in order to dilute the feeling of a change of momentum.
What does that mean?

It means that we should be expecting and should
be ready for, I am afraid, a tense security environment
10-70462
over the next few months. Our assessment is that the
situation may get worse before it gets better. And the
proof of that was the attack on the United Nations
centre at Herat, where 21 of our colleagues were
stationed. They all survived, thanks to luck, good
preparation, strong support from the Afghan security
forces around them and our own private security
company linked to the Gurkha support. But it is a
signal; it is a message.

The Lisbon NATO summit, in our view, was very
successful. The linking of the two dates - 2011 and
2014 - as a long beginning of a long end contributed
to establishing a much clearer perspective for all
international, regional and national players about
mutual commitment to Afghanistan.

With regard to transition, the message is clear,
and I am sure that we are all hearing it: allow a more
rapid delegation of responsibility and ownership to the
Afghan authorities. In other words - to use a slogan
that we heard in Lisbon and which I think is a very
good one - to help, support and assist the Afghan
authorities to stand on their own, but not to stand
alone.

The United Nations system and I myself, on
behalf of the Secretary-General, are planning - as we
are expected to do by this Council and, above all, by
the Afghan authorities - to increase, security
permitting, our own capacity in the areas where
transition is expected to take place and also in areas
where security is improving, in order to do what we
should be doing - doing much more to assist in
capacity-building and support for Afghan ownership of
Afghan territory.

We believe that, with the leadership of the
Afghan authorities and Mr. Ashraf Ghani, together with
the teams that have been established, we are moving in
the right direction on transition, and the United
Nations, as I said, will, with the blessing of the
Council, be doing its part.

On aid coherence, since the Kabul Conference we
have been talking about aid realignment, which then
leads to aid coherence. Aid realignment means,
basically, what we heard at the Kabul Conference,
which calls for a stronger and more effective
realignment of all bilateral and multilateral aid along
the lines of the priorities set by the Afghan authorities,
according to clear benchmarks set by both sides.
10-70462

The United Nations, that is, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
working closely in partnership and as co-Chair of the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board, which is the
institution that was created jointly by the Afghan
authorities and the international community to actually
assist, monitor and support the realignment, will be
increasing its activities in that field. I have new teams
coming in. One senior colleague, in particular, will join
me, who has been assigned particularly to support the
enhancement.

Human rights are crucial. Everybody recognizes
that, and we are working on that issue. The priority for
us is to be able to continue to issue reports that are
seen as significant because they are considered to be
objective and frank - sometimes too frank - but they
nonetheless help everyone to realize that the civilian
rights in human rights in Afghanistan are important for
the Afghans.

The issue of civilian casualties has been an issue
included in our report, and we will continue to include
that issue, hoping to improve that situation further with
fine-tuning. We have heard from President Karzai
several times, as well as from many other partners,
how important it is to actually address the issue of
civilian casualties in the best possible way; hopefully
we will not see repetitions of the figures we have seen
so far. There has, however, been an increase, as the
Council knows.

On the issue of women, reports are coming out -
and more will come out - about the violence affecting
women in particular. I must say, the results of the
election so far have been very encouraging regarding
the engagement and the involvement of women in the
future parliament. But we will continue to play our role
in that area. That has been requested by everyone, and
it is, frankly, required by our own moral compass.

On reconciliation and reintegration, everyone
recognizes that there is no military solution. Frankly,
even the Taliban do so, even if they will not say so
publicly. There is no military solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan - hence the importance of initiatives
such as the Peace Jirga and the establishment, by
President Karzai, of the High Peace Council. The
United Nations, through its own newly established
Salaam Support Group, in which everyone will be
invited to participate, depending on their level of
competence and the requirements by the Afghan
3
authorities, has been put at the disposal of the High
Peace Council. That participation will be based on
competence, the preparation of reports, visions and
substantive and substantial support for what could
suddenly become an important and accelerated level of
dialogue. Additionally, that support will come in the
form of logistics. What the Council is helping us with,
by asking for a strong logistical capacity, is being put
at the disposal of the Afghans, who are going to talk to
each other, both inside or outside Afghanistan. That has
already been requested three times, and we have
provided it on the Council's behalf.

Then, of course, confidence-building measures
represent an area where the United Nations, the
Security Council and the Mission can help in
eventually facilitating or explaining how to better
implement such measures, if and when they are
required.

On regional engagements, everybody again
recognizes that if there is - and when there is,
insha'allah - actual involvement in a dialogue, it will
be possible to sustain national dialogue only through a
long-term constructive engagement by all regional
players, and that means not only the immediate
neighbours, but also the distant and concerned
neighbours. In that sense, many initiatives are taking
place. As we speak, ifl am not mistaken, President
Karzai is in Ankara for discussions facilitated by the
Turkish Government on a trilateral basis. I think many
more meetings are likely to take place in that context in
the coming year. I understand that even in Washington,
DC, there is the possibility of a trilateral opportunity
sometime early next year. All those bilateral, trilateral
and regional initiatives are welcome and should be
supported in the right direction.

The United Nations in Kabul is doing its part in
the Kabul Silk Road initiative and is supporting other
initiatives by regional players. We understand that, by
the end of next year, in November, another Bonn
conference will possibly take place, as announced at
the NATO summit, and it will probably be - and I do
not want to prejudge here the decision by the Turkish
authorities - preceded by another regional opportunity
and discussion of the type we have had in the past.
Whatever the case, we will play a role, because we
recognize that all members of the regional context are
also Members of the United Nations.
On the issue of drugs, which is linked to the
question of regional issues, there has been a substantial
increase in drug production in spite of a disease
affecting drug production that we hope was sent by
God. It has also, unfortunately, contributed to an
increase in price and therefore also to an increase in
interest in producing, selling, transporting and storing
drugs. That is affecting 900,000 Afghans and major
neighbours, both close and distant. We welcome the
visit to Kabul of the new Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, who has
been very engaged and has been giving renewed energy
to the initiatives at the regional and national levels in
that context.

On elections, allow me to make a few points -
actually eight, but each of them short - on behalf of
the diplomatic community in Kabul and myself.

First, although it is late, we can never stress
enough how proud all of us are and should be and must
congratulate the Afghan people, the Afghan National
Security Forces and President Karzai for having held
elections in a country that, we know, is in a conflict
and is facing very challenging circumstances.

Second, at the end of the day, 4.2 million
Afghans, out of 10.5 million eligible voters, voted
despite the security situation and in spite of two serious
warnings from the Taliban to not go to vote.

Third, we recognize the diligent, committed and
intense work carried out by the two Afghan
independent electoral commissions nominated by the
President.

Fourth, the United Nations, the Russian
Federation, the United States, the European Union,
Japan, Canada and Turkey have all welcomed the
announcement - I repeat, the announcement i by the
electoral commissions on 24 November, and finally on
30 November, of the certification of the results of the
18 September Wolesi Jirga elections.

Fifth, the elections of 18 September, like all other
previous elections, included substantial numbers of
cases of fraud and irregularities. That is regrettable, but
we are dealing with a young democracy in a very
difficult environment. Both the Independent Electoral
Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission, the two electoral commissions, working
together, tried and did a lot of work, we have to
recognize, in trying to remove those cases of fraud that
they were able to detect. By doing so, they sent a
signal against impunity, which might have been an
important message for all Afghans to hear.

Sixth, we have to recognize the independence of
all Afghan institutions, both electoral and judiciary,
and that they act within their clearly defined areas of
competence and in accordance with the relevant
Afghan laws and the Afghan Constitution.

Seventh, with the certification of all results by the
bodies mandated by the law, the two Electoral
Commissions, the electoral process is now
procedurally concluded. Notwithstanding whatever the
judiciary system will have to do, following its own
procedures, the expected next steps are the
inauguration of the new Parliament, pursuant to the
electoral law.

Finally, we welcome the announcement by
President Karzai's spokesperson that the President
intends to inaugurate the new Parliament by the end of
January.

Now that we have gone through the electoral
process, we must look into electoral reform. We have
been discussing the issue with all Afghan authorities
and members of Parliament. The feeling is that there is
a need for the sort of electoral reform that will help to
prevent some of the problems that have been
encountered in the latest election and in previous
elections. That is the task that we will have to take on
together. We are confident that the Afghan capacity for
bringing an inclusive political approach to solving
some of the pending issues will bring about inclusive
participation 4 despite the previous exclusion of some
ethnic groups in the elections - hopefully before
January.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the Afghan
authorities, members of the Security Council, our
friend and colleague who is the European Union
representative in Kabul, and our friends and colleagues
representing the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) in Kabul for the support that we have
consistently received in implementing the UNAMA
mandate, which can only be fulfilled * and
incrementally so - if the necessary resources are
allocated to it in the next budget.

