Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): My delegation
would like to join preceding speakers in extending to you,
Sir, our sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of April.
We are particularly happy to see you presiding over the
Council's deliberations on the important item before it
today. We would also like to pay tribute to your
predecessor for the brilliant manner in which he presided
over the Council's work last month.

Allow me to express my delegation's sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General for the role he has
played in the Angolan peace process, particulary during
his last visit to the country. His visit gave a new impetus
to the process, and encouraged the reaffirmation of the
commitment of both the Angolan Government and
UNITA to fulfil the agreements they entered into.

It was with great joy that the people and the
Government of Mozambique welcomed, and witnessed,
the installation of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation in Angola after many years of
procrastination and seemingly endless suffering for the
Angolan people. The formation of the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation, and the return of
UNITA deputies to their seats in the National Assembly,
mark an important step towards stability and the

 

normalization of the situation in Angola. The people of
Angola are, more than ever before, near to the final
resolution of the devastating conflict and to the attainment
of lasting peace.

The Angolans can now concentrate their efforts on
national reconstruction, economic recovery and promoting
the development of their country. We congratulate the
Angolans for the courage and the spirit of reconciliation
that they have demonstrated.

The establishment of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation is an important step, but not the
end in itself. Much more should be done to implement
other aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. There is a need to
move expeditiously to normalize State administration
throughout the country, to complete the formation of the
unified Armed Forces and the National Police and to
demobilize the excess UNITA military personnel. The large
number of deserters and absentees from the selection and
demobilization centres may cause problems and endanger
the peace process. Therefore, the continued commitment
and determination of the Government of Angola and
UNITA are required so as to bring the peace process to a
successful conclusion.
The United Nations and the international community
at large should remain engaged in supporting the people of
Angola in overcoming the challenges they have to face
today. My delegation has carefully examined the progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). We welcome
the recommendation of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council to approve the extension of the mandate
of UNAVEM. III until 30 June 1997 and the establishment
as from 1 July of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (UNOMA). We believe that an Observer Mission
will help the people of Angola consolidate the process of
national reconciliation with s View to creating conditions
conducive to political stability and economic and social
recovery.

Once again, we would like to reiterate our appreciation
to the all those contributing towards the attainment of an
enduring peace in Angola, thus bringing about a conducive
environment for development not only in Angola, but in the
whole region of southern Africa. We would like to thank
particularly the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Blondin Beye, the observer
countries and troop-contributing nations.

