Mr. Pascoe: During a month that saw a number
of encouraging developments across the Middle East,
we are particularly heartened by the progress in
Lebanon, where a major step forward was taken with
the announcement of a national unity Government. It is
also positive that the indirect talks between Israel and
the Syrian Arab Republic continue. In Gaza, the
ceasefire has held and there was a marked decline in
violence. We are concerned, however, about the lack of
improvement in the situation on the ground in the West
Bank.

The political process begun at Annapolis
continues, with regular meetings and discussions of the
core issues taking place at various levels, both in the
08-4326]
region and elsewhere. Prime Minister Olmert and
President Abbas held a meeting on the margins of the
Paris Summit for the Mediterranean on 13 July. They
underscored their determination to make progress and
reach an agreement. However, some significant gaps
reportedly remain, and in discussions with Prime
Minister Olmert and President Abbas in Paris, the
Secretary-General emphasized the need to press ahead
with bilateral talks with the goal of overcoming all
outstanding differences. It is nevertheless encouraging
that today, for the first time, Israeli President Peres
hosted President Abbas in his residence in Jerusalem.

In Gaza and Israel, the security situation has
improved, as the Egyptian-mediated ceasefire that
entered into effect last month has generally been
upheld. During the reporting period, one Palestinian
civilian was killed by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
near the Gaza-Israel border, and two others were
injured. Palestinian militants fired 7 rockets and 10
mortars at Israel, which resulted in no casualties. No
IDF air strikes or incursions were reported. Hamas is
communicating to the public in Gaza its support for the
calm and has detained individuals involved in firing
mortars. However, 9 Palestinians were killed and 29
injured by internal violence, reckless handling of
weaponry and tunnel collapses along the Gaza-Egypt
border.

Building on the ceasefire, Egypt continues to
work on an agreement to exchange the captured Israeli
soldier, Gilad Shalit, for a number of Palestinian
prisoners currently held by Israel. The International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has still not been
provided with access to Corporal Shalit after more than
two years in captivity.

I am pleased to report that the number of
truckloads entering the Gaza Strip through the Sufa and
Karni crossings increased by 54 per cent during the
four weeks following the ceasefire, as compared to the
month before. Imports of cement increased
substantially and met Gazan requirements for the
reporting period. There has generally been a slight
increase in the import of non-food commodities. We
welcome that improvement, but note that current
import levels stand at approximately 30 per cent of the
level before June 2007. The continued lack of many
raw materials and the prohibition against exports
preclude any significant economic recovery.
Approximately 95 per cent of local industrial
establishments remain closed.
08-43261

On 17 July, Israeli officials informed their
counterparts in the Palestinian Authority that they
would increase the amount of fuel being allowed into
Gaza. That is encouraging and necessary, as the
amount of fuel has remained substantially lower than
the actual needs. Between 27 June and 20 July, only
17 per cent of daily needs of petrol, 57 per cent of
diesel, 40 per cent of cooking gas and 81 per cent of
industrial gas requirements were met. The Gaza
Electricity Company continues to operate at less than
70 per cent of its full capacity. The hardships caused by
that policy have been reported in past briefings.

United Nations Special Coordinator Serry visited
the Gaza Strip on 10 July to explore suitable ways to
resume stalled projects, including United Nations
projects, as requested by the Quartet. The United
Nations has asked the Government of Israel to
facilitate the resumption of priority projects as a matter
of urgency, and Prime Minister Olmert, in his
discussions with the Secretary-General, has undertaken
to consider that matter carefully.

President Abbas continued wide-ranging
consultations on the basis of his 5 June speech, which
called for national dialogue to implement the Yemeni
initiative. Both the Secretary-General and Special
Coordinator Serry have underlined their support for
President Abbas' initiative for progress towards the
goal of reunification of the Gaza Strip and the West
Bank within the framework of the legitimate
Palestinian Authority. The members of the League of
Arab States will have a leading role to play in
facilitating such efforts.

As efforts continue to solidify the ceasefire in
Gaza, it is critical to accelerate progress on the ground
in the West Bank. In this connection, we note with
concern that Israeli forces have stepped up their
military operations throughout the West Bank since
19 June. The IDF closed down and seized equipment of
alleged Hamas-affiliated institutions in Nablus,
including schools, medical centres, media outlets and
civic associations. Israel has outlawed 36 international
non-governmental organizations, charging them with
fundraising for Hamas. Israeli troops raided the Nablus
municipality, arrested elected Palestinian Authority
officials and ordered the closure of Nablus' main
shopping mall.

Palestinian Authority officials, including Prime
Minister Fayyad, have criticized those operations as
3
undermining the economy and the Authority's efforts to
improve security in the West Bank. Palestinian security
forces have continued their efforts to impose law and
order and to disarm and arrest militants, in compliance
with Palestinian obligations under phase I of the Road
Map. We are concerned about the effects of Israeli
raids on the efforts of Palestinian security forces to
operate effectively in areas under their control.

On 2 July, three Israeli civilians, including two
women, were killed and 30 others injured, when a
Palestinian from East Jerusalem used a bulldozer to
attack vehicles in West Jerusalem. The Secretary-
General condemned that attack. This morning, as I am
sure the Council is aware, a similar attack took place
again, resulting in the injury of two Israelis.

Meanwhile, in the West Bank, three Palestinians,
including one civilian, were killed by the IDF, and 136
others were injured, including at least 22 children.
Most of the injuries occurred during anti-barrier
demonstrations and were caused by rubber bullets and
tear gas. On three occasions since mid-June, Israeli
settlers are reported to have fired a total of six rockets
towards the Palestinian villages of Burin, southwest of
Nablus. On 12 July, Israeli police arrested a settler
suspected of manufacturing and launching those
projectiles and seized explosives and weapons in the
settlement of Yizhar. Subsequently, on 21 July, another
rocket was fired from the settlement.

Construction activity in Israeli settlements across
the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, has
continued in the reporting period, and on 3 July, it was
reported that Defense Minister Ehud Barak had
approved construction for a new building in the Beit
Romano settlement in Hebron's old city.

As the Secretary-General has stressed many times
before, Israeli construction in settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory is contrary to
international law and contrary to Israel's commitments
under the Road Map and the Annapolis process. He
urges Israel to heed the clear call of the Quartet to
freeze all settlement activity, including natural growth,
and to dismantle outposts erected since March 2001.

Across the West Bank, a slight deterioration in
movement and access has been observed, at a time
when we had hoped for improvement. Four significant
obstacles that had been removed during June were
reinstalled by the IDF in July, bringing the total
number of closure obstacles to 609. In addition, Israel

is renovating the Wadi Nar or Container checkpoint,
controlling movement from the north to the southern
part of the West Bank, rather than honouring its prior
commitment to remove it.

A recent report by the Office of the Coordinator
of Humanitarian Affairs confirmed that 56 per cent of
the planned route of the barrier has now been
constructed. The majority of the construction deviates
from the Green Line and is therefore contrary to the
2004 Advisory Opinion of the International Court of
Justice.

The report found that only 20 per cent of farmers
in the northern West Bank, who used to farm their land
west of the barrier, are being issued permits by the
Israeli authorities to access their land. This increases
dependency on food and humanitarian assistance and it
is undermining livelihoods as well.

Let me turn now to the Palestinian economic
situation. Owing to budget shortfalls this month, the
Palestinian Authority barely managed to make salary
payments for June. It plans to pay July salaries through
loans and donor aid, but will need an additional $600
million in order to stay solvent from August through
December - excluding aid for development projects.
We urge all donors who have not yet fulfilled their
pledges at the December 2007 donors' conference to
provide budget support in order to avert a financial
cr1s1s.

The Chair of the Paris Conference, France, and
the three co-chairs, Norway, the European Commission
and the Quartet representative, met on 7 July to discuss
developments since the donor conference in December
2007. A meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee is
scheduled to be held in September on the margins of
the General Assembly.

Another round of indirect talks between Syria and
Israel, mediated by Turkey, is expected later this month
and will be followed by further talks in August. The
Secretary-General expressed his appreciation for
Turkey's efforts and his support for these talks in his
meetings with Prime Minister Erdogan, President
Assad and Prime Minister Olmert in Paris.

Special Coordinator Serry visited Damascus and
underlined United Nations support for the important
efforts on this track. The Government of Syria raised
the issue of prisoners from the occupied Syrian Golan
with Mr. Serry and I note here the release from Israeli

08-4326]
custody of Sitan Al-Wali on 8 July. The situation in the
occupied Syrian Golan has remained quiet through the
reporting period, although settlement activity
continues.

Yesterday Syrian Foreign Minister Mouallem
arrived in Beirut, where he handed over to Lebanese
President Michel Sleiman an official invitation to visit
Syria. We urge both countries to establish full
diplomatic relations and representation, consistent with
Security Council resolution 1680 (2006).

As for Lebanon, we applaud the major step
forward taken on 11 July, when President Sleiman
announced that agreement had been reached on the
composition of the national unity cabinet, subject to a
vote of confidence in Parliament in the coming weeks.
The Secretary-General welcomed this development and
reiterated his call upon all parties to continue to work
towards the full implementation of the Doha Accord.
The United Nations looks forward to working closely
with the new Government.

An important achievement of the reporting period
was the implementation of the major humanitarian
aspects of resolution 1701 (2006). On 16 July, the
bodies of the two abducted soldiers were returned to
Israel, in exchange for Lebanese detainees and
remains. The Secretary-General's Facilitator has
worked with great perseverance for almost two years
and will be submitting a full report to the Secretary-
General in the coming period.

As you are aware, the Secretary-General has
received letters from the Government of Israel and
from Hizbullah, committing themselves to further
humanitarian action. The Secretary-General will
continue to keep the Council informed of these and
other developments.

A number of security incidents occurred in and
around the northern city of Tripoli and other parts of
the country during the reporting period. We are
concerned about these clashes and the implication they
have for the stability and security of Lebanon. We
welcome steps taken by the Lebanese authorities to
improve security around Tripoli.

Since the last Security Council briefing, United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon's (UNIFIL) area of
operations has remained generally quiet. The Lebanese
Armed Forces (LAF) Command has not yet returned
the army units that it redeployed out of the area of
operations in May, due to the security situation in other
parts of the country. The UNIFIL Force Commander
has called on the LAF Command to return those units
as quickly as possible.

In the meantime, UNIFIL and the LAF are
working to ensure that the shortage of units does not
adversely affect their ability to carry out their
obligations under resolution 1701 (2006).

Over the reporting period, UNIFIL has continued
to record significant numbers of Israeli air violations,
which have occurred on an almost daily basis. We
again urge Israel to cease these violations.

The reduction of violence in Gaza is a significant,
but fragile, achievement. We hope that this calm can be
sustained and, together with internal Palestinian
dialogue, lead to other positive steps: the return of the
legitimate Palestinian Authority to the Gaza Strip, the
reopening of the crossings, the release of Gilad Shalit
and a number of Palestinian prisoners and the
reunification of Gaza and the West Bank under the
legitimate Palestinian Authority on a basis that allows
the peace process to move forward.

We are encouraged by the determination of the
parties to continue negotiations within the Annapolis
framework, and by the active role of the United States
and other members of the international community. The
Quartet will meet in September here in New York and
in the period between now and then it is important that
progress continue. It is vital that there are visible
improvements in the situation on the ground, in the
consolidation of the ceasefire in Gaza and in improved
conditions in the West Bank.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that the Secretary-
General remains committed to a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003).

