Mr. Logar (Slovenia): First of all, I thank Spain
for its efforts in convening today's meeting. We also
welcome the adoption of resolution 2325 (2016).

Slovenia also aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union earlier today. I
would now like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

Slovenia supports the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
strengthen global capacity to prevent, detect and
respond to the use of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) for terrorist purposes. The response to that
threat must be coherent and comprehensive by using
all instruments at our disposal for effective action, as
also emphasized in this year's review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I will
briefly touch upon the practical measures adopted by
my country to prevent non-State actors from accessing
WMD technology.

Slovenia submitted its fourth national report on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) last month
and joined the Group of Friends of resolution 1540
(2004) to help to encourage greater transparency in the
resolution's implementation. We believe that a regional
approach prevents duplication and overlapping,
creates synergies and enhances the effectiveness of
a response compared to an individual response. Due
to its geographic position, the region of the Western
Balkans will remain in Da'esh's sights as a possible
transit and logistics route between Europe and Syria or
Iraq, including for the trafficking of weapons of mass
destruction and that is why it remains in our particular
focus. As a practical measure, we have expanded the
Slovenian-led Western Balkan Counter Terrorism
Initiative, which links individual initiatives in that area
with the integrity of the integrative internal security
governance concept, which includes measures against
serious and organized crime, as well as those on
border security.

As a country with an operating nuclear power
plant, a research reactor, a central storage facility for
institutional waste and more than 1,000 sources of
ionizing radiation, Slovenia attaches great importance
to nuclear security. Several ministries in my country
are involved in nuclear security matters, all in the
first line of defence against the illicit trafficking of
radioactive and nuclear materials. We highly value the
central role of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in the global nuclear security framework. Slovenia is
a member the Board of Governors for the third time
since our independence. We also welcome the entry
into force of the Amendment to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, which
specifically refers to the protection of nuclear facilities
and material in use, storage, as well as transport and
provides for expanded cooperation among States.

In conclusion, I wish to reassure the Council
that Slovenia will continue to implement resolution
1540 (2004) as well as the recommendations of the
comprehensive review and we call upon all States to
do the same.

