Mr. Kouliev (Azerbaijan) (spoke in Russian): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of Georgia, Uzbekistan,
Ukraine, Azerbaijan and the Republic of Moldova on the
question of civilians in armed conflict.

At the outset, I should like to thank the members of
the Security Council for the unflagging attention that they
have been giving to the issue of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. This is not merely an acute problem of
life today, but a priority for the international community,
especially the Security Council. I should also like to thank
the delegation of Canada for taking the initiative of
holding a debate on this item in the Security Council.
Your delegation's efforts, Sir, are designed to give real
content to the concept of human security and to make it
concrete through practical actions.

The States in our group are grateful to the Secretary-
General for his report on this issue, contained in
document S/1999/957, which includes specific
recommendations as to how the Security Council, acting
within its mandate, could enhance the level of physical
and legal protection for civilians in armed conflict.

 

Our debate today can be seen as an integral part of the
ongoing process within the Security Council to work out
comprehensive approaches to the settlement of conflict
situations that will not only enable us to put an end to
violence and reduce to a minimum the suffering of the
civilian population, but help in the search for stable and
lasting solutions to the conflicts themselves.
As we see it, there are at least two aspects to this
issue, so we must take an approach that is appropriate for
each one. The first aspect relates to ensuring the physical
protection of the civilian population, the consideration of
which is among the responsibilities of the Security Council.
The second aspect is more general. A unique mechanism
exists, consisting of various elements ranging from the body
of international humanitarian law to the activities of various
humanitarian organizations that try to protect the rights of
civilians in armed conflicts and to provide them with
assistance.

During earlier meetings of the Council focusing on
this issue, almost all the speakers agreed that in armed
conflict today there is an increasing tendency for civilians
to be deliberately and arbitrarily targeted for attack,
subjected to violence and killed. We are greatly concerned
by the fact that genocide, ethnic cleansing and other gross
violations of human rights have not only become linked to
modern armed conflicts, but, in manner of speaking, have
developed into just another way of waging war.

With regard to this burning issue, some of the
countries in our group can speak not merely on the basis of
hearsay, but from experience of the tragic consequences of
such actions. The States in our group would like to
emphasize that the civilian population must never be
targeted in armed conflict, regardless of their political,
ideological, racial, ethnic or religious nature or for any
other reasons. Obviously, unless there is an appropriate
response to such violence against civilians, those negative
tendencies will continue to develop and may even become
irreversible, with the result that more and more people will
be dragged into the conflict, the area of the conflict will
grow increasingly larger and peace and stability will be
threatened, which in turn will provide fertile ground for the
emergence or strengthening of ethnic hatred.

Of particular concern is the situation of internally
displaced persons. Today, there are over 20 million people
in this category, which needs sufficient attention on the part
of the international community. During earlier meetings of
the Council on this issue, Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, drew our attention to the fact that the
most vulnerable group of the population is displaced
persons.

In this connection, the States in our group regard as
extremely important the work being done by Mr. Francis
Deng, Representative of the Secretary-General on
Internally Displaced Persons. We would also like to note
how much we appreciate the work done by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees,
headed by Mrs. Sadako Ogata. We also appreciate the
work done by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, headed by Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello.

Attention must also be given to the problem of the
return of refugees and other displaced persons to their
former homes when the territory is not controlled by the
legitimate Government. We are speaking about physical
and legal protection for those persons. Armed conflict
which has not been completely resolved can flare up
again with renewed force, giving rise to a new wave of
violence against civilians and bringing all prior
peacemaking efforts to nothing.

We would also note the special link of modern
armed conflict with aggressive separatism and religious
extremism. These negative phenomena today are one of
the main challenges of the twenty-first century. Our group
of countries regards them as one of the root causes of
bloodshed and continuing military conflicts that directly
threaten the lives of the civilian population, regardless of
their racial, ethnic or religious identity.

The countries of our group believe that today one
particularly crucial issue is coordinating efforts by the
world community as it seeks legal mechanisms and
instruments for combatting terrorism. Our countries
strongly support the initiative of Uzbekistan - made
public at the Istanbul summit of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in 1999 - on the
establishment of an international centre to combat
terrorism.

Another issue of particular concern involves the
illicit supplying of weapons to areas of conflict. We must
step up our efforts to put an end to this. Halting the flow
of weapons, including small arms and light weapons, into
areas of chronic instability can be one of the main
elements of a strategy to combat acts of violence against
civilians and humanitarian personnel. In this context, we
cannot fail to be deeply disturbed over violations of arms

 

embargoes imposed by the Council. We strongly advocate
strengthening the effectiveness of such embargoes. At the
same time, it is quite clear that unless we solve the question
of how to prevent and limit the uncontrolled proliferation
of weapons, it will be difficult to settle conflicts and ensure
security for civilians. Here we can only agree with the
recommendations of the Secretary-General that arms-
exporting countries should at least exercise restraint,
especially when exporting weapons to areas of conflict or
tension.
The States belonging to our group believe that the best
way of protecting civilians in armed conflicts is to
effectively prevent conflict. The root cause of humanitarian
crises must be removed by using inter-ethnic reconciliation,
confidence-building measures and economic development
and by supporting national stability.

We also believe that regardless of where and when
conflict erupts, it is necessary to urge the parties involved
to put an end to the conflicts as quickly as possible by
peaceful means. They should also strictly comply with the
norms of international law, and insofar as they can, they
should provide protection and assistance to civilians. They
should not allow any kind of violent attacks on civilians,
and they should not allow any interference with the delivery
of humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance of
efforts to achieve consensus in the United Nations, on the
basis of which one can integrate, in a balanced way, the
work being done by the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council, the specialized
agencies and other international participants to develop the
best possible conceptual framework for ensuring more
scrupulous respect for the norms of international law, on
the one hand, and, on the other hand, to move beyond the
provision of humanitarian assistance into the area of
organization-building and socio-economic development.

It is our hope that the Security Council, once it adopts
the important draft resolution on this item today, will very
carefully monitor the protection of civilians and react
appropriately to all cases where the lives and security of
peaceful people are threatened.

