Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed; the Director-General of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Mr. Jose Graziano da Silva; the Director-General of
the World Health Organization, Mr. Tedros Adhanom
Ghebreyesus; and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, for their briefings.

I would especially like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened today's briefing.

The tragic situation in Yemen must continue to be
the subject of ongoing public scrutiny by the Security
Council and by the Members of the Organization. Our
most recent presidential statement on this topic was
issued on 15 June (S/PRST/2017/7). It is a long statement,
which describes the entire situation in Yemen and the
opinion of the Security Council on the steps to be taken.
Just two days after the statement was issued, actions
certainly spoke louder than words and could almost
be interpreted as a direct response it. I will now read
from a statement provided to us by Mr. McGoldrick, the
Humanitarian Coordinator in Yemen:

"On 17 June, at least 22 civilians, including six
children, were reported killed and injured in a series
of air attacks on a market in Saada governorate,
near the border with Saudi Arabia. There were no
reported military targets in the proximity of the
market at the time of the attack and no warning was
issued to civilians in the area".

The statement mentioned air attacks. As far as
we know, the so-called Yemeni rebels do not have air
assets. That means that the attacks were perpetrated by
some other group operating in the region. According
to the information we have, Yemeni President
Mr. Mansour Hadi exercises no control whatsoever
over air operations being carried out in his country. We
do not know what type of strategic value a market could
have that would justify such an attack. Nonetheless, it is
time to demand that those who carry out such barbaric
attacks and those who provide logistical support and
weaponry immediately cease such actions, which are a
violation of international humanitarian law.

We endorse the call to the international community
made in August 2016 by Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
to establish a mechanism to investigate violations
of fundamental rights committed in Yemen. The
perpetrators of such gross violations of international
humanitarian law must be held accountable for
their crimes. The Security Council has all of the
competencies required to establish impartial and
transparent mechanisms to investigate the violations of
international humanitarian law reported in Yemen and
committed by both parties to the conflict.

There is no military solution to the conflict. It is
through negotiations and peace talks alone that peace
will be restored to the Yemeni people. Nonetheless, the
parties are showing no signs of reaching an agreement
that would lead to a political solution, without
preconditions and in good faith, to end this protracted
conflict. Actors must assume that concessions must be
made in order to break the deadlock.

More than two years of conflict in Yemen have
caused not only a humanitarian disaster and the most
serious food insecurity crisis in the world, with millions
of people needing food aid daily in order to survive; the
violence has also weakened Yemen and has affected the
lives of millions of Yemenis.

Our own sensitivity is yet another victim of the
tragic events in Yemen. Here at the United Nations, we
have become accustomed to creating euphemisms so we
talk about food insecurity when we are really describing
a complete dearth of food. We talk about people who
are food insecure, instead of saying that they do not
have food to meet basic daily dietary requirements.

In this brutal war, the lives of people in vulnerable
groups, such as women and children, are seriously
and adversely affected by ongoing hostilities and the
humanitarian crisis. According to recent reports,
education and health, which has worsened by an
outbreak of cholera, and the nutrition of children are
all under threat. Uruguay takes this opportunity to
commend and support the work of the newly appointed
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, and
awaits her annual report. In that regard, Uruguay trusts
that this year, a comprehensive list of all parties that
commit serious violations against children in Yemen
will be issued. In spite of the calls of the international
community, the Yemeni people continue to endure
widespread violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.

In conclusion, I reiterate Uruguay's support
for the work carried out by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, and thank him for his tireless efforts to find
a peaceful solution to the conflict. At the same time,
once again, Uruguay deeply thanks and acknowledges
all humanitarian workers and institutions in Yemen for
their courageous efforts to assist the millions ofvictims
of a terrible conflict.

