The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Turkey
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misie' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Celem (Turkey) took the seat reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 1019 (1995)
on violations of international humanitarian law in the areas
of Srebrenica, Zepa, Banja Luka and Sanski Most. The
report is contained in document S/1995/988.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1995/1047, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Argentina, France, Germany, Italy,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.

I should like to inform members of the Council that
the Czech Republic has become a co-sponsor of the draft
resolution.
I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following technical changes which should
be made to the text of the draft resolution contained in
document S/ 1995/ 1047.

In the second line of operative paragraph 2 in the
English text, the word "in" after the words "human
rights" should be replaced by the word "by". In the fifth
line of operative paragraph 5, after the words "within the
areas of" the words "the Republic of" should be deleted.
In the penultimate line of the same paragraph, after the
word "of" at the beginning of the line, the words "the
Republic of" should be deleted. In the third line of
operative paragraph 14, after the words "in the areas in"
the words "the Republic of" should be deleted.

The first speaker is the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on whom I now call.


