Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Like other members of the Security Council,
I too am pleased to see the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Kazakhstan presiding over today's meeting, which
is dedicated to strengthening confidence-building
measures. Unfortunately, around the world and in
the Security Council in particular, there is indeed
insufficient confidence and insufficient trust, and that is
evident. What kind oftrust or confidence can there be if
some countries - and given that Russia was mentioned
by name, I will take the liberty to mention them by name:
the United States and the United Kingdom - continue
to manipulate the Security Council and the social
sentiment of the international community?

Perhaps their statements were written in advance,
and they did not have sufficient time to revise their
drafts after they had heard our statement. But, no,
this is being done deliberately. We are deliberately not
being heard, and our positions are being distorted. They
erroneously claim that we are responsible for closing
the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) because we
vetoed the draft resolution on its extension. However,
they shamefully forget to mention that we proposed a
draft resolution that would have extended the JIM. and
improve its effectiveness, efficiency, professionalism
and impartiality, which they did not allowed to be
adopted. We proposed that draft resolution because the
JIM. completely discredited itself with a mendacious
report that withstood no criticism.

I would ask a couple of rhetorical questions. Who in
essence vetoed our draft resolution, and who was the last
to do it? It is those very countries - the United States
and the United Kingdom - that, without blinking an
eye, are today accusing us of doing this. Who closed the
JIM? I will say once again what was already repeatedly
said in consultations on the Syrian chemical-weapons
dossier: Stop your games at the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons - we know the aim
of those games - and demonstrate your readiness to
establish a genuinely independent and professional
mechanism, if you want honest cooperation, and not a
smokescreen for political manipulation". The needed
trust would then emerge.

There should be no illusions about this. We need
a new mechanism that is approved by the Security
Council. In our View, any other alternatives or
agreements in a narrow format will be illegitimate.

