Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting. I would also like to thank Mr. Lacroix, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and the three United Nations peacekeeping mission
Force Commanders for their briefings. I want to pay
tribute to the Commanders and the more than 90,000
peacekeepers currently deployed all over the world
in peacekeeping missions, and to express my deepest
condolences to the families of the peacekeepers who
have made the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty.

The environment in which United Nations
peacekeeping operations are deployed and the mandates
they are supposed to implement are increasingly
complex. Both the security risks for peacekeepers,
and casualties among them, are on the rise. There is
a mismatch between the ever-increasing demands
of mandates and the limited resources available for
them. In accordance with its mandates, the Security
Council should play a part in helping United Nations
peacekeeping missions cope better with new challenges
when meeting the responsibilities they are assigned
by the Security Council. First, it is important to be
proactive in facilitating the political settlement process
of regional hotspot issues. Some protracted hotspot
issues have resulted in the continuing deterioration of
the security situation in the region and its surrounding
areas, with serious effects on the performance of
other peacekeeping operations in the same region.
The international community should step up efforts
to settle regional hotspot issues in the region, while
the peacekeeping operations should be responsive to
efforts to create the conditions conducive to the political
settlement of hotspot issues.

Secondly, peacekeeping missions need clear,
feasible and focused mandates. They should be able to
focus on the central task of peacekeeping and to abide
by peacekeeping's three main principles, while taking
into full consideration such factors as the situation on
the ground, existing resources and troop-contributing
countries' capacities to help host countries strengthen
their own security capacity. The work of adjusting to
priority tasks and work priorities during each stage
should be dynamic, according to the changes in the
situation on the ground. Furthermore, when conditions
permit and when the countries concerned request it, it
is essential to formulate a practical and feasible exit
strategy in a timely manner. When mandates are being
designed or readjusted, troop-contributing countries
should be given more opportunities to participate
in discussions.

Thirdly, the Secretariat should be guided to
strengthen support for peacekeeping operations. The
Secretariat and missions should pay attention to the
security and safety of peacekeepers, develop security
rules for peacekeepers and enhance early-warning and
internal information sharing against security threats.
They should ensure the availability of life-saving and
life-sustaining services and medical evacuation in
high-risk environments. The report on improving the
security of United Nations peacekeepers proposed
several recommendations, and we hope that the
Secretariat will discuss them with Member States and
implement them.

China is a major contributor of troops to
peacekeeping operations and the second largest
contributor to the peacekeeping budget. At present, 2,500
Chinese peacekeepers are on active duty in 10 missions.
China is actively implementing various commitments
announced by President Xi Jinping in further support
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, and we are
ready to work with the general membership to improve
the United Nations peacekeeping system in a joint
effort to maintain international peace and security.

Lastly, I would like to ask what the main factors are
affecting peacekeeping operations" ability to respond
to security threats. Are inadequate equipment and
resources the main difficulty?

