Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): Let me just start
by saying how saddened we are at the horrific attack
in New York. We convey our condolences to everyone
affected, and our thoughts are with them.

Let me also thank France for its presidency last
month and welcome Italy as well as wish it good luck
for this month.

Let me begin by thanking the High Commissioner
for being here and briefing us today. Our work and that
ofthe High Commissioner and his Office are intimately
linked. For when we fail to prevent or resolve conflict,
it is the High Commissioner and the staff of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) that stand with neighbouring countries and
humanitarian partners to provide refuge and relief to
those forced to flee their homes. At the same time,
how the international community responds to forced
displacement across borders has clear consequences for
international peace and security.

There are now more people than ever in need
of UNHCR's assistance. We commend the High
Commissioner and his staff for their continued
leadership and for providing a voice to refugees, who
arrive with nothing except heartbreak, fear and their
futures stolen and erased by conflict and displacement.
High Commissioner Grandi began his presentation
at the border between Myanmar and Bangladesh.
Like him, we are deeply concerned by the situation
in Myanmar and Bangladesh. We know he needs our
support to respond to the needs of those on both sides
of the border. We welcome the important financial
contributions to the response made at the Myanmar
conference in Geneva some weeks ago, and we
encourage all Member States to ensure that he and his
partners have the resources they need to do theirjob.

If the Rohingya refugees are to return home, a
political solution to the crisis is essential. Sweden fully
supports the way forward laid out by the Secretary-
General. We must address the immediate crisis by
ending the violence and ensuring humanitarian access,
while at the same time taking steps to achieve a lasting
resolution to the conflict in Rakhine state. This includes
the issue of citizenship for the Rohingya. Only then
will refugees be able to return home voluntarily and to
dignified conditions, where they can begin to rebuild
their lives with confidence in the future.

The United Nations should be invited to assist in
this process. UNHCR has a key role to play in providing
support, expertise and experience in upholding
international standards, and ensuring sustainable
conditions for return.

Sweden was one of the original 26 countries
that negotiated the 1951 Convention. Since then, our
commitment to the plight of refugees has not waned.
Today UNHCR continues to have our full political
support. The growing numbers of forcibly displaced
people mean that there is also a need for enhanced
and sustained financial support for UNHCR and other
humanitarian organizations. Support is not needed only
in those places that are currently grabbing the headlines,
but also, as the High Commissioner reminded us today,
in protracted situations that risk being forgotten, such
as the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We encourage all Council members to maintain
and increase their financial support to UNHCR, in
particular through flexible, unearmaked financing that
allows UNHCR to respond quickly in crisis situations.
The High Commissioner has illustrated the
clear links between conflict and refugee flows. As
I mentioned at the beginning of my statement, the
inability to prevent and resolve conflicts often results
in large-scale refugee flows that have enormous human
and political costs. These flows often in turn contribute
to instability and conflict, resulting in a mutually
reinforcing cycle of conflict and displacement.

The protracted refugee crisis in Syria is a clear
illustration of the need for early warning and early
action to prevent conflicts and subsequent forced
displacement. We commend UNHCR's efforts in
addressing the needs of the millions of displaced
persons resulting from the Syria crisis.

We agree with the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner that we must redouble our efforts to
prevent conflict from emerging, to manage and end
conflicts when they do, and to prevent a slide back into
conflict when peace is achieved. That is the mission of
the United Nations, and all parts of the Organization
must work together to that end. The Council must live
up to its responsibility by using all the tools at our
disposal to end conflict and sustain peace. By doing so,
we can enable people to return home.

International humanitarian law and human rights
law are essential for the protection of the lives, health
and dignity or persons caught up in conflict. They must
be respected at all times. In addition, humanitarian
organizations must be given full and unimpeded
humanitarian access to refugees in need of assistance
and protection. Half of the world's refugees are
children. Refugee children, particularly unaccompanied
minors, are particularly vulnerable and should receive
protection, health care, education, psychosocial support
and the hope needed to rebuild their futures.

Humanitarian relief can be only one part of
the response to forced displacement. Millions of
people around the world are trapped in protracted
refugee situations and living in limbo. Providing
dignity, particularly for refugees trapped in these
circumstances, requires both short-term approaches
and long-term, durable solutions. We continue to see
generosity and solidarity towards refugees across
the world. It is essential that we recognize the role of
those countries and communities that are hosting large
number of refugees and provide them with support.
Working together, the international community and
host-country Governments can provide for refugees'
self-reliance, livelihood opportunities and host-
community development. This will also help to
maximize the positive contribution that refugees
make to their host communities. We also welcome the
important partnership of UNHCR with the World Bank
in this regard.

By working closely together, the United Nations
system can ensure that refugees are not left behind in
development processes. We strongly support UNHCR's
coordination roll, building on the Comprehensive
Refugee Response Framework, in reaching agreement
on the global compact on refugees, to be adopted next
year. The new global compact will provide an important
framework for comprehensive responses to large-scale
and protracted displacement.

Let me conclude by thanking High Commissioner
Grandi once again for his briefing. In light of the clear
interlinkages between our work and his, we would
encourage the High Commissioner to come back to the
Council more often and to alert us when he believes
early action or support from the Council is needed. We
would also welcome the opportunity to receive another
update and to have another broad exchange with him in
the course of 2018.

