Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): As the
Permanent Representative of Germany just recalled,
the convening of this debate a few days after the
remarkable mobilization that we witnessed during
the Climate Action Summit highlights very aptly the
crucial importance of listening to what young people
have to say to us and of including future generations
in the discussions and decisions that should enable us
to overcome the current crises and challenges together.
Interaction and unity among generations are vital. In that
regard, I would like to thank our young briefers today
for sharing their experiences and recommendations.

France's commitment to peace and development in
Africa is known. In Ouagadougou in November 2017,
President Macron outlined the basis of our partnership
with Africa, which is founded not only on achieving
peace and security and promoting development and
innovation, but also above all on the African youth, who
are central to our common future and whose fulfilment
is a vital component. There can be no stability or lasting
peace if the needs and expectations of young people
are ignored.

The path to lasting peace in Africa cannot be
limited to a military response to crises and threats.
A broader approach is needed, as Ms. Aya Chebbi,
Ms. Hafsa Ahmed and Mr. Victor Ochen very eloquently
described. Moreover, that is the main goal of the
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative, which
France supports. That goal cannot be achieved without
the full and active participation of young people and
without them having the means to meet their needs for
social recognition, professional and personal success
and, more broadly, political direction and hope.

They are optimistic and mobilized and we should
both acknowledge and encourage them through words
and, above all, deeds. There are many specific and very
enlightening examples of initiatives led by committed
young women and men across the continent. I believe
that we were all impressed by the determination of
Burkina Faso's youth to defend on two occasions,
sometimes at the cost of their lives, the benefits of
democracy and the rule of law in Burkina Faso. I
personally admire young people's ability to act and to
unite by using social networking and by developing new
and often more creative and participatory techniques.

The commitment to democracy of young people
in Tunisia during and following the revolution was
striking. I witnessed their drive during my previous
post in Tunisia, in particular at the Youth Forum,
organized with the support of France.

We also support the work of the United Nations
Development Programme in cooperation with the
African Union to strengthen the capacities of young
women and men through an approach that links the
Silencing the Guns initiative and the youth and peace
and security agenda.
Unfortunately, contrary to what should happen,
young people continue to be victim to stereotyping
and discrimination. They remain largely excluded from
decision-making processes, political institutions and
the labour market. They are sometimes seen only, or
primarily, as troublemakers or a breeding ground for
violent extremism. Those stereotypes are too often used
as pretexts to disregard their demands, to violate their
rights or even to use violence against them. Among
youth, young women are the hardest hit by injustices,
exclusion and discriminatory social norms, particularly
during conflicts. In that regard, France supports the
women and peace and security agenda, which aims in
particular to promote the voice of women and young
women in order to build lasting peace.

We must guarantee respect for the most fundamental
rights of all young people, including the freedom of
expression and the right to peaceful demonstration.
Youth must be able to participate in decision-making
processes and be fully taken into account in peace
settlements. As it has been suggested, it would be very
useful to have young people brief the Council on a
regular basis, including on country-specific situations.

To enable young people to live up to their full
potential, education is the number-one priority for
France. It is the best way to prevent opposition to the
spread of knowledge and shifts towards violence. France
has made education its priority at the international
and national levels, with more than €300 million
contributed for basic education in Africa through the
Global Partnership for Education and through bilateral
aid. That commitment was reiterated at the Group of
Seven Summit presided over by France, specifically
during the meeting of the Development and Education
Ministers, to which youth representatives from the
Sahel countries were been invited.

France has also decided to revise its development
policy in order to adopt a partnership-based approach
aimed at better involving civil society, young people,
businesses and diasporas. France will also ensure
that youth is at the centre of the Generation Equality
Forum 2020, which is being jointly organized by UN-
Women, France and Mexico, to be held in Paris in July
of next year.

France calls on all actors to commit to enabling
the active participation of young people in building
international peace and security. We therefore welcome
the call for initiatives launched by the International
Organization of la Francophonie aimed at civil society
youth organizations. We also look forward to the
recommendations to be made by the Secretary-General
in his report on the implementation of resolutions 2250
(2015) and 2419 (2018), which established the youth,
peace and security agenda. It is indeed high time to
fully seize the immense potential of young people to
achieve and maintain international peace and security
in order to build just, peaceful and inclusive societies,
while also respecting nature, as we have all collectively
endorsed within the framework of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

I would like to conclude on a literary note by
paraphrasing Amadou Hampate' Ba, who once said that
human life is like a big tree and that each generation is
like a gardener. We therefore have a great deal to do in
order to tend to our shared garden.

