The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Uganda in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lukwiya
(Uganda) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is grateful for the
efforts undertaken by His Excellency
Mr. Joaquim Chissano, former President of
Mozambique, as the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA)-affected areas. The Council
expresses its appreciation for his briefing of
17 December 2008, and agrees with his
recommendation that the peace efforts should
continue. The Council welcomes President
Chissano's readiness to continue in his role for a
further period.

"The Security Council reiterates its
welcome for the Final Peace Agreement (FPA),
negotiated between the Government of Uganda
and the LRA, and reached through the Juba Peace
Process. The Council commends the Government
of Uganda for its continued commitment to the
FPA and its investment in the peace process.
"The Security Council condemns the
repeated failure of Joseph Kony to sign the FPA.
It calls upon the LRA to sign and honour the FPA
immediately and to begin the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration to
ensure a peaceful, political solution.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the recent attacks by the LRA in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Southern Sudan,
which pose a continuing threat to regional
security. It demands that the LRA cease its
recruitment and use of children and that it release
immediately all women, children and other
non-combatants, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005). The Council
reiterates its deep concern at the long-running
and brutal insurgency by the LRA which has
caused the death, abduction and displacement of
thousands of innocent civilians in Uganda, the
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

"The Security Council recalls the
International Criminal Court arrest warrants for
certain LRA leaders on charges of, among other
things, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
including murder, rape and the enlistment of
children through abduction. The Council recalls
its statement of June 2006 (PRST/2006/28), and
reaffirms that it attaches vital importance to
promoting justice and the rule of law, including
respect for human rights, as an indispensable
element for lasting peace. The Council reaffirms
that ending impunity is essential for a society
recovering from conflict to come to terms with
past abuses committed against civilians and to
prevent their recurrence.

"The Security Council commends the States
in the region for their increased cooperation, and
welcomes the joint efforts they have made to
address the security threat posed by the LRA. The
Council calls upon these States to ensure that all
actions are carried out in accordance with
international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law and to take appropriate measures to
protect civilians. The Council encourages these
States to keep the United Nations missions in the
region informed about their actions.
the

"The Security Council welcomes the
re-establishment of peace and security in northern
Uganda. It encourages the Government of
Uganda, with the support of international
partners, to honour its commitment to accelerate
reconciliation, recovery and development in that
region through rapid implementation of its Peace,
Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) and
relevant agenda items in the FPA and to disburse
anticipated financing for the PRDP without delay.

"The Security Council will continue to
monitor the situation closely."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/48.
08-66447

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

Expression of thanks to outgoing members of the
Council


The President: This may be the last day of
meetings of the Security Council for December 2008. I
would like, on behalf of the Council, to express the
sincere appreciation of the Council to the five outgoing
members, namely Belgium, Indonesia, Italy, Panama
and South Africa. I know I speak on behalf of the
Council when I commend those five members for their
hard work and contributions during their 2007-2008
term on the Security Council.

The meeting rose at noon.

