Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
expressing our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening today's open meeting to review the situation
in the Balkans.

The Balkans remain high on the international
community's agenda as one of our most pressing
issues. This is particularly so because the memories are
still fresh of the events of recent years, when we
witnessed the most brutal genocide and ethnic
cleansing at the heart of Europe in over half a century.
The wars are over now, but it is now time to work to
consolidate peace through reconciliation and
reconstruction processes and to minimize the prospects
ofthe recurrence of violence.

In the context of the conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the signing of the Dayton Peace Accords
was a landmark achievement, as the parties took a
historic decision at Dayton to embrace peace by
rejecting the path of war, destruction and devastation.
The journey ahead was arduous, considering the deep
fissures and cleavages caused to the very fabric of that
society by the fratricidal war. The people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina deserve commendation for their courage
and determination to accept peace and reconciliation as
their collective goal.

During the last five years, the progress along the
path of peace has been substantial, though it still
remains fragile. The international community has been
playing a pivotal rote in supporting the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the rebuilding of their
country. It is a recognized fact that there cannot be a
durable peace unless it is consciously and carefully
nurtured by the people. Being the main beneficiaries of
peace, they have to consolidate and strengthen peace.

Pakistan has always emphasized that faithful
implementation of the Dayton Accords is central to
durable peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina as a united,
sovereign and independent State. While the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina has fulfilled
its obligations to a large extent, the Republika Srpska
is lagging behind in vital areas. We are particularly
concerned at the lack of progress on the return of
refugees and displaced persons, cooperation with the
International Tribunal for war crimes, freedom of
movement across the inter-entity boundary lines, the
establishment of common State institutions, judicial
and police reform and sustainable economic
development.

The three communities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina need to recognize the benefit of mutual
cooperation in the nation- building process.

It is unfortunate that, despite concerns expressed
by the international community, the war criminals still
remain at large, mostly in the territories of the
Republika Srpska and Serbia. The parties must
implement the solemn commitments made at Dayton to
pursue and apprehend war criminals. Pakistan believes
that those who participated in mass killings must not
go unpunished anywhere in the world, be it in
Srebrenica, in Rwanda, in Kosovo or in Kashmir.
While some progress has been achieved in
making the common State institutions effective and
operational, a lot still needs to be done in this respect.
Progress is relatively slow in the revival of Bosnia's
economic and social structure. A comprehensive
approach to economic reform would facilitate a
homogeneous development of economic and trade
between the two entities and across inter-entity
boundary lines. On their part, the donor countries and
agencies must continue to provide the required
financial and technical support.

Pakistan extended unequivocal moral, political,
financial and material support to the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in defence of international law and
morality and as proof of our solidarity with them. Our
support was and continues to be the manifestation of
our conviction that no nation should be victimized
because of its weakness and vulnerability, no people
should be brutalized because of ethno-religious origin
and no nation or people should be denied their inherent
right to self-determination and right to wage a
legitimate struggle for freedom.

I will now turn to the developments concerning
Kosovo. The massive human tragedy which unfolded in
Kosovo over a year ago was a source of deep distress
and anxiety for the people of Pakistan, as it was for
people all over the world. It was particularly shocking
that, soon after Bosnia and Herzegovina, we witnessed
yet another campaign of genocide and ethnic cleansing
in the Balkans by the same regime. The Belgrade
authorities pursued systematic and deliberate policies
of hatred and intolerance, aimed at decimating and
uprooting a whole community because of its ethnic
origin and beliefs. It is a matter of satisfaction that the
international community responded to this grave
challenge and prevented the brutalization of a whole
community.

In the aftermath of the conflict, the international
community has shouldered a robust challenge and a
programme of augmenting the healing process in
Kosovo -indeed, a daunting task. The United Nations
Mission in Kosovo has made a difference. It has played
a vital role in restoring peace and encouraging a
process of reconciliation and reconstruction. There is a
continuing need to provide support to the efforts to
establish a harmonious inter-ethnic relationship, bring
about economic reconstruction and build the
institutions of pluralistic society. We hope these tasks,
which need resilience and dedication, will be
accomplished.
Pakistan closely followed the developments in
Kosovo during the humanitarian crisis and contributed
to the peace process through bilateral contacts and in
international forums. Once the United Nations Mission
was established, we contributed personnel to all
segments ofits operations.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Pakistan's
commitment to and support for efforts to achieve
peace, reconciliation and prosperity for the peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo and, indeed, the
entire Balkan region.

