Mr. Lauber: Mr. President, on behalf of the
members of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I would like to
thank you for inviting me to brief the Security Council
and for the continuous constructive cooperation
between the Council and the configuration. Members
of the configuration noted with appreciation the
positive reference to the PBC contained in the Council's
presidential statement S/PRST/20l7/l3, 0f2 August.

As per established practice, the following statement
has been submitted to and approved by the members
of the configuration, including the country concerned,
Burundi.

Since my last briefing to the Council on 26 July
(see S/PV.8013), I have had a number of meetings in
New York, Addis Ababa and Geneva on Burundi in
my capacity as Chair of the configuration. During the
high-level week of the General Assembly, I met with
His Excellency Mr. Alain Aime Nyamitwe, Burundi's
Minister of External Relations and International
Cooperation, and we discussed the continuation of
the socioeconomic dialogue. Minister Nyamitwe
confirmed that the next round of the dialogue will
include additional partners, as agreed at the latesst
retreat, held in Bujumbura on 12 July. Also during the
high-level week, I met the Secretary General of the East
African Community (EAC), Mr. Liberat Mfumukeko;
the European Union Senior Coordinator for the Great
Lakes, Mr. Koen Vervaeke; and the Special Envoy of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the Great Lakes
Region, Ms. Katja Lasseur.

On 12 October, I had a meeting with His Excellency
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, the former President of Tanzania
and the EAC Facilitator for Burundi, as we were both in
Geneva on that day.

From 25 to 28 October, I used the opportunity of a
visit to Addis Ababa to discuss the situation in Burundi
with the Permanent Secretary of Burundi's Foreign
Ministry, His Excellency Mr. Jean de Dieu Ndikumana;
the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security, His Excellency Mr. Smai'l Chergui; the new
AU Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region,
His Excellency Mr. Basile Ikouebe; and the Head of
the United Nations Office to the African Union, His
Excellency Mr. Haile Menkerios. While in Addis, I
also met the Executive Secretary of the United Nations
Economic Commission for Africa, Under-Secretary-
General Vera Songwe, as well as experts from the AU,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) and members of the
diplomatic community.

On 8 November, I updated the configuration on my
activities and on recent developments in Burundi. The
new United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burundi,
Mr. Garry Conille, participated in that meeting of
the configuration. He characterized the situation in
Burundi as one of chronic vulnerability and informed
Member States about United Nations efforts aimed at

strengthening the resilience of the population.

Representatives from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees highlighted the gravity of the humanitarian
situation and indicated that the number of persons in
need of humanitarian assistance will possibly soon reach
6 million people, that is, over half of the population.
They noted a funding gap for the humanitarian
response plan of 50 per cent, as well as for the Regional
Refugee Response Plan, which is currently funded at
only 19 per cent.

In the subsequent discussion, the members of the
configuration expressed support for the engagement
of the configuration, namely, for its efforts to draw
attention to the deteriorating socioeconomic and
humanitarian situation. Member States reiterated their
unequivocal support for the EAC-led dialogue process,
although some of them expressed concern over the lack
of progress in the process. The human rights situation
was described by several delegations as concerning.
In that regard, the Permanent Representative of
Burundi, Ambassador Albert Shingiro, indicated that
the negotiations between his Government and OHCHR
about the outstanding memorandum of understanding
were in their final phase.

A number of representatives enquired about
the prospects of an amendment of the Constitution,
and they stressed their concern about the potential
impact on the spirit of the Arusha Accord. Other
representatives noted that amending the Constitution
is part of Burundi's sovereign rights. The Permanent
Representative of Burundi stressed that this was an
internal matter and reassured PBC members that
changes to the Constitution would not be detrimental to
the spirit of the Arusha Accord.

From my interactions in recent months, I am
drawing the following conclusions:

First, with regard to the political dialogue,
President Mkapa remains committed to facilitating
the EAC-led political dialogue and he continues to
enjoy support inside and outside the region. At the
same time, the facilitation remains challenging. While
I heard disappointment regarding the lack of progress
in the dialogue process, I was encouraged to see that
Secretary-General Guterres, as well as the members of
the East African Community, the African Union and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
continue to pay considerable attention to the situation
in Burundi. As the Special Envoy just mentioned, the
holding of the next Arusha round has been tentatively
scheduled for late November. I would like to encourage
Burundi's political stakeholders to fully commit
to the continuation of the EAC-led process and to
constructively participate in the planned session.

Secondly, with regard to the socioeconomic
situation, national and international actors continue
to highlight challenges in the areas of food security,
health, education and energy. Against this background,
international partners are increasingly concentrating
on strengthening the resilience of Burundi's population
and on their immediate humanitarian needs. On
20 October, for example, the European Union announced
a new population resilience support programme, with a
volume of €95 million.

Thirdly, on human rights, in my contacts I
continued to hear reports about human rights violations
in Burundi, as well as regrets about the outstanding
memorandums of understanding with the OHCHR and
the African Union for their work in Burundi. In my
meetings with the representatives of the Government
of Burundi, I continued to encourage them to swiftly
conclude these agreements.

The human rights situation has been discussed,
as the Assembly knows, in the Human Rights Council
in mid-September and by the Third Committee of the
General Assembly on 28 October. As is well known, at
its thirty-sixth session in Geneva, the Human Rights
Council adopted two resolutions on Burundi; one
extends the mandate of the Commission of Inquiry
for one year; the other asks the High Commissioner to
appoint an expert who will provide technical assistance
and capacity-building to the Government in the area of
human rights.

Fourthly, with regard to the question of refugees,
many of my interlocutors pointed to the return of
refugees from Tanzania to Burundi. On 31 August
in Dar es Salaam, the Governments of Tanzania and
Burundi and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees agreed to assist the voluntary repatriation
of 12,900 refugees who had by then registered their
desire to return. At the latest configuration meeting,
Ms. Wafaa Saeed, the Deputy Director of the OCHA
Coordination and Response Division, underlined the
fact that the voluntary character of these repatriations is
essential and must be respected in the current movement
of return. As for reintegration, Ms. Saeed said:

"There is a strong need to improve the
socioeconomic and human rights situation in
Burundi to ensure the sustainability of returns
and reintegration at the community level, both
for refugees and those returning from internal
displacement within Burundi."

In the subsequent discussion, it was also underlined
that it is essential to safeguard the civilian character of
refugee camps in accordance with the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees.

In View of this situation, I suggested to the members
of the PBC Burundi configuration that they focus on
the following four points for the time being.

First, national, regional and international actors
should continue to fully support the mediation efforts
undertaken by President Museveni and President
Mkapa on behalf of the EAC.

Secondly, while the ongoing efforts on the political
track remain important, the forthcoming election cycle
of 2020 requires increasing attention from all of us. I
believe that some kind ofroad map is required, defining
the necessary conditions for free, fair, peaceful and
democratic elections, as well as the necessary steps to
get there. I also believe that the PBC should be able to
contribute, in one way or another, to such an endeavour.

Thirdly, the socioeconomic conversation must
complement these efforts with a focus on addressing the
needs ofthe population, as well as existing obstacles for
cooperation. Such conversations with the Government
need to involve additional partners who were not able
to participate in our Bujumbura retreat of 12 July. I
remain committed to engaging on the socioeconomic
situation not only with the Government and Burundi's
main donors, but also with the private sector, African
economic actors and academia.

Fourthly, the question of truth and national
reconciliation should receive more attention and
support. This will be one of the issues I am planning
to raise during my next visit to Burundi, which is
tentatively scheduled for early 2018.

