Mr. Akram (Pakistan): It is a pleasure to see the
representative of South Africa, an eminent colleague,
presiding over the Security Council during this month,
which promises to be eventful and important. I hope
that the President will not be overtaken by the Ides of
March. I also wish to express our great appreciation for
the active presidency of Slovakia in the month of
February. Let me also welcome the participation in
today's meeting of Mr. Massimo D'Alema, Italy's
Minister for Foreign Affairs.

We have listened carefully to the briefings
provided by Mr. Tom Koenigs, Special Representative

of the Secretary-General, and by Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime. We have also studied the latest report
(S/2007/ 152) of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan.

As the briefings and the report indicate, there are
multiple challenges to the restoration of peace, security
and development in Afghanistan, namely, terrorism, the
Taliban, extremism, drugs, criminals, warlords,
factional friction and inadequate security and
governance, as well as a relatively small international
presence in Afghanistan.

This is an appropriate opportunity to develop an
objective and correct assessment of the environment in
Afghanistan and to formulate a strategy for success
that responds to that environment. That strategy must
combine military containment with political
reconciliation, administrative control and rapid socio-
economic development. It must build peace in
Afghanistan through a bottom-up approach - village
by village, district by district - offering incentives
and disincentives to win the cooperation and support of
the local population in the south and south-east of the
country. It is vital to win the hearts and minds of the
people, which is more important than killing or
capturing insurgents. It is essential to adopt military
tactics that do not create more alienation, opposition
and enemies. Most important, our strategy for success
must accelerate reconstruction and development. It
must offer hope to the people - hope for peace, for
jobs and for better lives for themselves and their
children. Such a strategy could be implemented
through traditional structures and practices, such as the
convening of tribal Jirgas in the troubled parts of
Afghanistan.

Pakistan's frontier regions have been deeply
affected by three decades of war and conflict in
Afghanistan. After the United States intervention in
2001, many Al-Qaida and Taliban elements crossed the
border into Pakistan. The people of our frontier region,
who constitute l per cent of our total population, have
also been afflicted by the rise of extremism and
terrorism. As part of our programme for modernization
and rapid socio-economic development, it is in
Pakistan's vital interest to eliminate Al-Qaida
terrorists, Taliban militancy and Talibanization in the
frontier regions of Pakistan.
The success of stabilization, reconciliation and
development in Afghanistan will contribute to
Pakistan's campaign against extremism and terrorism
in our frontier regions. Likewise, our success against
Al-Qaida, the Taliban militancy and Talibanization will
contribute to peace and security in Afghanistan. Peace
in Afghanistan will also enable Pakistan to realize its
strategic objective of serving, together with
Afghanistan, as the hub for trade and economic
cooperation between the adjacent regions of South
Asia, West Asia and Central Asia. Our commitment to
promoting peace, security and progress in Afghanistan
is complete, unwavering and unquestionable.

Despite media reports and some unfortunate
public statements, the relationship between Pakistan
and Afghanistan is close, cooperative and intense. Our
leaders exchange frequent visits. We offer transit to
Afghanistan's external trade. Our bilateral trade has
grown to $1.2 billion and is rising rapidly. Pakistan has
committed $300 million for Afghanistan's
development. Sixty thousand Pakistanis are working in
Afghanistan. The next Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan will be held in Islamabad
later this year.

Pakistan is also participating actively in the joint
efforts of the international coalition and the Afghan
Government to promote security in Afghanistan, and
especially in the border regions. Cooperation in the
military Tripartite Commission is operational and
constant. The Commission now has a joint intelligence
operations centre in Kabul. It has also created an
operational coordination working group.

This is an appropriate occasion to outline the
measures which Pakistan is taking, or intends to take,
to contribute to the success of the campaign for peace,
stability and progress in Afghanistan and our frontier
region.

First, as to our campaign against Al-Qaeda, the
Pakistan Army and intelligence services have played
the leading role in much of the success against
Al-Qaeda. We have captured over 700 Al-Qaeda
terrorists. Most of Al-Qaeda's command and control
structure was destroyed with Pakistan's support. We
have launched over 90 military operations in some of
the most treacherous terrains to eliminate the presence
of terrorists, especially foreign fighters. Vice-President
Cheney of the United States recently said "I have often
said before and I believe it is still true that we have
captured and killed more Al-Qaeda in Pakistan than
any place else". Pakistan has lost over 700 soldiers in

those operations. In retaliation, the terrorists have
launched several suicide attacks against our leaders,
our security forces and civilian targets, but that has not
deterred us. We shall continue to take resolute action
against any suspected terrorist activity anywhere on
our territory. Al-Qaeda will certainly not be allowed to
regroup on our soil.

Secondly, as to our actions against the Taliban,
over the past three years, we have captured and handed
over to Afghanistan 1,500 Taliban militants, including
a large number of the leadership. Just during the last
year, we have handed over 300 captured Taliban
members to Afghanistan. However, as past and present
United Nations reports have noted, most of the Taliban
activity is within Afghanistan, as are its five command
structures. That should not be distorted. Similarly, as
for the financing of the Taliban from abroad, the major
source of financing - the production of drugs and the
drugs trade - lies inside Afghanistan.

Thirdly, Pakistan has taken significant measures
to control the difficult 2,500-kilometre border with
Afghanistan. Pakistan has, for the first time in recent
history, inducted its armed forces in the tribal areas.
Eighty thousand Pakistani troops are now deployed in
the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and along the
border with Afghanistan. That number is higher than
the combined forces of the international coalition and
the Afghan National Army. We have established 1,000
border posts. There are 300 on the other side. We plan
to fence about 35 kilometres of the border in the
roughest terrain where clandestine crossings take place.
In response to the concerns of some of our friends, we
are reviewing the plan to mine parts of the border.
Pakistan is also introducing stricter measures to better
regulate the legal border traffic. Over one border
crossing alone - in Chaman, Baluchistan - about
40,000 people and 14,000 vehicles cross in both
directions each day. An estimated 300,000 people cross
the Afghanistan-Pakistan border legally each day. To
improve identification checks, we are introducing
biometric cards. It is not very helpful when border
guards on the other side cut up and throw away those
cards.

I would also like to underline that control of the
border is a joint responsibility of Pakistan, Afghanistan
and the international coalition forces. Pakistan cannot
accept the entire onus of controlling the border.
Mr. Koenigs has referred to suicide attackers,
facilitators and Taliban commanders crossing over
from Pakistan. I would like to say that the crossing of
the border is in both directions, and I hope he will
agree that it is in both directions and that therefore the
Taliban must be controlled on both sides of the border.
Pakistan should also be provided with real-time
intelligence as well as with the electronic and other
equipment that we have requested to enhance our
ability to control the long and difficult border.

Fourthly, Pakistan will act shortly to eliminate the
atrocious allegations about so-called sanctuaries and
safe havens for the Taliban in terrorist training camps.
That information is unsubstantiated and should not be
given currency. What happens is that Taliban militants
mostly seek to merge into the refugee camps that are
close to the border. In a camp of some 80,000 Afghans,
it is obviously difficult to identify who those Taliban
militants are. We have therefore reached an agreement
with the Afghan Government to relocate four of the

large camps - Pir Alizai and Gidri Jungle in
Baluchistan, and J allozai and Kachi Garhi in the North-
West Frontier Province - to secure sites inside

Afghanistan. We ask for the cooperation of the
international community to create the facilities on the
Afghan side to receive those refugees. Thus, we shall
end this story of sanctuaries.

Pakistan has also initiated a programme to
repatriate all the remaining 3 million Afghan refugees
within the next three years. We have hosted them for
30 years without any appreciable international
assistance. That has placed an unconscionable burden
on our national exchequer, our economy, our
environment and our society. We hope that conditions
will be created in Afghanistan for the return of those
refugees in dignity and security. The international
community should provide assistance and cooperation
to Pakistan and Afghanistan in the repatriation process.

Fifthly, Pakistan is pursuing a comprehensive
strategy to promote peace and progress in our frontier
regions. That involves military, political, economic and
administrative components. The objective of the
strategy is to win the hearts and minds of the local
population and to isolate the militants from the
moderates. The North Waziristan Agreement,
concluded with the tribal elders, was essentially an
exchange of peace for development. While there may
be room for better implementation, we believe that the
Agreement represents a correct approach and the right
strategy. The Agreement has brought relative calm to
the area. Activity from across the North Waziristan

border has declined. Some assert that the total number
of incidents inside Afghanistan have increased, but
there is no proven direct correlation of those incidents
and the conclusion of the North Waziristan Agreement.
Meanwhile, violations by some recalcitrant elements in
North Waziristan have been adequately punished.
Pakistan continues to retain the option of striking at
terrorists where and when they are located, as we have
demonstrated recently.

We have advocated that approach of peace,
reconciliation and development on the Afghanistan side
as well. Similar agreements could be reached through
local jirgas. They can offer a modality to establish
relative if not complete peace in south and south-east
Afghanistan. That was the essence of the
understanding, at the tripartite summit in Washington
last September, to promote the convening of jirgas.

The first meeting of the Pakistan and Afghanistan
Jirga Commission - as was mentioned by my Afghan
colleague - was held last week in Islamabad. The two
sides agreed to stop the blame game and to increase
cooperation to address common problems of border
control and refugee repatriation. Meanwhile, Pakistan
believes there is a need to rapidly develop the areas on
both sides of the border. For development of our tribal
areas, we are grateful to the United States for its
commitment of $750 million over the next five years.
We would like to seek greater help from other sources
as well for that vital objective.

We are also working with the United States to
establish reconstruction opportunity zones in the tribal
areas. Pakistan's private sector is investing in industry
and manufacturing in those areas. The United States
has promised special tariff- and duty-free access to the
United States market for products from those areas. We
ask the European Union to provide similar access.
Similar reconstruction opportunity zones could be
established on the Afghan side as well. Pakistan stands
willing to coordinate with Afghanistan to promote the
creation of such zones.

In conclusion, let me say that Pakistan wants
friendly relations with Afghanistan. Our destinies are
inextricably bound together. We respect each other's
sovereignty, we treat Afghanistan with equality, and we
wish that both countries would respect each other's
territorial integrity. Pakistan will continue to extend its
cooperation to promote peace and stability in
Afghanistan and to combat terrorism in all its forms.
We hope that the Government of Afghanistan and
others concerned will accept their own responsibilities
to address the multiple challenges within Afghanistan.
That is a collective endeavour and a joint
responsibility. Political expediency and occasional
frustration over failure must not be allowed to wreck
the cooperative framework that has been established,
that is operational and that is so vital for success in
Afghanistan.

