Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): Mr. President, I am
convinced that the fact that you are presiding over this
important meeting will give additional weight to our
deliberations and decisions.

I would like to thank Dr. Peter Piot for his lucid
presentation of the report on measures undertaken by
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) as a follow-up to the previous Security
Council meeting on HIV/AIDS in Africa. That meeting
undoubtedly successfully accomplished one of its
primary purposes: it contributed to increasing global
awareness of the AIDS problem and stimulated further
efforts of the world community to address it.

Of course, many actions, as outlined in the report,
had been conceived and planned long before the
meeting, but it is especially gratifying to see that the
Security Council promoted their implementation, thus
demonstrating its results-oriented approach to the
consideration of this important issue.

We would also like to thank Dr. Piot for the
information on the International AIDS Conference,
held at Durban. We very much agree with Dr. Piot that
HIV/AIDS is an epidemic of global proportions with
enormous human and social ramifications that go far
beyond the province of health care. As such, it
constitutes a global emergency, threatening stability,
exacerbating inequalities and undermining sustainable
development. AIDS has become a disease of poverty,
ignorance and gender discrimination, with the greatest
effect on poor children and women.

The most disturbing facet of this disease is that
today 95 per cent of all HIV-infected people live in
developing countries. The impact of HIV/AIDS on all
aspects of development threatens to provoke the
reversal of decades of progress in the most affected
countries. Many hard-won development gains have
already been eroded. Estimates show that in the
forthcoming decade no sector - including the trade
and economic development, health care, education,
employment, social and other sectors - will be spared
the ravaging effects of this epidemic.

We realize that HIV/AIDS will continue to be a
serious challenge for many years to come. Facing this
challenge will require comprehensive, multisectoral
responses that involve a broad range of actors. Failure
to meet it effectively will put at risk all other aspects of
international development during the next decade.

It is encouraging that increased attention to the
problem of AIDS has started to bring the first practical
results. We welcome the recent decision by a number
of leading pharmaceutical companies, following the
appeal from the Secretary-General, to begin the process
of cutting the price of AIDS drugs for States affected
by the disease. We also welcome the recent move by
the United States Government to make the procurement
of cheaper anti-AIDS drugs more accessible and
affordable. We hope that these steps will be followed
by actions on the part of other Governments and drugs
producers. At the same time, it is clear that such
measures are only one of the factors in what should
become a broader and urgent effort.

In our View, only the concerted and coordinated
efforts of the international community will be able to
successfully address the problem of HIV/AIDS. As we
have already indicated on many previous occasions, we
believe it is high time for the United Nations to
elaborate a comprehensive agenda for action against
this pandemic. And it is also our conviction that-
while all relevant United Nations bodies can contribute
to this cause, according to their respective mandates -
the General Assembly should play its central role in
tackling this issue of global concern by reviewing the
problem in all its aspects and proposing new strategies,
methods, practical activities and specific measures to
strengthen international cooperation to address the
issue.

Ukraine believes that a special General Assembly
session would be the most appropriate forum for this
purpose. I would also like to inform the Council that
just a few days ago my country, along with Costa Rica,
the Czech Republic, Nigeria and Zimbabwe, tabled a
draft General Assembly resolution for such a session to
be held in May 2001. We invite all United Nations
Member States to support this draft resolution.

In conclusion, I would like to wish Dr. Piot every
success in his work to fight this devastating scourge.
Let me express our delegation's hope that today's
discussion will provide another boost to this difficult
but important endeavour.
Finally, we would like to express our support for
the draft resolution before us. It is particularly
commendable that the Council has had an opportunity
while preparing this draft resolution to take into
account the Views of troop-contributing countries. We
hope this practice will be continued in the future.

