Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the convening of this meeting
against the backdrop of your concept note, Mr. President,
which was published on 28 June (S/2019/537, annex).
We thank your delegation for maintaining, in the course
of your presidency of the Security Council this month, a
common thread with regard to concerns about regional
situations and their impact on international peace and
security. On this occasion, nothing is more appropriate
than referring to the links between terrorism and
organized crime and the difficulties that their multiple
facets represent for Governments.

I also thank Under-Secretary-General Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; Under-Secretary-General Michele
Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; and Ms. Tamara
Makarenko for their enlightening briefings.

Of the activities mentioned in the concept note that
can be linked to terrorism, the fight against two of them
is fundamental for my country, namely, drug trafficking
and corruption. Ecuador has experienced the impact of
the Colombian conflict throughout its history. On the
northern border, the splinter groups that did not comply
with the peace agreement are part of transnational
crime networks. They seek to keep their activities
undisturbed through the use of terror, including attacks
and death. Security issues have been linked to criminal
gangs and an increase in illicit activities, including
organized crime, drug trafficking, human trafficking
and money-laundering.

With varying degrees of penetration, organized
crime permeates society and secures its survival by
expanding its markets through micro-trafficking,
whereby children and young people are condemned
to lives without a future. We see how corruption in
our region, which involves the private sector and
Governments alike, became a sophisticated mechanism
for self-perpetuation. In addition to the diversion of
resources that should be devoted to development,
citizens lose faith in the values that support coexistence
in the community, accountability and democracy.

Drug trafficking and corruption are two of the most
important challenges my country faces. Both require
solutions that go beyond national borders and that
must be interlinked to be effective. Every sector must
be involved: the Government and its functions, public
and private institutions, academia with its analysis and
citizens with their convictions.

My delegation has spoken here on numerous
occasions in favour of working to identify and address
the underlying causes of conflicts - an aspect that
coincides with the vision that Peru's presidency has
brought to the Council. In the case of organized crime
as well, it is necessary to go beyond the commission of
crimes, to the elimination of their origins.

Working with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, my country is actively working to combat
drug trafficking and corruption through a dedicated
committee made up of experts at the highest level
that also includes bilateral cooperation. However, the
challenge is not individual. It requires the commitment
and cooperation of the entire international community.

In that regard, my delegation endorses and reiterates
the content of presidential statement S/PRST/2018/9,
which the Council issued on 8 May 2018 and which, in
its second paragraph, calls on States

"to enhance cooperation and strategies to prevent
terrorists from benefiting from transnational
organized crime, and to build the capacity to
secure their borders against and investigate
and prosecute such terrorists and transnational
organized criminals working with them, including
through the strengthening of national, regional,
and global systems to collect, analyse and exchange
information, including law enforcement and
intelligence information."

To be credible, the results must be visible and
lasting. It is not enough that tons of drugs be seized
every day, as happens in my country; it requires that
there be no consumers and no crops. It is not enough
to identify corruption and begin the processes of
dismantling its frameworks; it is necessary that the
diverted resources return to the countries of origin.
It is necessary to create just, peaceful and inclusive
societies and to work for the elimination of poverty
and for the recovery of ethical values. To that end,
it is essential to have a convergence of efforts at the
national, subregional and organizational levels.

