Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I would like to thank
Ambassador Fowler for his very informative briefing. We
highly appreciate and very much admire his proactive
approach as Chairman of the Angola sanctions
Committee. In both of his briefings, Ambassador Fowler
touched on an essential point at the heart of the problems
associated with the implementation of sanctions, and that
is the lack of hard intelligence. Some of Ambassador
Fowler's most important recommendations are intended to
deal with precisely this problem in the future. It is
obvious that his work is of wider relevance: it provides a
framework from which other sanctions regimes may draw
useful lessons.

We are looking forward to the start of the expert
panels that will look into the more detailed issues of
specific sanctions violations. We are also pleased that the
larger part of this exercise can be funded from the regular
budget, as is appropriate for exercises like this that are of
relevance to the whole United Nations membership.

During his first briefing, Ambassador Fowler put
forward 14 recommendations, including the possibility of
deploying sanctions monitors in the region, who could
play an important role in collecting more detailed
information about possible violations of sanctions. We are
supportive of this idea, but we would like to repeat our
concern about the difficult issue of the safety of these
monitors, who would have to work in an environment
where huge interests are at stake.

Of particular interest also is Recommendation 18, in
the latest report, proposing a direct link between the
Committee and the International Criminal Police
Organization (Interpol). Such collaboration between these
two organizations was also mentioned in
Recommendation 5 of Ambassador Fowler's first report.
His subsequent findings on such a possible contact are
encouraging.

We have noted with particular interest that the
diamond industry wants to be part of the solution to the
problem of the identification of UNITA diamonds brought
illegally to market - a fundamental problem, as
Ambassador Fowler rightly called it. We are looking
forward to the concrete proposals that may come out of
his further contacts with representatives of the diamond
industry. We hope, with Ambassador Fowler, that the

 

experience gathered in this field may help elsewhere, such
as in the sanctions regarding Sierra Leone.

