Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your delegation on the able manner
in which you are presiding over the Security Council.
We thank you for organizing this open debate on such
an important issue.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
statement, and the representative of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Ms. Christine Beerli, and
Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte for their briefings.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Debates of this nature are necessary, as protecting
civilians from the scourge of war is at the core of the
Security Council's mandate to maintain international
peace and security. Ifthe Council cannot play its role in
this regard, it then fails in its responsibilities toward the
international community that it seeks to serve. We wish
to begin by commending the humanitarian workers and
medical staff who carry out their duties so valiantly,
often under the most difficult of circumstances. South
Africa has been involved in a number of initiatives that
highlight the circumstances in which health-care and
humanitarian workers operate, including the Health
Care in Danger project of the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement.

We wish to underline that, while it remains the
primary responsibility of States to protect civilians,
including humanitarian personnel and health workers
within their borders, all parties, including armed
opposition groups, must also bear responsibility
for ensuring that civilians and health workers are
protected. All parties to a conflict should fully comply
with their obligations under international law, as stated
in resolution 2286 (2016). Furthermore, we believe that
Member States have an obligation under international
humanitarian law to allow and facilitate the safe and
unhindered passage of humanitarian relief, including
medical missions and their personnel and supplies.

My delegation wishes to emphasize the following
four points.

First, we support the Secretary-General's call for
increased efforts in mediation and preventive diplomacy
in our quest to protect civilians. The Security Council
should therefore ensure that the protection of civilians
remains a core aspect of all political strategies to
prevent and resolve conflicts. In pursuing that goal,
we call on the United Nations to strengthen and
streamline regional partnerships, including the African
Union-United Nations partnership, in fulfilling its
mandate to protect civilians and health workers.

Secondly, South Africa supports the adoption and
implementation of measures pursuant to resolution 2286
(2016), which emphasizes the protection ofthe wounded
and sick, medical personnel, medical facilities and
equipment, and the sharing of best practices and lessons
learned. We reiterate that the selective application of
the protection of civilians mandate undermines the
credibility of the international community in pursuing
this goal.

Thirdly, the Security Council should at all times
condemn all instances of arbitrary withholding of
consent to impartial humanitarian relief operations or
any actions to deprive civilians of means indispensable
to their survival, including wilfully impeding access to
relief. Such acts constitute violations of international
humanitarian law and are therefore unacceptable.

Lastly, we call on all parties to conflicts to
comply with their obligations to respect and protect
humanitarian and medical personnel and objects, as
well as to condemn direct and indiscriminate attacks in
this regard. The Council should ensure that activities of
this nature are investigated and do not go unpunished.
Ensuring accountability for these crimes is crucial in
ensuring that the credibility of the United Nations is
maintained, which is key to delivering global justice.

