Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking your delegation,
Mr. President, and the delegation of the United
Kingdom for the timely and necessary initiative to
revisit this matter. I also wish to express my gratitude
for the comments and questions from Mr. Le Roy,
Ms. Malcorra and Mr. Annabi. I believe they are
important contributions to the Council's discussion of
this matter.

As the Council knows, I come from a part of the
world where three United Nations peacekeeping
missions operated and successfully concluded their
activities in Central America, verifying compliance
with commitments adopted by five countries in order to
restore peace and promote development in the
subregion. The key to that success can be found in the
simple elements that we all know, but perhaps it is
worth reiterating them: appropriation of the processes
by the recipient countries, a regional commitment to
the processes, clarity in the Security Council's
objectives and mandates and, of course, broad,
transparent and timely communication among all the
actors involved. With this experience and with some
knowledge of how this Council operates, we would like
to take advantage of this meeting to highlight a few
points.

I will begin with the obvious, because perhaps it
is not really so obvious, and that is the nature of the
problems that has brought about a natural evolution in
the scope of peace operations. I call them "peace
operations" because they go so much further than
simple peacekeeping. Very frequently, we persist in
thinking in terms of old instruments to tackle
completely new problems without making a more
creative use of the range of instruments that we have at
our disposal for addressing these new problems. That is
why we have repeatedly advocated the concept of
integrated missions that comply with the Council's
duty to promote peace, and not simply to maintain it.
We are convinced that that is the best way to
address and possibly meet the expectations generated
by the deployment of the United Nations flag. In those
places where the flag flies, the formal distinctions that

are of great concern to us here are irrelevant. People
who see the United Nations flag flying on the horizon
believe that a better future is at hand, hope that their
grief is coming to an end, and are pleased because their
security and their very existence are no longer
threatened. For these people, it is difficult to
understand that their security and expectations may or
may not be part of a mandate and that, as a result, those
who represent the Organization on the ground may not
be able to accomplish what these populations are
hoping for and urgently need.

That is the enormous challenge that must be met
by the United Nations and, in particular, the Council.
We have to manage growing expectations with
increasingly limited resources. That is why today's
debate must be the beginning of a process of
rationalizing the way in which the Security Council
fulfils its mandate. The great majority of the necessary
provisions have already been agreed to by the Council.
The measures to be taken are included in resolutions
and presidential statements that are now more than
lO-years old. We need to bring together all that we
have agreed upon, revise the way these decisions are
implemented and incorporate elements that experience
has shown to be crucial to success on the ground.

We have to review our own internal logic.
Despite the fact that Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations provides that the Council was
established to ensure prompt and effective action in the
field, we are often more concerned with achieving
results on paper. The logic of achieving results on
paper explains the fact that our decision-making
processes are exclusive. It is much easier to achieve
prompt and effective results on paper if decision-
making is limited to members of the Council, and even
easier if the decision-making process starts with a
consensus among permanent members. That is
absolutely counterproductive if we seek to achieve
prompt and effective results on the ground.

No one around this table is unaware of the
distance between those who take decisions on peace
operations, those who implement them, those who
allocate resources, those who have to implement the
decisions on the ground, and the recipient country.
That is why we have to review the way in which
we establish and renew Security Council mandates.
Specifically, we believe that we need to have
interactive and informal meetings with the troop-
contributing countries and with the Secretariat. It is
also crucial to improve our interaction with the General
Assembly through the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and with the Fifth
Committee. With appropriate and timely information,
we can produce clear, convincing and viable mandates,
and with the appropriate interaction among bodies we
can guarantee that we will faithfully implement the
decisions of the Council in the field. We also need to
have inputs from the host country and other concerned
players.

The Council's decision-making process on a
peacekeeping operation requires more active support
from the Secretariat. As we have seen in many
negotiations in the General Assembly, when our
experts meet to negotiate a resolution we need the
advice of the Secretariat to tell us, in a timely manner,
the practical implications of our proposals or of our
silence, including the financial and operational
implications of mandates. Moreover, we must
effectively follow up on the resolutions and mandates.
If something is not working as it should, we have to
identify and take measures to correct it.

We have reached the limit of our resources. We
can no longer establish mandates in the hope that our
mere presence in the field is enough. This perspective
was identified and approved by the Council when it
considered the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), and it
would therefore be timely to hold an open debate on
the implementation of the recommendations contained
in that report.

I would like to conclude by saying that we
believe that it is important to deepen and strengthen
our relationship with the Peacebuilding Commission.
The peacebuilding component is crucial, as was
pointed by Mr. Alain Le Roy. As a result, when we talk
about having the timely advice of the Secretariat, we
are referring not only to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, but also to the Department
of Political Affairs and the Peacebuilding Support
Office.

We are convinced that, although our
recommendations could prolong negotiations, the final
results will be much more effective in the field, and
that is where the Charter asks us to be prompt and
effective.

The history of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is, generally speaking, a success story. We

are victims of our own success. Our discussion today is
a step in the right direction towards achieving the
proper conceptualization and implementation of what
the peace operations of the twenty-first century must
be.

