Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, for presiding over the work of the Council during
this month.

Year after year, the General Assembly has adopted
scores of resolutions on the Palestinian question. Our
international Organization has adopted dozens of pivotal
resolutions, such as General Assembly resolution 194
(III) on the right of return ofrefugees to their homeland,
as well as Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 478 (1980). All of those resolutions reject
the occupation in Palestine and confirm the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including their right
to self-determination and to establish their own State,
the right to return and the right to sovereignty over its
natural resources. All of those resolutions consider
the Israeli decision to annex Jerusalem null and void,
illegal and illegitimate, and confirm the illegality of
colonization, condemn Israeli violations of human
rights law and humanitarian international law and call
for the cessation of those violations.

After the adoption of all those resolutions and
nearly a half-century of occupation by Israel of Arab
territories, we have the right to question the credibility
of meetings such as today's, aimed at addressing the
important Israeli-Palestinian dossier now that it has
been transferred from the Security Council to the
Middle East Quartet. We have the right to question
the seriousness of certain powerful States that claim
to seek a just and lasting solution to the Palestinian
question that is comprehensive and compatible with the
aforementioned United Nations resolutions.

We would ask the following questions. When will
the Palestinian people enjoy a life of dignity in their
long hoped-for independent State? We have posed that
question for the past 70 years, ever since the United
Nations was established. When will our people in
the occupied Syrian Golan be able to return to their
homeland, Syria? When will the Israeli occupation of
our lands in the Golan, which began in 1967, end? We
have raised another question for the past 50 years: When
will Israel withdraw from other occupied territories,
in particular the Lebanese territories? And here is yet
another question that we have raised for more than 10
years: Is it not time for all effective, powerful forces
to find a useful formula to implement the resolutions
dealing with the Arab-Israeli conflict? These are
questions that we would like the Governments that
claim to cherish the precedence of international law
and the credibility of the United Nations to answer.

I speak before the Council today as a party to
the Middle East conflict, because parts of the Syrian
territory are under Israeli occupation. In that context,
Israel continues to ignore all relevant United Nations
resolutions in regard to the Syrian Golan, particularly
resolution 497 (1981), which declared Israel's decision to
impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the
Syrian Golan as null and void and lacking legal value.
The occupation authorities pursue their systematic
violations of human rights, settler activities and policies
of oppression against Syrian nationals. Israel steals the
natural resources of the Golan, including oil and water.
The American firm Afek Oil and Gas has begun to
explore for oil in the occupied Syrian Golan, close to
the so-called nature settlement.

Moreover, the Israeli occupation authorities have
confiscated thousands of dunums of land from the
Golan to distribute among people who will be brought
in to settle the confiscated lands with the purpose
of establishing agricultural projects. Under this so-
called farms project, the Israeli occupation forces
have established 750 new farms in the occupied Syrian
Golan. This year alone, 90 families have been brought
in to settle those farms. Planning is under way to bring
in another 150 families; so there will be a total of
750 families to settle those farms. All of those Israeli
measures represent a blatant violation of international
law, the Geneva Conventions and resolution 497 (1981).
Such practices must be brought to an end immediately.
They leave us with no other option than to resist that
occupation through all the legal means guaranteed by
the Charter of the United Nations.

Furthermore, Israel continues to arrest many of the
Syrians under occupation, including the Syrian Mandela,
Mr. Sedqi Al-Maqet, who has been detained by Israel
for over 27 years, which is the same amount of time that
Nelson Mandela spent in prison under apartheid. Some
might not know that Israel has detained Al-Maqet yet
again because he worked to document and show, with
sounds and images, Israeli support for Al-Nusra, which
is linked to Al-Qaida, and the so-called Al-Yarmouk
Martyrs Brigade, which is part of the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Sham. All of this, in addition to the meeting
that was held by the Israeli Government in the Syrian
Golan, was not enough to concern the Secretariat or the
Department of Political Affairs, let alone the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority.

Syria confirms that the stability of the region and
the credibility of the Organization require the United
Nations and the Security Council to adopt measures
to implement international resolutions, in particular
resolution 497 (1981), by forcing the Israeli occupation
to commit to putting an end to its aggressive and hostile
practices and to withdrawing from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the line of4 June 1967.

Israel is not satisfied with practicing all the hostile
policies which I referred to. It has started dealing with
terrorists, including Al-Qaida-affiliated groups in
the zone of separation, such as Al-Nusra Front. Israel
provides support, including by treating their wounded
in Israeli hospitals and covering their costs, which is
also, according to reports by the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, in
violation of the Disengagement Agreement of 1974. It
has exposed the members of the Force to danger and
provided increased freedom of movement for terrorist
groups in the separation zone. Terrorist groups have
been able to kidnap some peacekeepers from the
Philippines and Fiji more than once. Therefore, I stress
once again the need to address this grave situation with
the seriousness and importance that it deserves.

I will not respond to some of the improper
comments made by some speakers with regard to
my country, Syria, in particular those made by the
Permanent Representative of the United States and the
observer of the European Union. Those comments seek
to detract our attention from this agenda item, lure us
into quixotic argument and tilt at windmills instead
of working seriously to put an end to the Arab-Israeli
conflict and the question of Palestine in a just and
comprehensive manner.
The observer of the European Union seems
to have forgotten that the item under discussion is
primarily dedicated to the Arab-Israeli conflict and the
Palestinian question. It is not focused on the situation in
Syria, which was precipitated by some European States
involved in Syrian bloodshed by exporting European
takfiri terrorism to my country, Syria. Some States
used to refer to these types of terrorists as jihadis and
moderate opposition members when they targeted my
people in Syria.

However, when those terrorists started acting up in
European capitals they became terrorists. This is well
known. Mr. Laurent Fabius said as much at the 2012
Morocco summit at which participants claimed to be
establishing an opposition entity. The same statement
was repeated by the Foreign Minister at the time, who
is now the Prime Minister of France. They both said,
in December 2012, that European terrorists who were
sent to Syria from France were called "Frenchjihadis".
They used the term "French jihadis". Those jihadis
who were sent to Syria returned to France, violated
its security and killed innocent French citizens owing
to the lack of concern of the French Government and
its sponsorship of terrorism early in the Syrian crisis.
Some other European States regrettably did the same,
and they had to pay for it later. That is exactly what
my country, Syria, has suffered during the years of
the crisis.

