Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): We are pleased to welcome
Mr. Didier Burkhalter to the Council and to congratulate
him on assuming the chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We
thank him in particular for his very informative briefing
on the OSCE's plans and priorities for 2014 and would
like to wish him a very successful tenure.

The OSCE remains a key component of European
security. Its importance for building strong and
genuinely cooperative relationships among its 50-some
States members was quite evident from the briefing we
just heard. We are pleased that the OSCE is not only
making noteworthy progress as a regional organization,
but also enhancing cooperation with the United
Nations in the prevention, management and resolution
of conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

In that regard, we commend the close cooperation
between the OSCE and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. We appreciate
the important role the OSCE is currently playing in
facilitating various processes aimed at settling crises
and conflicts in its region. We also welcome the high
priority that the Chairperson-in-Office has placed on
the agreement reached between the parties towards
the settlement of the crisis in Ukraine. We believe that
the implementation process will be strengthened by
the support and expertise of the OSCE, and we urge
that mediation, dialogue and cooperation be accorded
priority in the search for an enduring solution.

We also welcome the OSCE's efforts in assisting
Azerbaijan and Armenia in finding a peaceful solution
to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, and we welcome the
European Union-led dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. The OSCE's role in support of the dialogue is
very important.

The emphasis placed on human rights, women's
and civil society issues, freedom of the press and the
promotion of democracy on the agenda of the OSCE
deserves our encouragement and, indeed, our broad
support. Challenges encountered on those cross-cutting
issues underscore the need for a further increase in
international corporation in order to jointly address
their root causes.

Going forward, pressing challenges such as the
ongoing tensions in South Ossetia, the pursuit of
freedom of the press, the safety of journalists and
the settlement of territorial disputes in the Southern
Caucasus region present a unique opportunity to
promote change in the region. We share Mr. Burkhalter's
commitment to effectively cope with transnational
threats to international peace and security such as
human trafficking, drug trafficking and terrorism.
Since transnational crimes are not limited by territorial
boundaries, combating them requires complete
cooperation. For that reason, we urge the OSCE to
continue to create opportunities for corporation and
information exchanges with regional security agencies,
including the Committee of Intelligence and Security
Services of Africa.

Finally, we believe that the vision that the
Chairperson-in-Office has outlined ensures a very
promising future for the OSCE. It is a vision that will
promote regional stability and international peace and
security. Such an agenda advances the work of the
Security Council, and is thus deserving of our support
and endorsement. But the OSCE must maintain its role
in the region. It must retain its fundamental character
as the most inclusive Atlantic forum for consultation
and joint action.
