Mr. Frydenlund (Norway): Norway welcomes
this important opportunity to address the situation in
Haiti and would like to use the occasion to express
solidarity with Haiti and its population. Further, we
would like to express our strong support for the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes, and the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

The security situation in Haiti continues to be an
obstacle to sustained democratic and economic
development in the country. Haiti now needs both to
restore security and to implement investment and aid in
order to lay the foundations for the country's
reconstruction and the strengthening of the rule of law.
In those efforts, it is essential that the international
community confirm its long-term commitment to
assisting Haiti. Faced with a difficult situation, we
should intensify our efforts rather than turn our
attention elsewhere.

There is a strong need to promote and facilitate
national reconciliation in an open and inclusive
process. Political training is important for national
opinion leaders and other social and political actors in
order to ensure the continued strengthening of
democracy in Haiti.

Over the past six years, Norway has been
involved in facilitating political dialogue and
consensus-building. It is Norway's view that, by
bringing political groups into a dialogue based on
democratic values and practices, an environment for
democratic development can be established. Norway
intends to continue those efforts, in close coordination
and cooperation with national and international efforts.
Norway also welcomes the joint efforts to prepare for
fair and transparent elections to be held in November.
Norway fully supports and has made financial
contributions to the Organization of American States
and its electoral assistance to Haiti.

Norway maintains its commitment to Haiti. We
will continue to support the processes of dialogue and
reconciliation and will be pleased to coordinate with
others in those efforts.

