Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Over the past four years the Security Council has been
holding periodic open debates on the situation of
children in armed conflict. Unfortunately, the debates
have had little practical impact. Mr. Olara Otunnu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict, has reminded us that
today more than 300,000 children under the age of 18
are involved in more than 30 armed conflicts. Millions
of children have been the innocent victims of war: they
have been killed, have become refugees or have been
displaced. Hundreds of thousands more have been
orphaned or left defenceless as a result of armed
conflict.

To be sure, in the past few years some progress
has been made at the legal level. We welcome the entry
into force of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflicts, which bans compulsory
recruitment and participation in hostilities for those
under the age of 18. Unfortunately, the Protocol does
not also prohibit voluntary recruitment of minors.

We are also pleased at the entry into force of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), which classifies as a war crime the recruitment
of children under the age of 15. But much remains to
be done, and all States should now accede to the
Optional Protocol and the Rome Statute.

We were pleased to see the inclusion in the
Secretary-General's report of a list of parties to armed
conflicts that recruit or use children as combatants, in
violation of their international obligations under
paragraph 16 of resolution 1379 (2001).

It is high time for the international community to
shoulder its responsibilities vis-a-vis those who are
committing such massive violations of the fundamental
rights of children. The Security Council must act. The
Council must now require of those entities and States
on the list that they stop recruiting children and
demobilize those already recruited. Where necessary,
the Council should consider imposing sanctions on
entities or Governments that use or recruit children in
their armed forces.

But we cannot fail to note that we do not agree
with the rather restrictive interpretation offered by the
Secretary-General of the mandate contained in
paragraph 16 of resolution 1379 (2001). In particular,
we would question the Secretariat's decision to include
on the list only those situations currently on the
Council's agenda. We believe that the Secretariat
would have done better by the children of the world
had it adopted a broader approach to its mandate. We
would like, therefore, to invite members of the Security
Council to give detailed consideration to a parallel
report that was prepared by a coalition of non-
governmental organizations, the Coalition to Stop the
Use of Child Soldiers.

This parallel report includes a number of well-
founded accusations against various governmental,
paramilitary and revolutionary entities in 25 countries,
as well as a list of specific recommendations to deal
with each one of them. I would like, if I may, to
mention a few of them.

For example, on Afghanistan, the Coalition
recommends that the Security Council monitor the new
national army and existing factions so as to ensure that
they are not recruiting children under the age of 18. On

Somalia, they also recommend to all parties that they
adopt a policy of non-recruitment of children under the
age of 18.

On Angola, Burundi, Guinea-Bissau and Sierra
Leone, the Coalition recommends the implementation
of specific programmes for the demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers as well as the creation of
educational and employment opportunities in refugee
camps, as an alternative to joining a rebel force.

On Colombia, the Sudan, India and Indonesia, the
Coalition recommends the inclusion of all
revolutionary and paramilitary groups on the list
prepared pursuant to paragraph 16. On Myanmar, the
Coalition believes that both Government and
opposition forces should be included in the list.

The Coalition recommends that the Government
and opposition groups in Liberia should demobilize
child soldiers. On Macedonia, Yugoslavia and Pakistan,
it deems necessary further investigation to determine if
opposition paramilitary groups are, in fact, recruiting
children.

On the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Nepal, the Coalition suggests, inter alia, the
classification of the recruitment of children as a
criminal offence. With respect to Palestine and the
occupied territories, the Coalition calls on the various
groups not to encourage children to participate in acts
of violence.

With respect to the Russian Federation, the
Coalition is proposing that the Chechen rebel groups be
included on the paragraph 16 list. On Rwanda and
Uganda, the Coalition recommends the adoption of
measures to implement the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the
carrying out of programmes for the demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers.

Lastly, the Coalition recommends that the
Secretary-General draw the attention of the Security
Council to the situation in Sri Lanka.

As can be seen from this list of recommendations,
the Security Council is facing a tremendous task if an
end is to be put to the use of child soldiers.
Accordingly, we believe that the Council must adopt a
holistic approach to protect young people.

First, the Council should ensure that any
resolution or measure adopted to deal with a specific
situation of armed conflict must include clear and
specific provisions aimed at safeguarding the security
and fundamental rights of children during armed
confrontation.

Second, the Council should set up an institutional
mechanism that would enable it to consider, on an
ongoing and comprehensive basis, the problem of
children in armed conflict. The Council should,
accordingly, set up a subsidiary body to monitor the
situation of children in all situations that are on the
Council's agenda. To that end, it would make use of
information provided by Member States and by non-
governmental organizations. Following the model of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the subsidiary body
set up should have a group of independent experts who
would evaluate objectively the information that is
received. They could also carry out fact-finding
missions where there are accusations of serious
violations of the rights of the child, and they could
offer early warning in the event of a situation that
might threaten the security of children.

Third, the Security Council, with assistance from
the Secretary-General, should, on an ongoing basis,
maintain, review and update the list of entities that
recruit or use children in conflict, in violation of their
international obligations. It is essential to broaden the
list to include not just situations already on the
Council's agenda, but also situations that, because of
the seriousness of the violations of children's rights
involved, should be referred to the Council by the
Secretary-General. In this connection, the Council
should request the Secretary-General to update the list
regularly.

Fourth, the Security Council should ensure that
plans for the post-conflict demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration of combatants must include
programmes to facilitate the rehabilitation of child
soldiers. Peace-building processes must take account of
the perspective and the needs of children.

Fifth, it is essential to take effective steps to
regulate illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, which facilitate the use of children as
combatants and are the main weapons used in the
destruction wrought. We would advocate a complete
prohibition on the transfer of weapons, ammunition and
military assistance to Governments or armed groups
that violate human rights, including the fundamental
rights of children.

Sixth, the Security Council, in any peacekeeping
operation, must include humanitarian personnel who
are dedicated to dealing with the problems of children
who are victims of conflict. Such personnel should
facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance to
children during conflicts. In this context, we are
pleased that the Security Council has included in some
peacekeeping operations expert advisers on the
protection of children.

Seventh, before adopting any sanctions regime,
the Security Council should carry out an in-depth study
of any possible impact on the most vulnerable
population, particularly children. Any sanctions regime
must include exceptions so as to minimize any
damaging impact on children.

We deem it essential that the Secretary-General
make full use of his powers under Article 99 of the
Charter and refer to the Security Council any situations
of armed conflict in which young people under the age
of 18 are being recruited or used in fighting.

Over the long term, the only way to save children
from evil consequences of armed conflict is to do away
with war. As long as war exists, we cannot free
children from those harmful consequences. As long as
there are wars, children will be orphaned, displaced,
hurt or killed. As long as there are wars, schools and
hospitals will be burned down, roads destroyed and
families broken apart. As long as there are wars, it will
be impossible to ensure that children can fully develop
into worthy, productive and creative adults.

