Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the outset
I would like to echo previous speakers in condemning
the cowardly attack that took place this morning in
Mogadishu and express our condolences to the families
of the victims, to the United Nations staff and to the
Somalian authorities. I would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, Mr. Kofi Annan,
Ms. Rebeca Grynspan and Ms. Anstey for their
briefings.
The issue of managing and controling natural
resources, in particular those of the the extractive
industry, is a key issue with regard to maintaining
international peace and security. A number of conflicts
are related to the issue of natural resources, and that
trend will accelerate in the coming years given the
increasing pressure upon such resources. We would
therefore like to thank the United Kingdom presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this debate on
what is really a major issue at the heart of the Security
Council's mandate, especially within the perspective of
conflict prevention.

International law confers upon States special
prerogatives with regard to natural resources; they have
sovereign rights over those resources. The Security
Council's role is not to question such rights in any
instance, but to consider situations in which natural
resources play a role in conflicts. There are many such
situations. We therefore regret the fact that the Security
Council cannot adopt a text on the issue because of the
objections of one delegation.

In some cases, it is the way in which natural
resources are managed that can lead to conflicts. There
are many such examples. The civil wars in Liberia,
Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo all
share a sommon aspect: resources such as diamonds,
gold, minerals and oil. In other cases, the exploitation
of natural resources or of wildlife can fuel conflicts
through the purchasing of weapons and payments to
armed groups, as for example in the Kivus.

Unfortunately, those factors can some together,
resulting in suffering for civil populations.Children
are often recruited to work in mining. Ms. Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, has also pointed out in
her most recent report the correlation between armed
activities related to illegal mining and sexual Violence.

While tensions around natural resources have major
consequences on the stability of a region, that should not
allow us to forget that the sound management of natural
resources is essential in the reconstruction phase and
would prevent a relapse into conflict. By benefitting
economic development, the sound management of
resources also contributes to peacebuilding. We see
that, for example, with the normalization of relations
between the Sudan and South Sudan with regard to the
oil sector, which is one of the necessary preconditions
for stabilizing their relations and, beyond that, for their
development. In the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, addressing the issue of sharing
resources and arable land is an matter that is vital to
putting an end to the repeated crises in the region.

Clearly, the issue of natural resources and their
management is far from being the only cause of
conflict, but it is a deep-rooted and lasting one that, as
we have seen, can affect all phases of a conflict. Good
management of such resources is an important element
in good governance, which in its turn is essential for
maintaining stability. It is important that local people
be able to enjoy the benefits of their resources in
order not to fuel tension. The Security Council has
a responsibility to encourage initiatives that ensure
proper, lasting and responsible management. It must
support measures that can establish the basis for lasting
peace.

Aware of all those challenges, the international
community has gradually established means to
ensure proper management of natural resources,
and we must support those initiatives. To combat the
pillaging of natural resources, France supported, in the
General Assembly and the Security Council alike, the
establishment of the Kimberley Process certification
scheme, which establishes a certification mechanism for
the source of diamonds. Those efforts must be carried
out at the level of States as well as that of private-sector
companies, and they can also be supported by civil
society. Frances supports the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative, which on a voluntary basis
brings together Governments, mining companies and
non-governmental organizations. The initiative has as
a goal to ensure that those resources serve development
and not fuel ongoing conflicts. That is also a historic
step forward in combatting corruption, given that
it aims to make Governments accountable to public
opinion for their use of mining-sector resources. Private
companies play a key role in the effective, transparent
and responsible management of such resources. It is
important to continue to encourage them to sign on to
the United Nations Global Compact, through which they
would align their operations with the 10 universally
accepted principles concerning human rights, labour
standards, the environment and combating corruption.

I should like to conclude by emphasizing that the
United Nations system, including the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, can play a very
useful supporting role vis-a-vis States that wish to
establish transparent institutions responsible for
managing their natural resources and to avoid the illegal
exploitation of those resources, thereby promoting
sustainable development. But to fully benefit from
the involvement of the various players in the United
Nations system, we must enhance coordination. I would
like to note that the current example of the involvement
of the World Bank in bringing States of the Great Lakes
region closer together through the Secretary-General's
Framework Agreement is promising.

In conclusion, we believe that in future it is
important that the Security Council continue to review
the issue of the management of natural resources, whose
consequences for international peace and security, as
we have seen, are considerable.

