Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
The Security Council is meeting tonight to decide on a
new step in the international community's continued
commitment to the restoration of peace and democracy in
Haiti. Four months ago, the multinational coalition
authorized by the United Nations arrived in Haiti. Then,
on 15 October, President Aristide returned to his country.

Since then, much progress has been made. A new
Government has assumed office, Parliament is working
freely again, the human rights situation has improved
dramatically, and the legislative elections, to be held this
spring, are approaching. The Haitians have begun to enjoy
rights and freedoms denied them for the past three years.

The multinational coalition, led by the United States,
has contributed to the creation of the environment
necessary to enable Haitians to begin to build a peaceful,
stable and democratic society. We commend the efforts of
all those who are participating in this mission.

The time has come to begin the transition from the
multinational coalition to the United Nations Mission in
Haiti (UNMIH), as envisaged in resolution 940 (1994).

 

The draft resolution the Council will consider tonight
affirms the existence of the secure and stable environment
required for the deployment of UNMIH and envisages that
the transfer from the Multinational Force in Haiti (MNF) to
UNMIH will be completed by 31 March this year.

This transition underlines the continuity of the
international community's commitment in Haiti. Planning
for the transfer is well under way. The United Nations and
the Multinational Force are working in close cooperation so
that it will go smoothly. Many of those now in the MNF
will stay on with UNMIH, which shows clearly the link
between the two operations.

Canada is firmly committed to participating in this
process and will make an important contribution to
UNMIH. Canadian police and military personnel are
already on the ground, heading the team now preparing the
hand-over.

(spoke in English)

While the security environment in Haiti has improved
sufficiently to allow for the transition from MNF to
UNMIH, we agree with the Secretary-General's observation
that the situation remains fragile, and we support his
assessment of the challenges faced by Haitians in
consolidating security and stability. For this reason, we join
him in urging the multinational coalition to work actively
to improve the security situation in the time remaining
before the hand-over to UNMIH. In particular, we would
encourage the MNF to pursue disarmament programmes
energetically.

Maintaining law and order is the biggest challenge
facing Haitian authorities. The interim public security force
lacks experience and expertise. UNMIH will provide
additional training and will monitor its activities in order to
make the force more effective in carrying out its law-and-
order functions. We fully support the increase in UNMIH's
civilian police component for this purpose. However, it is
important to underline that UN MIH's responsibility remains
to assist, not to replace, Haitian efforts in sustaining a
secure and stable environment.

The current situation also makes it essential that there
be no delays in training and deploying a permanent Haitian
police force and that improvements to the judicial system
be undertaken rapidly. Canada will work with the Haitian
Government to establish a national police, as we have
already done with regard to the creation of the interim
security force. Close to 100 Haitians trained in Canada will
arrive in the coming weeks to join the new police force.
In the months ahead we will also be providing support to
make the judicial system more effective.

Continued assistance from the international
community aimed at helping Haitians rebuild their
economy remains key in consolidating stability. The link
between economic and social development, on the one
hand, and peace and security, on the other, is nowhere
more evident than in Haiti. Since President Aristide's
return, Canada has disbursed over $30 million in support
of national reconstruction efforts.

While the difficulties ahead remain daunting,
Haitians are making progress in restoring democracy and
establishing peace and stability. The international
community has played an active role in supporting this
process. The transition from MNF to UNMIH outlined in
the draft resolution, which we are pleased to co-sponsor,
fully reflects this ongoing commitment.

