Mr. Feltman: I thank you for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the fourth report of the
Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da'esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat (S/2017/97).

This report was prepared with the input of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (201 1) and 2253
(2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, and in close collaboration
with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF), the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
(UNCCT) and other relevant United Nations actors and
international organizations.

The report stresses that the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) is on the defensive militarily
in several regions, but although its income and the
territory under its control are shrinking, ISIL still
appears to have sufficient funds to continue fighting.
The group relies mainly on income from extortion
and hydrocarbon exploitation, even though resources
from the latter are on the decline. Member States are
concerned that ISIL will try to expand other sources of
income, such as kidnapping for ransom, and increase
its reliance on donations.

ISIL is adapting in several ways to military pressure,
resorting to increasingly covert communication and
recruitment methods, including by using the dark web,
encryption and messengers. Moreover, it has expanded
its area of attacks to countries neighbouring Iraq
and Syria, while continuing to encourage followers
farther afield to perpetrate attacks. Meanwhile, foreign
terrorist fighters leaving Iraq and Syria augment the
threat of terrorism in their countries of origin.

The previous reports to the Security Council on
ISIL's global threat have focused on South-East Asia,
Yemen and East Africa, Libya and Afghanistan. This
fourth report focuses on Europe, North Africa and West
Africa.

First, since declaring in 2014 its intent to attack
Europe, ISIL has conducted a range of attacks in
that region. Some of these attacks were directed and
facilitated by ISIL personnel, while others were
enabled by ISIL providing guidance or assistance or
were inspired through its propaganda.

Secondly, While the military offensive in Libya has
dislodged ISIL from its stronghold in Sirte, the group's
threat to Libya and neighbouring countries persists. Its
fighters - estimated to range from several hundred to
3,000 - have moved to other parts of the country.

Thirdly, ISIL has increased its presence in West
Africa and the Maghreb, although the group does not
control significant amounts of territory in the region.
The reported loyalty pledge to ISIL by a splinter faction
of Al-Mourabitoun, led by Lehbib Ould Ali, may elevate
the level of the threat.

Fourthly, ISIL-affiliate Boko Haram is attempting
to spread its influence and commit terrorist acts beyond
Nigeria and remains a serious threat, with several
thousand fighters at its disposal. It is, however, plagued
by financial difficulties and an internal power struggle,
and has split into two factions. The fourth report also
notes some of the measures taken by Member States

through the Security Council and the General Assembly
since the last report.
On international cooperation and information-
sharing, the report highlights resolution 2322 (2016),
which calls upon Member States to consider establishing
laws and mechanisms to allow for the broadest possible
international cooperation in the judicial and law-
enforcement spheres. The report also notes the General
Assembly consensus resolution 71/19, of 21 November,
aimed at further enhancing and strengthening
collaboration between INTERPOL and the United
Nations. INTERPOL reports that information-sharing
among Member States has since increased.

The report also mentions resolution 2331 (2016),
which recognizes the connection between human
trafficking, sexual violence and terrorism and other
transnational organized criminal activities and
calls upon Member States to prosecute and penalize
perpetrators. Some States, with help from United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), have
instituted special procedures to screen for trafficking
victims among refugees and asylum-seekers.

The report highlights some of the actions Member
States have taken in Europe, the Maghreb and West
Africa to counter ISIL. With regard to Europe, for
example, it stresses the improvements in States'
information-sharing and cooperation on addressing
terrorist attacks and on curtailing the travel and transit
of foreign terrorist fighters. Although more work needs
to be done, including on the use of advance passenger
information systems, the report notes that substantial
progress has been made to counter the financing of
terrorism despite continuing challenges.

The report also notes the efforts by the European
Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe to prevent and counter violent
extremism, including projects to bring together
information on radicalization and intervention and
raise awareness about the phenomenon.

With regard to the Maghreb and West Africa,
the report notes that States are pooling resources
regionally to combat terrorism, while improving the
sharing of information on foreign terrorist fighters. It
also highlights the fact that some States - with United
Nations support - are developing and implementing
counter-terrorism and prevention-of-violent-extremism
strategies. Some West African States are taking action
on countering the financing of terrorism, including
through legislation, although the report notes that few
terrorist-financing cases have been prosecuted.

During the reporting period, a number of United
Nations entities took further steps to support the
efforts of Member States to counter the threat of
ISIL. For instance, the CTITF Office and CTED are
currently reviewing the Security Council-mandated
All-of-UN capacity building implementation plan to
stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, in order to
adjust it to the changing phenomenon. The 37 project
proposals address the entire life-cycle of the foreign
terrorist fighter phenomenon, including radicalization,
travel, financing, and return and rehabilitation and
reintegration should they return. The plan is currently
23 per cent funded.

The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
provides capacity-building assistance to Member States
through a number of projects at the global, regional and
national levels.

At the global level, progress was made on the
border security initiative, the development of the border
security and management programme and the advance
passenger information project.

At the regional level, the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre continued to provide assistance on
the development of strategies to counter terrorism and
prevent violent extremism. The Centre also continued
its efforts to improve the capacity of Member States
in East and West Africa to address kidnapping-for-
ransom, which is a potential source of funds for ISIL-
affiliated groups.

At the regional and national levels, the Integrated
Assistance for Counter Terrorism (I-ACT) initiative
aims to develop a coherent and coordinated capacity-
building programme to counter terrorism and prevent
violent extremism. During the reporting period, much
progress was made in the implementation of the I-ACT,
both in Mali, with the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, and regionally, in the preparation of an I-ACT
for the Group of Five States for the Sahel, as mandated
by presidential statement S/PRST/2015/24, on peace
and security in Africa. The United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre also continued its preparations for a
project to enhance aviation security in Nigeria.

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
published the Handbook on the Management of Violent
ExtremistPrisoners andthePrevention ofRadicalization
to Violence in Prisons. UNODC also continued to
provide assistance to Member States in the Middle East
and North Africa region aimed at strengthening law-
enforcement capacity at international airports, as part of
its airport communication project. UNODC and CTED
collaborated to provide technical assistance to Member
States on strengthening judicial cooperation on foreign
terrorist fighters and held technical consultations
with Nigeria on the prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of persons associated with terrorist
organizations. The United Nations Interregional Crime
and Justice Research Institute implemented projects
in the Maghreb on preventing and managing violent
extremism, including in prison settings.

The need to develop sustained, coordinated
responses to the grave threat posed by ISIL and
associated groups and entities is beyond question.
There are 19 universal counter-terrorism conventions
and protocols, as well as related regional instruments on
international terrorism, and relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. But we need to do
more, as Member States continue to face significant
challenges to ensure effective international cooperation.

Improving our response is critical to addressing the
growth of transnational terrorism as ISIL expands its
area of attacks and foreign terrorist fighters leave Syria
and Iraq. Although many foreign terrorist fighters stay
behind in the conflict zone, those returning or leaving
the conflict could pose a grave risk to the country
of origin or to the countries they are travelling to or
transiting through, such as Iraq and Syria's neighbours,
as well as countries in the Maghreb.

The Secretary-General has warned that terrorism
exacerbates conflicts and that it takes little to trigger a
crisis that can engulf a country, or a region, with global
consequences. He has urged Member States to step up
efforts to resolve conflicts, including those that are
responsible for the dramatic increase in global terrorism.

As we consider what more we can do to check and
roll back ISIL, we must also step up efforts to prevent
and resolve the violent conflicts that both drive and are
made worse by terrorism. Those are mutually reinforcing
pursuits. Ultimately, it is the spread and consolidation
of peace, security, development and human rights that
will most effectively deprive terrorism of the oxygen it
needs to survive.

