Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We very much welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2439 (2018) on
the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We are pleased to partner with Sweden
in facilitating the negotiation on the resolution. We
thank all members for their flexibility and constructive
engagement during the negotiation process, which
has made it possible for us to adopt the resolution by
consensus. We are also very grateful to all members for
sponsoring the resolution.

The resolution is necessitated by the two important
briefings that we received recently from the Director-
General of the World Health Organization (WHO) on
the Ebola outbreak in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be commended
for its leadership in responding to the Ebola outbreak,
and particularly for providing free health care in
affected health zones, as well as for its daily reporting
on the status of the outbreak. We also appreciate the
efforts of all humanitarian and health workers on the
ground, including the World Health Organization and
its partners in the Global Outbreak Alert and Response
Network, as well as all other front-line actors involved
in the response effort.

We recognize that these humanitarian actors
are operating under enormous difficulties to save
lives. The security situation in the region affected
by the Ebola outbreak is further complicating the
ongoing efforts. That is why the resolution we have
adopted today underscores the need to address the
security situation in the areas affected by the disease
and condemns all attacks against civilians. It also
condemns in the strongest terms the recent attacks and
the killings of two Congolese health workers attached
to a Congolese army unit helping to combat the Ebola
outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
resolution also urges all parties to the armed conflict to
ensure full, safe, immediate and unhindered access for
humanitarian personnel and health services to patients
and others in need.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has been playing an important role in supporting the
efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the World Health Organization and other
actors to respond to the Ebola outbreak in an extremely
challenging and dangerous environment. We commend
the Mission for its efforts within its existing mandate.

In his briefing to the Council, WHO Director-
General Mr. Tedros Adhanom explained to us the
gravity of the Ebola situation and the possibility that
the virus could spread to other parts of the country
and the wider region. This is also reflected in the
World Health Organization's latest assessment of the
risk that the virus could spread to Uganda, Rwanda,
South Sudan and Burundi. It is in this context that we
should encourage countries of the region to continue
their efforts to prepare for operational readiness, in
full cooperation with the World Health Organization.
A regional meeting has already taken place in Entebbe,
on 3 October, to review the implementation of cross-
border disease surveillance activities and the status
of emergency preparedness activities in districts that
border the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
East African Community.

Even though the World Health Organization has
stated that a public health emergency of international
concern should not be declared at this time, it remains
deeply concerned by the outbreak and has emphasized
that response activities need to be intensified and that
ongoing vigilance is critical. Therefore, we hope that
the resolution we have adopted today will send a strong
message and contribute to mobilizing international
support and engagement to bring the Ebola outbreak
under control. It is indeed vital that the international
community redouble its efforts in providing flexible
financial support to enable a more rapid and
effective response.

