Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I wish
to join other delegations in thanking Under-Secretary-

General Alain Le Roy and President Benjamin Mkapa,
Chair of the Secretary-General's Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan, for their comprehensive and
informative briefings. We welcome the participation of
His Excellency Mr. Mutrif Siddiq, State Minister at the
Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs of the Sudan, and
Mr. Pagan Amum, Secretary General of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement.

I would like to reiterate Bosnia and Herzegovina's
support for the full and timely implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). At this stage,
it is critical that the CPA parties redouble their efforts
to fulfil their commitments and obligations.

Bearing in mind the tight referendum calendar, it
is of the utmost importance to get all procedural work
finished in a timely manner. We therefore call upon the
parties to prevent any further delays in the referendum
process. With regard to the resolution of the issue of
Abyei, we are concerned that the parties have not yet
agreed over the eligibility of voters.

As far as the post-referendum process is
concerned, the establishment of working groups on
wealth-sharing, citizenship, security and international
legal instruments, as well as the anticipated
establishment of a joint secretariat for negotiations, are
positive steps. However, the process should be
conducted more expeditiously.

We welcome the efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union
Panel in facilitating and intensifying the negotiations
between the parties on outstanding issues. It is
essential that the parties continue dialogue in a spirit of
compromise in order to close the differences on
substantial CPA issues, including borders, revenue
sharing, citizenship and Abyei.

We commend the assistance and engagement of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) in
the process of preparing and conducting the
referendums, as well as its technical and logistical
support to the process. We are encouraged by the
contingency planning of UNMIS to address challenges
that may arise during this critical time.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports
the efforts made by UNMIS in the protection of
civilians. In that regard, we call upon both parties to
remove all restrictions on UNMIS's freedom of
movement and to allow UNMIS to exercise its mandate.

