Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset I would like to welcome Judges Meron and
Joensen and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow and
thank them for their outstanding achievements and the
exceptional work carried out by the Tribunals.

The Council established both the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
in response to crimes against humanity, war crimes
and genocide and in order to ensure the prosecution
of the perpetrators of such crimes, the fight against
impunity and the promotion of the rule of law. Over
the years, the Tribunals have made positive progress
towards achieving their fundamental goals through
the significant number of cases adjudicated and the
few remaining cases, which together provide the best
evidence of that progress.

Despite the challenges and financial costs of the
investigations and trials, the Tribunals' accomplishments
confirm the sound decision to establish them and
to ensure their success. The Tribunals have played a
crucial role in developing principles of international
criminal law that are invoked today by the International
Criminal Court and numerous international courts in
rendering their decisions and judgements. We therefore
encourage all international judicial institutions and
national courts to make the best use of the Tribunals'
judicial and administrative experience.

Achieving the fundamental goals of the Tribunals
will require constructive cooperation and strong
support, which Jordan continues to offer. The Tribunals
must be supported by all available means to complete
their work within the timeline set by their respective
Presidents. At the same time, we stress the importance
of a smooth transition to the Residual Mechanism and
the implementation of the completion strategy after
all trials have been finalized. In the current phase we
must focus on the technical and administrative issues
affecting the work of the Tribunals in order to ensure
the effective completion of their work.

We are concerned about the remaining fugitives
indicted by the ICTR and call on the relevant
stakeholders to hand over those persons for whom
arrest warrants remain outstanding.

