Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would like to join others
in thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for
his briefing, and the Permanent Observer for his
statement.
For too long, the situation in the Middle East has
remained a matter of grave concern to the international
community. Today's debate opens against the backdrop
of a deadlock in direct negotiations and a deteriorating
security situation in the region, as Mr. Pascoe reported
this morning. Nevertheless, this debate affords us the
opportunity to take stock of the preceding year. In
doing so, we need to soberly reflect on the
circumstances that hindered the sustenance of the
resumed direct negotiations between Israel and
Palestine.

Our unequivocal message, today as always, is a
simple one. There should be an independent State of
Palestine existing side by side with a secure State of
Israel, free from threat and intimidation. I have no
doubt that the entire Council is united on this.
Speaking with one voice, it is important for the
Council once again to call on the parties to resume
direct negotiations without further delay on all the
permanent status issues, in particular borders, security,
the status of Jerusalem and the return of Palestinian
refugees.

Each of the parties can play an important role in
fostering peace. To this end, we call on Israel to take
concrete steps to freeze all settlement-related activities
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem as a confidence-
building measure. The planned construction of 1,400
new settler homes and the approval two days ago by
the Jerusalem City Council of 122 housing units to be
built in East Talpiot and Pisgat Ze'ev in East Jerusalem
not only are provocative, but run counter to the
objective of building confidence. Indeed, such actions
provide fodder for resentment and increased violence.
In the same vein, the incursion yesterday by Israeli
tanks into northern Gaza, east of Beit Hanoun, which
resulted in the death of 23-year old Amjad al-Zaanein,
in retaliation for Palestinian militant attacks, was
unhelpful to the peace process.

The Palestinians also have a role to play in
building confidence. It is important for Palestinian
leaders to signal their readiness to return to the
negotiating table through enhanced efforts to forge
unity and deal with acts of militancy. Rocket attacks
and other harmful actions undermine peace and
security. As is well known, in this conflict such actions
have often attracted swift reprisals. We believe that the
prospect of a Palestinian State, recognized and
supported by the international community, should serve
as an incentive to all Palestinians to sheath their
swords and embrace the peace process. It is beyond
doubt that neither militancy nor military might will
resolve the lingering conflict.

We call on Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
demonstrate in their words and deeds a strong desire to
re-engage in a speedy negotiated settlement of all the
core issues of the conflict. In addition, they must
recommit themselves to their obligations under the
Road Map. They should endeavour to overcome the
obstacles that have hindered the realization of a two-
State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace within secure and recognized borders.
The international community, and more especially the
Quartet, should remain engaged and exert pressure on
the two parties to negotiate in good faith.

We commend Israel's announcement last month
of further measures to ease the blockade on Gaza. We
hope that the time will come sooner rather than later
when the blockade will be lifted completely. In the
meantime, we urge the people of Gaza and other
stakeholders to utilize only legitimate channels to
transport persons, goods and materials out of the
territory in order to address Israel's legitimate security
concerns. In this connection, we acknowledge the
efforts of the Palestinian Authority to address Israel's
security concerns.

With regard to Lebanon, we want to stress the
need for calm and restraint. We call on the United
Nations and concerned parties to continue to support
the independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
We commend the Special Tribunal for Lebanon for its
work in very challenging circumstances. It is our
expectation that the Tribunal's findings will provide a
good basis for justice, peace and stability to reign in
Lebanon. We commend President Michel Sleiman's
resolute support for the independence and mandate of
the Special Tribunal. We underscore the need for
continuous dialogue amongst the parties to preserve the
stability of the country.

In the final analysis, achieving lasting peace in
the Middle East will depend not on bullets or
blockades, but on the courage and determination to
make painful sacrifices in support of peace. Lasting
peace requires accommodation and flexibility on both
sides to reach necessary compromises in the
negotiations. I hope that the parties can demonstrate
this spirit.
