The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

France associates itself with the statements to be
made later by the observer of the European Union and
by the representative of Peru, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

With just a few days remaining until the closure
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), France commends the work done over
the past 13 years by the United Nations, and especially
the tireless efforts of the Special Representatives and
their teams. We also acknowledge the extraordinary
commitment of the troop-contributing countries.
Our thoughts go to the men and women who lost
their lives while serving in MINUSTAH, especially
during the earthquake of 2010 and in particular,
Special Representative Hedi Annabi, who died in that
tragic event.

In following up on MINUSTAH's remarkable
work, the capacity-building and professionalization
of the Haitian National Police must remain a priority.
The United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which will take the reins
on 16 October, must build on the success already
achieved in order to fulfil the objectives set out in
resolution 2350 (2017) - strengthening the rule of law,
supporting the Haitian National Police and monitoring
the human rights situation. The new Mission must also
take into account the needs of the Haitian authorities
and civil society and continue to support Haiti on its
path to development. In that regard, special attention
must be paid to justice. Progress in the area of the
rule of law is intrinsically linked to strengthening the
professionalism and independence of the judiciary,
establishing a legal framework that meets international
standards, particularly in the area of criminal justice,
and implementing a prison system that is compatible
with the country's needs and respects the rights
of inmates.

The issue of human rights will have an especially
significant role to play in the new Mission. No political,
social or economic reform can succeed without taking
human rights into account from conception right
up through implementation. The consolidation of
democratic institutions also depends on this, and we
hope that MINUJUSTH will regularly report back to
the Council on the latest developments in that field.

It is solely up to the Haitian authorities and the
sovereign people of Haiti to establish their political
priorities for the years to come. By modifying its
presence, the United Nations has shown its willingness
to continue assisting Haiti and responding to its new
needs. It is not trying to take the place of its leaders or
stage a hasty withdrawal; on the contrary, MINUJUSTH
will give the relationship between Haiti and its partner
countries new momentum. We have every faith that
the Haitian authorities will take full advantage of this
opportunity. This is an essential stage as we transition
from an assistance-focused approach to one centred on
sustainable development. In addition to MINUJUSTH,
the country team will have an equally important role to
play in its future developments.

I would like to conclude my statement by paying
tribute to Ms. Sandra Honore, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, as well as to all MINUSTAH
personnel, and by expressing our full support and
solidarity to the great people of Haiti.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Haiti,
and it gives me great pleasure to welcome him.

