Ms. Graham (New Zealand): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for calling this open debate.
We welcome the latest revised aide-memoire on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We also thank
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his compelling
briefing earlier today. The plight of civilians caught in
current conflicts underscores the importance and
immediacy of this subject for the Council and the
international community. As the issue of the protection
of civilians is wide-ranging, in the interests of time I
will focus my comments on areas of importance to
New Zealand.

First and foremost, as the aide-memoire affirms,
it is the responsibility of parties to armed conflict to
ensure the protection of civilians in conflict areas. It is
a distressing reality that steps necessary to protect
civilian populations are not being taken by parties to
conflicts. Even more deplorable is the fact that
civilians are not simply being caught in the crossfire
but that, in many cases, are actually the targets of
attacks.

New Zealand continues to be appalled at human
rights violations and abuses directed against civilian
populations. The crises in Darfur, Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zimbabwe are
of particular concern, with human rights abuses
occurring widely and often with apparent impunity. In
many cases, targeted attacks against civilian
populations, sexual violence, the recruitment of child
soldiers, summary executions and the forced removal
of civilian populations are causing extreme
humanitarian distress. New Zealand stands with the
international community in expressing its deep concern
at those situations. We fully support United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions and actors in
their efforts to protect civilians in zones of armed
conflict in Africa.

The ongoing crisis in Gaza throws into sharp
relief the plight of civilian populations caught in
fighting by protagonists who show little regard for
their safety. The indiscriminate firing of rockets into
towns and the full-scale military campaigns being
conducted in heavily populated cities inevitably mean
that the civilian population pays the heaviest price. The
protection of civilians begins with the need for an
immediate, durable and fully respected ceasefire, as
called for by the Council in resolution 1860 (2009).
Full access must be allowed to relief agencies to assist
the people of Gaza, who have borne the brunt of the
suffering. Those are practical and immediately possible
actions that simply require political will on the part of
both protagonists.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains of
concern, with ongoing insurgent attacks against the
Government of Afghanistan and the forces of NATO
and the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
NATO and ISAF have stated clearly the importance of
avoiding civilian casualties to the maximum extent
possible. New Zealand is playing an active role in the
protection of civilians through its Provincial
Reconstruction Team in Bamyan province. The Team
provides daily security to the people of Bamyan and
facilitates development assistance programmes.

New Zealand is also deeply concerned at the
increasing trend of attacks deliberately targeted at
humanitarian workers in conflict zones. Many of those
attacks involve humanitarian workers in United
Nations-mandated assistance missions. We must do
more to ensure the safety and security of those
unarmed civilian workers. New Zealand urges all
parties to armed conflict to respect international
humanitarian law, and recalls in particular the duty to
respect and protect humanitarian assistance personnel.
We welcome the inclusion in the aide-memoire of the
section on humanitarian access and the safety and
security of humanitarian workers.

Finally, New Zealand is proud to be among the
first countries to have signed the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. The Convention places at its centre the people
who are most affected by cluster munitions - the
victims and communities trying to rebuild after armed
conflict has disrupted their lives.

In conclusion, New Zealand strongly supports
practical and concrete action to enhance the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We urge the Council to
keep those issues at the forefront of its work.

