Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): There
has been a conviction that conflicts and events in the
Middle East would undermine attention on the question
of Palestine and that efforts to sustain the status quo
would lead to tensions in the occupied Palestinian
territories, thereby affecting stability in the region.

That conviction, however, is false. That is why
international efforts, including those of Egypt, the
United States and France, have been made to revive
negotiations between the two parties, proving that the
question of Palestine is still alive and awaiting solution,
especially now as the Middle East is witnessing
unprecedented political developments, recurrent crises,
tremendous challenges and widespread chaos that
undermine the very notion of statehood.

The peace process has not seen such prevarication
since the adoption of the Oslo Accords. Each time, the
international community has worked hard to push the
two parties towards serious negotiations, regardless of
setbacks, because all were aware ofthe danger ofstalling
or delaying the process. Egypt has warned against such
delays, and I know that everyone agrees with me that
the situation in the Middle East cannot afford any
escalation of the situation of Palestine. Frustration and
despair are fuels that will stoke violence and extremism
and play into the hands of extremist groups seeking to
influence and lure our young people to the brink of
chaos that will destroy their future and their lives.

Given the specific options available to Egypt
in this situation, including its clear connections and
channels of communication with the two parties and
the experience we have accumulated over the years
in our efforts to bring them to the negotiating table,
as well as our historic support for the rights of the
Palestinians and for peace with Israel, Egypt will spare
no effort to achieve a comprehensive and just peace in
the region based on the two-State solution, put an end to
the conflict in cooperation with likeminded countries,
ease tensions, calm relations between the two parties
as a prelude to direct negotiations, and build trust and
the necessary foundations for future negotiations. Such
negotiations would address all final status issues and
lead to the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

I do not believe that I am exaggerating in saying
that a resolution of the Palestinian question would help
to enhance cooperation among the countries of the
region in seeking solutions to other crises there. Thus,
in 2002 the Arab world launched a comprehensive
Vision for achieving that goal, namely, the Arab Peace
Initiative. All we need do is translate the Initiative into
concrete, incremental steps. Our recent efforts, within
the Council and beyond, are part and parcel of the peace
process that we have been developing for more than 50
years. We will pursue that path even though we are fully
aware of the difficulties ahead in reaching a settlement
to a very complex and thorny conflict - perhaps the
most complicated in our history.

Egypt is aware of the heavy responsibility it must
bear in that regard, and will spare no effort in assuming
it, fully committed as we are to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, our belief in the legimate
rights of the Palestinian people and the legitimate
norms of international law, and our aspirations to
achieve prosperity and peace. Egypt will redouble its
efforts to ensure success in the peace negotiations, and
calls on all parties to assist to that end and help prevent
any setback that might perpetuate the occupation. I call
on the two parties to demonstrate the courage to take
the difficult decisions necessary to achieving peace for
the region and its peoples.

