I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his statement. Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union. Let me first turn to the recent developments regarding the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak. We echo the appeal of the United Nations Middle East envoys made in line with the Secretary-General's recent call for a global ceasefire during the COVID-19 pandemic. We encourage cooperation and coordination between the Israeli and the Palestinian authorities and stress Israel's responsibility as an occupying Power in that regard. Measures taken to prevent the spread of the virus should be in line with international humanitarian law and international human rights law. The situation in East Jerusalem is a cause for concern owing to both the lack of information as well as the lack of access to testing and appropriate medical care. The forced closure of a testing facility in Silwan is of particular concern. In addition, with regard to the West Bank, we call for an end to the destruction and seizure of health, water and sanitation facilities, which not only constitutes a breach of international humanitarian law but also undermines efforts to contain the spread of the virus. The coronavirus disease pandemic has a significant impact on the Palestinian health system, already strained by long-standing challenges, particularly in Gaza. We call on the Israeli authorities to immediately lift the blockade of Gaza and call on all duty bearers to enable the entry of essential medical supplies and humanitarian workers into Gaza to provide relief. We welcome the efforts deployed by the United Nations, including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), in the fight against COVID-19. We remain concerned about UNRWA's lack of funding. The COVID-19 crisis will have dire socioeconomic consequences for an already weakened Palestinian economy and for the budget of the Palestinian Authority. We welcome the initial intentions of Israel to release the withheld clearance revenues, in line with its commitments under the Paris Protocol, and call for the smooth regular transfer of funds to the Palestinian Authority. We are deeply concerned about the wider effects of the pandemic on the most vulnerable, including women and children. We call on all duty bearers to take immediate action to release all Palestinian child detainees in order to ensure their safety and health amid this pandemic. The current COVID-19 pandemic only further exacerbates an already fragile situation on the ground, where security incidents and human rights violations occur every day. In that regard, we note with concern the sharp increase in settler violence in the past few weeks. We urge Israel, as an occupying Power, to protect the population and to ensure that those responsible are held accountable. The developments on the ground once again underline the need to reach a sustainable and peaceful resolution of the conflict that is in line with international law and the internationally agreed parameters. The international community needs to exert all possible efforts to get the parties around the table and to take a clear stance against any unilateral measure that undermines the viability of the two-State solution. I would like to express our deepest concern about provisions regarding the prospect of the annexation by Israel of parts of the occupied Palestinian territories in the political agreement that has opened the way for the formation of a national emergency Government in Israel. If put into practice, such provisions would constitute a clear breach of international law, as well as the resolutions of the Security Council, and would risk entailing significant legal, political, security and other consequences. Annexation would undermine any prospect for the start of negotiations. As a friend and close partner of Israel, we therefore strongly advise the Israeli Government against such steps. We also call on the international community to take a clear stance against any steps towards annexation in order to give space to international and multilateral efforts aimed at reaching a fair and durable peace.
