The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like to
begin by commending the Security Council for focusing
its attention on climate-related security risks.

I would like to address four key issues today:
first, the nature of the challenges to our common
security posed by climate risks; secondly, the impacts
of climate change; thirdly, the actions being taken by
the United Nations system to tackle them; and, lastly,
what we need to ask of all of us to ensure that we
continue to centrally integrate climate concerns in our
security considerations.

It is clear that climate change is a real threat and
is proceeding at a relentless pace. Earlier this year,
the World Meteorological Organization confirmed
that 2015, 2016 and 2017 were the warmest years on
record. The level of carbon dioxide concentration in
the atmosphere continues to rise. That build-up means
that we are at increasing risk from heat waves, floods,
droughts and wildfires, and we are now seeing all those
things happening more frequently.

While the impact of climate change may be spread
unevenly across various regions today, no country will
be spared from its consequences in the long term. But
we see disproportionate effects on socially vulnerable
and marginalized groups. We must act together
with a joint vision and a commitment to multilateral
cooperation. That is our only chance at finding effective
and sustainable solutions to this huge challenge.

The impacts of climate change go well beyond the
strictly environmental. Climate change is inextricably
linked to some of the most pressing security challenges
of our time. It is no coincidence that the countries
most vulnerable to climate change are often those
most vulnerable to conflict and fragility. Fragile
countries are in danger of becoming stuck in a cycle
of conflict and climate disaster. Where resilience is
eroded, communities may be displaced and exposed to
exploitation. That said, the impact of climate change on
security can take many different shapes, as the concept
note for this debate continues to argue. They includes
loss of livelihoods, food insecurity and risks to the
natural resource base. Many of those manifestations
become visible only over time.

The Lake Chad basin is grappling with many of
those challenges. Havingjust returned from ajoint visit
to the region with the African Union and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Ms. Margot Wallstrom, I
have seen the situation on the ground in all its complexity
and urgency. The basin is experiencing a crisis brought
on by a combination of political, socioeconomic,
humanitarian and environmental factors. The drastic
shrinking of Lake Chad by more than 90 per cent
since the 1960s has led to environmental degradation,
socioeconomic marginalization and insecurity affecting
40 million people. Exacerbated competition over scant
resources and the vicious cycle of risk and vulnerability
have decreased the resilience of populations to cope
with the humanitarian crisis.
I personally grew up in the Lake Chad basin, in
Maiduguri. As a child, I would cross the lake on a
hovercraft, thinking that I was going to the United
Kingdom. Today, you can hardly take a canoe across it.
The situation is real. There is no trade. There are only
places for terrorists to hide.

Declining economic activity and agricultural
loss have led to a lack of employment opportunities
across the region. The resulting socioeconomic
marginalization has exposed populations, in particular
the young, to the risk of violent extremism and has
provided a breeding ground for recruitment by groups
such as Boko Haram. The Boko Haram insurgency in
north-east Nigeria and the neighbouring countries of
Cameroon, Chad and the Niger has left over 10 million
people displaced and has resulted in the massive
destruction of basic infrastructure, health-care and
educational facilities, commercial properties, private
homes and agricultural assets.

The multidimensional nature of the crisis underlines
the complex relationship between climate change
and conflict. Climate security-risk assessments and
reporting from the local, national and regional levels
should be considered as an early warning for conflict
prevention. We must understand climate change
as one issue in a web of factors that can lead to and
exacerbate conflict. Within that web, climate change
acts as a threat multiplier, applying additional stress
on prevailing political, social and economic pressure
points. As the Executive Secretary of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission said to me during our visit, "At the
end of the day, what was the origin of this conflict?"
For him, the disappearance of the Lake was a key
factor. In B01, the Lake has shrunk by more than 90 per
cent in just a few decades. Action on climate change is
urgent and is an integral part of building a culture of
prevention and ensuring peace.

The United Nations system is tackling climate risks
on several fronts. During the past 18 months, the Security
Council has recognized the adverse effects of climate
change on stability in several geographical areas - the
Lake Chad basin, West Africa, the Sahel and the Horn
of Africa. The United Nations system takes seriously
its responsibility to provide integrated analysis to the
Security Council as it discusses those issues.

In that spirit, we are determined to fully mobilize
the United Nations capacity to better understand and
respond to climate-related security risks at all levels.
We are increasing our climate-related security-risk
assessments and management strategies. We are
strengthening our capacity to understand the impact of
climate change on security, to integrate our findings
into assessment and planning processes and to better
coordinate efforts between system entities.

For example, the Secretary General's forthcoming
report on the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel will report on recent developments
involving the climate-security nexus in the region.
The recalibrated United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel is similarly climate-oriented, focusing
on building resilience and improving management
of natural resources. By supporting climate-smart
agriculture and resilient pastoralism at the regional
level, the United Nations will continue to contribute to
strengthening the resilience and capacities to adapt to
the impact of climate change of rural women and their
communities. The United Nations is also supporting
ongoing successful efforts by the member States of
the Lake Chad Basin Commission to implement their
stabilization strategy and programme, which also
includes the development programme for recharging
Lake Chad.

At the international level, the United Nations can
help to connect efforts and ensure that climate-related
frameworks are linked up and complement one another.
We will support efforts to set the global resilience
agenda to achieve sustainable development.

What is our ask? We need to support programmes
that place women and youth at the heart of our efforts.
We know that the impact of climate change is felt
disproportionately by women. I am happy to have
Ms. Hindou Ibrahim here to give us a much clearer view
of what that means on a daily basis. Desertification
means women must travel farther to fetch water and
food, forcing them to miss out on education and
economic opportunities in the long term. Youth without
jobs will take the alternative route, into terrorism. The
United Nations Development Programme, for instance,
is already addressing many of those challenges. This
progress needs urgent investments in scale.

The reality today is a very different one. The
challenge and danger of climate change are today
very clear and present dangers that virtually every
country has accepted and realized. They call for
dramatic actions.

As the Secretary-General has said, climate change
is moving much faster than we are. We count on the
Security Council to do its part to help humankind
keep pace.

