Mr. Guehenno: I had the opportunity less than a
month ago to brief the Security Council during its
informal consultations on the subject of HIV/AIDS and
peacekeeping. I am grateful to have the opportunity
today to speak on this subject again, in this open
meeting.

Putting the issue in context, people of conscience
cannot possibly turn away from the staggering tragedy
of HIV/AIDS. I personally cannot but be thunderstruck
by some of the most recent estimates of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
and the World Health Organization about the epidemic,
which bear repeating. I personally find it painful to
comprehend that an estimated 3 million people around
the world died of AIDS last year, and that 5.3 million
were newly infected. Almost 22 million people have
died of AIDS since the epidemic began, and Africa has
buried three quarters of them. The continent could end
up burying one third of today's 15-year-olds because of
AIDS in the countries where the epidemic is most
rampant. The problem is not, of course, restricted to
Africa. Over 36 million people around the world are
estimated to be living with HIV today. I am taking this
opportunity, as a human being, to add my voice to Dr.
Piot's in publicizing those statistics.

I want to address one issue that is of great
concern to all of us. Is there a link between HIV/AIDS
and peacekeeping? Is there a risk? As the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, the
question I must ask myself is, what impact do 38,000
or even 50,000 peacekeepers deployed worldwide have
on this epidemic that has affected tens of millions of
people? And what can the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) do to make a contribution in
helping to prevent its spread?

The reality is that a number of peacekeepers, like
any sample of people from around the world, are likely
to have been infected by HIV, prior to deployment, and
this does not apply only to peacekeepers coming from
countries with high prevalence rates.

It is also a fact that some, although certainly not
all, of our peacekeeping missions are deployed to parts
of the world where there is a relatively high incidence
of HIV/AIDS. Furthermore, it is a fact that some
peacekeepers are sexually active while on United
Nations missions. That such risk behaviour takes place
at all is an issue to which I will return later in my
remarks, because it is an important one.

These few basic points alone should leave
absolutely no one in doubt. It is undeniable that there is
a risk of peacekeepers transmitting HIV, or of
contracting HIV, while they are on mission. It stands to
reason that this must have happened already. How big
is the risk? We do not yet have the means to quantify
the extent to which this has happened already, or to
quantify the extent of the risk in the future. There are
normal rules and norms for epidemiological research
and collection of medical data which are especially
important to follow when dealing with the issue of
HIV/AIDS. However, the correct collection of such
data is difficult for a variety of reasons, two in
particular.

First, there is generally a lack of reliable and
complete data on HIV/AIDS in the places in which
peacekeepers deploy. The capacity of countries to
collect epidemiological data on HIV/AIDS, if it ever
existed, can be severely crippled by the outbreak of
war. Thus, there is generally a lack of baseline data
against which to judge the impact of a peacekeeping
operation on the incidence of HIV/AIDS in the place of
deployment. The development of local capacities in
this area is therefore critical, and I join the appeal to
the donors to increase their assistance for this purpose.

Secondly, we do not have reliable data on the
prevalence of HIV among contingents. Member States,
and not the United Nations, are responsible for the
medical records of their contingents. National
Governments do not, as a matter of practice, inform the
United Nations that one or more of their personnel
have contracted HIV/AIDS while on mission. Even if
they were ready to do so, Member States would have
had to test their personnel for HIV prior to deployment
in order to know if the infection had been contracted
while on mission, rather than beforehand.

DPKO, in cooperation with UNAIDS, welcomes
any information from Member States that would help
us to verify and understand the extent of the problem
better, so that we might tailor our prevention strategies
accordingly. In collecting data that could help to shape
our future policies and programmes, it is, of course,
essential to respect the confidentiality of individuals'
medical records.

On a related note, just a few days ago DPKO put
forward a proposal to Member States, within the
context of the discussions of the so-called post-Phase V
Working Group, for the United Nations to reimburse
contributors for the costs of conducting HIV testing for
their personnel, both pre-deployment and upon return.
We believe that it would be an important and relatively
minor investment for the Organization to make, while
recognizing that it remains the prerogative of Member
States to apply their respective policies on testing. We
do, however, strongly recommend voluntary
confidential testing and counselling.

In the interim, even without hard statistics in
hand, there is no disputing that HIV/AIDS in general is
a problem of massive proportions, and that
peacekeepers are not exempt from it.

What are the key immediate challenges before
us? While we cannot change what has happened
already, the first step in mitigating future risks is to
increase the awareness of peacekeepers, and those with
whom they come in contact locally, about the causes of
HIV/AIDS and the ways of preventing its spread.

The Security Council's ground-breaking and
historic resolution 1308 (2000), adopted in July of last
year, specifically recognized the importance of
incorporating HIV/AIDS prevention and awareness
skills in DPKO's training for peacekeeping personnel,
as did the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, in its report of 20 March 2000. These
issues were already important parts of the curriculum
in all United Nations-organized training and orientation
programmes for peacekeepers, but the strong support
from the Security Council and the Special Committee
definitely increased the extent to which Member States
prioritize this issue in the training that they give to
peacekeepers.

(spoke in French)

What can we do in order better to meet the
challenges? As I said during informal consultations on
22 December last, the Training and Evaluation Service
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
developed a training module on medical issues for
senior-level national trainers. The module, which is
part of a broader training course on a variety of
peacekeeping issues, generally lasts for two to three
days, and 80 per cent of the material covered is
dedicated to HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention. In
the past six months, the Service has conducted three
such regional "train the trainers" courses in Zimbabwe,
South Africa and Ghana. Furthermore, these
programmes were incorporated into the peacekeeping
training course for human rights and humanitarian
assistance for military officers and civilian police
trainers, held in Turin, Italy, in November last year. In
2001, we plan to organize sessions in Nepal, for Asia;
Kenya, for Africa; in Bosnia, for Europe; and in Latin
America, in a city yet to be determined.

The Training and Evaluation Service of DPKO,
UNAIDS and the Civilian Military Alliance to Combat
HIV and AIDS (CMA) have collaborated in producing
a number of publications that are distributed to all
participants in the "train the trainers" courses. Some of
them include - I'll cite them in English, since most
are in English -

(spoke in English)

"Protect Yourself and Those You Care About
against HIV/AIDS", "Policy Guidelines on
HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control for Military
Planners and Commanders", and "HIV Prevention
and Behaviour Change in International Military
Populations".

(spoke in French)

The Department's Training and Evaluation
Service has distributed these publications widely, in
particular to peacekeeping missions, and to Member
States and training institutions worldwide.
Furthermore, the United Nations tries to supplement
any instruction that its military personnel might have
received during national training by providing each
soldier with a pocket-sized aide-memoire. I have
brought with me to the Council Chamber copies of
some of this material for those who might be interested
in seeing it. These materials are supplemented with
other practical measures, such as ensuring the easy
availability of prophylactics for people on missions.

To ensure that the material provided to
peacekeepers is as easy to understand and accessible as
possible, the Department is now in the process of
producing a "pocket card" with basic facts on codes of
conduct and HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention. We
are now seeking funding so as to be able to translate
and print this document in the languages of the
personnel and soldiers who serve in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Last month the Medical Support Unit of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, working in
partnership with the World Health Organization,
prepared and distributed to all uniformed personnel and
to all civilian personnel an HIV/AIDS awareness
message to commemorate International HIV/AIDS
Day. This message focused not only on the need for
increasing all personnel's awareness of HIV/AIDS but
also on the importance of not treating as outcasts those
who, unfortunately, have been infected with the virus.
Of course, the Unit intends to repeat this message in
2001.

United Nations civilian staff members of
peacekeeping operations receive detailed briefing
material on the topic of HIV/AIDS in the course of
their predeployment orientation. Since many staff
members join their new missions without visiting
Headquarters here in New York beforehand, our
services continue their policy of providing additional
briefings and instruction at the field level in order to
create an awareness among staff members of the risks
of HIV/AIDS. In this setting, staff members receive,
upon their arrival in the field, copies of brochures such
as "AIDS and HIV Infection: Information for United
Nations Employees and Their Families."

United Nations medical personnel in the field
receive detailed guidelines on medical procedures for
treating cases of sexually transmitted diseases, and, of
course, all matters related to HIV/AIDS are an
important part of this training. The medical staff is
guided, in this regard, by the "Medical Support Manual
for United Nations Peacekeeping Operations", in which
chapters 5 and 6 focus significantly on HIV/AIDS and
related issues.

How can we enhance our efforts? Indeed, we
want to do more.

In addition to the various training activities that
have been ongoing for some time, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is also pursuing a number of
new initiatives.

Furthermore, all budgets for new missions now
include provisions for HIV/AIDS training and
education programmes. The Department is currently
seeking funding for improving our longstanding
system, which we want to expand, for making
prophylactics readily available and accessible in all
missions. In future, we want to conduct this programme
on a broader scale.
The Department's Medical Support Unit has
submitted a number of suggestions for revising the
contingent-owned equipment manual. In these
proposals, we stress the responsibility of national
contingents for in-mission HIV/AIDS awareness and
training. These suggestions were included in the
background material for the post-Phase V Working
Group, which is deliberating this very week here in
New York. In addition, the Department has suggested
that all United Nations level II and III medical
facilities must provide adequate facilities for testing
and counselling, and also must provide post-exposure
treatment for sexually abused women and for health
professionals who might have been accidentally
infected.

Even though the Department has been addressing
problems related to HIV/AIDS for quite some time
now, especially from a training perspective, I am
convinced that the reactivation and further
development of the Medical Support Unit has helped,
and will help in future, to put in place an even more
systematic approach to these difficult issues. In this
respect, our efforts to fill all of the positions in the
Medical Support Unit will continue to be accorded the
highest priority.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations is
now a fully fledged partner, within the United Nations
system, in the global fight against the HIV/AIDS
epidemic, and regularly coordinates its efforts with our
colleagues in the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS and with Dr. Piot, who is here today. The
Department actively participated in the expert strategy
meeting held in Sweden a few weeks ago, at which we
had the satisfaction of seeing that proposals for a
systematic approach to dealing with the issue of
HIV/AIDS had gained the full support of the experts at
that meeting.

The chief of the Department's Medical Support
Unit, who is here today, has been formally appointed as
the Department's focal point for HIV/AIDS, and he
participates in a policy group that includes
representatives from UNAIDS and Department of
Peacekeeping Operations personnel working with
gender and humanitarian issues. The Department's
Medical Support Unit and the Training and Evaluation
Service are also working in close cooperation within
the Department to improve HIV/AIDS-related training
and training materials, with the strong support of
UNAIDS. We are very grateful for that assistance from
UNAIDS, which allows the document to take into
account the most recent research on best ways of
presenting these issues to the public.

The Medical Support Unit has also initiated a
project to formulate a job description for an HIV/AIDS
focal point in every mission from now on. Such a focal
point would be an integrated part of mission
headquarters' training units, and would dedicate his or
her efforts to coordinating HIV/AIDS awareness and
prevention before, during and after missions.

Lastly, I am very pleased today to join Dr. Piot in
announcing that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and UNAIDS this very morning signed a
memorandum of understanding that further develops
and institutionalizes the close cooperative relationship
between our respective organizations. This
memorandum of understanding reaffirms our will to
increase HIV/AIDS awareness programmes in
peacekeeping missions within the overall strategic
framework and technical support provided by
UNAIDS, to which I again pay tribute. It is essential
for us.

How do we measure the impact of our efforts, and
what more can we do to be even more effective?
Member States of this Organization have now agreed
that HIV/AIDS awareness is important for all
peacekeepers. DPKO, together with UNAIDS and with
its partners, is resolutely involved in the fight against
AIDS, within the resources that we have been given. At
the same time, we must continually ask ourselves if we
are doing enough. I have already mentioned that much
more needs to be done for us to accurately quantify the
extent of the problem and thus quantify the impact of
our efforts.

At the same time, this issue is not just about
epidemiological research and medical data. Awareness-
heightening initiatives must also be evaluated,
qualitatively, in terms of what impact they have on the
behaviour of our personnel in the field.

If even a small minority of personnel in the field
continues to demonstrate unacceptable risk behaviour,
then we have clearly failed to make them aware, and
we must do more to make them aware.

Our awareness and training programmes must not
stop at HIV/AIDS either. Some of the same behaviour
that increases the chances of contracting or
transmitting HIV, such as engaging in sexual contact
with prostitutes, is unacceptable and can damage
seriously the image of a peacekeeping operation within
the community where it is deployed. Such behaviour
offends the people we are sent to help. It can damage
the credibility of a contingent or an entire operation.
And such behaviour can overshadow the exemplary
efforts of the great majority of United Nations
personnel engaged in the pursuit of peace.

In this respect, it is not just about HIV/AIDS
awareness. It is about awareness of the responsibility
of all peacekeepers for the image they project in the
countries where they are deployed and the image of the
United Nations in general. It is not just about the
practice of safe sex and responsible sex. It is about the
practice of respect for human beings, a respect that is at
the very basis of the work of the United Nations and at
the basis of the values that the Organization and its
Members uphold. This is what is at stake in our effort.

Peacekeepers must therefore constantly be made
aware of their responsibilities and of the possible
consequences of their actions and behaviour. This is
why I wholeheartedly support the increased awareness
that today's debate makes possible, because this goes
right to the heart of an essential responsibility of our
Organization. It is my intention to continue discussions
with Member States, including within the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, to raise the
standards of behaviour and of discipline that we expect
of all United Nations peacekeepers in the field,
whether they be military, civilian, or police.

In general terms, we must continue to evaluate
the effectiveness of all our programmes and activities,
and revise and improve our materials, so that they can
have the maximum impact.

We need to move quickly in order to fully staff
DPKO to the limits authorized by the General
Assembly, and during the comprehensive review that
we will conduct of peacekeeping activities, we will
also examine the necessary staffing levels related to the
issues I have touched upon today.

We need to enhance the dialogue on this subject
with those in the countries where we are deployed.

I have already written, and will be writing again,
to all special representatives of the Secretary-General
in the field on the issue of HIV/AIDS and
peacekeeping, so that our personnel in the field
continue to have the best guidance from us on this vital
issue.

In closing, we cannot deny that HIV/AIDS is a
problem of global and tragic proportions. Any step that
can be taken to address any aspect of this problem is a
step in the right direction. If the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations can be a small part of the
solution of this immense problem, rest assured that we
will do everything within our power to contribute to
the solution.

