Mr. Wali (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to open this debate on a topic of
great importance to my country and my subregion. I
also thank your delegation for the excellent concept
note (see S/2014/869, annex) provided to guide our
discussions. We have listened attentively to our briefer,
Under-Secretary-General Feltman, and we thank him
for sharing his insights.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the Niger
on behalf of the Republic of Benin and the member
States of the Lake Chad Basin Commission: Cameron,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria.

I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
my colleagues, the Foreign Ministers of Luxembourg,
Chile and Libya, and the Deputy Foreign Minister of
Argentina. I thank Ambassador Tete Antonio of the
African Union for his statement.

Cross-border crime and organized crime are, in
themselves, threats to the peace and security of States.
When they intersect with terrorism, they become an
even greater threat, not only to States, but indeed to
entire regions. An important dimension of terrorism
in my subregion, West Africa, is its transnational
character. There is evidence indicating that terrorist
groups operating in the subregion have formed alliances
among themselves and with organized criminal gangs
involved in the trafficking of drugs, weapons and even
human beings. That inextricable link between organized
crime and terrorism creates significant challenges for
West African nations. It is in realization of that that the
leaders of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), in February 2013, adopted the
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and Implementation Plan to
fight terrorism and related criminal acts in West Africa.
The Plan also aims to facilitate the implementation of
relevant international counter-terrorism instruments
and to provide a framework for joint action by ECOWAS
member States.

As indicated in the concept note (S/2014/869, annex), the link between terrorism and organized
crime was clearly underscored by resolution 1373
(2001), which required all Member States to adopt
laws criminalizing terrorism and its financing. In that
regard, I am pleased to note that we in Nigeria have
put in place multiple legal and institutional frameworks
to combat the financing of terrorism. In 2004, the
Economic and Financial Crimes Commission was
established to coordinate the national effort in the
fight against money laundering and the financing of
terrorism. In the same year, the Nigerian Financial
Intelligence Unit was established to analyse currency
transaction reports and suspicious transaction reports of
financial institutions. In 2009, the federal Government
adopted the Anti-money Laundering and Combating of
Financing of Terrorism Regulation, aimed at improving
the detection of terrorist financing. In 2011, the federal
Government strengthened the legislative framework for
fighting terrorism with the adoption of the Terrorism
(Prevention) Act. The Act provides measures for
the prevention, prohibition and combating of acts of
terrorism in Nigeria. It also prescribes penalties for
terrorists and their collaborators. The Act prohibits
terrorist financing and provides for the seizure of funds
and property held by individual terrorists or terrorist
organizations. In 2013, the Act was amended, and it
now designates the Office of the National Security
Adviser as the coordinating institution for Nigeria's
counter-terrorism efforts. The Act also requires the
Attorney General to maintain international cooperation
in Nigeria's fight against terrorism.

The value of international cooperation in the fight
against organized crime cannot be overemphasized.
In that regard, the engagement of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) is of crucial
importance. The UNODC notes that international
cooperation could be used as a tool for strengthening
sovereignty and security, not for surrendering it. The
Office also notes that States can use the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime to
cooperate through the sharing of criminal intelligence
and financial intelligence. The Convention's provisions
for mutual legal assistance, extradition and the
confiscation of assets also offer avenues for mutually
beneficial cooperation among States. Through its
technical assistance programmes, UNODC has helped
States parties to the Convention to strengthen their
capacity to combat organized crime.

Nigeria commends UNODC for these and other
efforts, which help to define its role as a global leader
in the fight against organized crime. Similarly, we
acknowledge the leadership role of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force in the global
fight against terrorism.

Still on international cooperation, we are working
very closely with our neighbours Chad, Cameroon, the
Niger and Benin to establish a multinational joint task
force to combat the terrorist group Boko Haram, which
has become a threat not only to Nigeria, but indeed to
neighbouring countries as well. We are also cooperating
with our bilateral and multilateral partners, including
all the permanent members of the Security Council,
and other friendly nations, to deal decisively with the
problem of Boko Haram. We are deeply grateful for
the assistance we have received, and we are certain
that, with sustained international support and our
unwavering determination, we shall before long defeat
and uproot Boko Haram.

In terms of our national response, we have put in
place the necessary legal and regulatory frameworks
that would make it difficult for terrorist groups and
criminal networks to launder money obtained through
criminal cross-border activities. However, there is
no doubt that this is an ongoing war. Therefore, as
terrorists and criminal gangs continue to search for
loopholes and systemic weaknesses they can exploit
to carry out their nefarious activities, it is our duty to
remain vigilant. We will continue to cooperate with our
neighbours and international partners in seeking ways
to effectively shrink and eventually close the space
available for terrorist groups and organized criminal
gangs to operate.

