Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): Today's debate on
the situation in Croatia reflects once again the sad fact that,
despite sustained efforts by the international community, the
search for an overall negotiated settlement of the conflicts
in the former Yugoslavia has not yielded the desired
results. In Croatia, a political solution for those areas of
the Republic of Croatia currently under Serb control has
yet to be found. Instead, tensions and conflict prevail.

My Government has consistently assured the
Government of Croatia of German support in its search
for a negotiated solution to the conflict. My Government,
at the same time, has consistently made it clear to the
Government of Croatia that we are convinced that there
is no military solution to the conflict.

Chancellor Kohl reaffirmed this view to President
Tudjman when President Tudjman visited Bonn two days
ago: the military offensive launched by the forces of the
Government of Croatia in Western Slavonia on 1 May
was a clear violation of the cease-fire agreement of
29 March 1994. The Chancellor told President Tudjman
that the Croatian forces in the zones of separation should
be withdrawn. President Tudjman assured the Chancellor
that the forces would be withdrawn by the afternoon of
16 May.

Today we acknowledge with some satisfaction that,
according to reports of the United Nations, there have
apparently been substantial withdrawal movements of
Croatian forces in Sectors East, South and North. At the
same time, we note with regret that, despite the
assurances given by the Croatian side, the withdrawal has
not yet been fully concluded.

We are concerned, too, by recent reports that
military units of the Croatian Serbs continue to be active
in the zones of separation. The demand by the Croatian
Government that it must be certain that Croatian Serb
forces withdraw from the zones of separation in a parallel
manner and that they do not occupy the positions vacated
by Croatian forces is, in our view, obviously justified. We
demand that UNCRO continue to monitor the situation
closely.

Continued activities of Croatian Serb forces in the
zones of separation would involve the risk of further
confrontation, which is not acceptable.

Let me stress again four points which, in our view,
are of particular importance. First, there must be no
further military measures or actions by any side that could
lead to escalation. Secondly, the freedom of movement
and safety and security of UNCRO must be fully
respected. Thirdly, all detainees must be released as soon
as possible. Fourthly, the local Serb population must be

 

treated with full respect for their human rights, in
conformity with internationally recognized standards.

Let me repeat what we and others have said on many
occasions: that to overcome the recent crisis in Croatia it is
urgent that the parties turn away from the logic of
confrontation and instead return to the negotiating table.
This may be difficult, yet, in our View, there is no other
way. We believe, and we continue to say, that the three-
phase process of negotiations - cease-fire, implementation
of the economic agreement and political negotiations - is
the only practicable path to durable peace.

