Ms. Edjang Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to congratulate the delegation
of Cote d'Ivoire on convening this relevant briefing
on drug trafficking in West and Central Africa as a
threat to stability. I also welcome Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and thank him for his
valuable briefing and recommendations, as well as the
dedication of his team.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is alarmed
and deeply concerned by the growing impact of drug
trafficking in Africa, particularly in Central Africa.
According to the UNODC World Drug Report 2018,
the overall production of opium and the manufacture
of cocaine have reached the highest levels ever
recorded. In Africa, that has triggered an increase in
the production, trafficking and use of drugs. In spite of
the progress made - albeit unevenly distributed 4 in
Africa's development in recent decades, such progress
is being undermined by drugs, generating new
layers of vulnerability in the development of several
countries and communities across the continent. That
is due in part to the African population being mostly
young, with more than 60 per cent under 35 years of
age. Moreover, the unequal and limited development
of several countries affects their ability to control the
traffic in and use of drugs.

Many African countries are experiencing very
serious problems, such as the resolution of protracted
armed conflicts - with seven ongoing peacekeeping
missions in Africa - in addition to post-conflict
situations, the scourge of terrorism, the illegal
circulation of weapons, piracy and maritime crime. As
Mr. Fedotov explained in his briefing, the complexity
and fragility of all of those situations are compounded
when combined with the drug trade, which undermines
peacebuilding and sustainable development efforts.
Narcoterrorism is fuelling the capacity and mobility
of terrorist and extremist groups in Africa, providing
income to Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and
associated groups, as well as Boko Haram, among
others. That can in turn increase the influence of
criminal and narcoterrorist syndicates in certain local
Governments, leading to corruption and destroying the
social and moral fabric of communities.

In order to address the situation comprehensively,
the African Union adopted its Plan of Action on Drug
Control 2013-2017. That stance was reiterated in the
Common African Position presented at the special
session of the General Assembly on the world drug
problem in 2016. In the same vein, the commitment to
sustainable development in Africa in order to curtail
the root causes of poverty and conflict, in accordance
with the 2063 Agenda of the African Union and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, reinforces
that vision. However, making progress in implementing
those efforts is being conditioned by the aforementioned
limitations of capacity, resources and contexts.

We pay tribute to the countries of the Economic
Community of West African States for their response
to the problem of drug trafficking, terrorism and
maritime crime, with the collaboration of the United
Nations and the international community. Initiatives
such as the West Africa Coast Initiative, the Airport
Communication Project, the Joint Port Control Units
and strengthening criminal investigation and criminal
justice, among others, have generated some successes
in the fight against drug traffickers and narcoterrorists.
However, those successes have led to the establishment
of new trafficking routes, facilitated by porous land and
sea borders through Central African countries. That in
turn is increasing the production, trafficking and use
of drugs in the subregion. We recognize the impact that
large drug seizures have on traffickers and their allies.
We must replicate that across all subregions in order to
solve this problem once and for all.

For that reason, we believe it essential that such
initiatives 4 with the participation of the United
Nations and various other entities, such as the regional
offices, the Department of Political Affairs, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNODC and
other relevant entities, as well as INTERPOL and other
partners - attempt to prevent unwanted transfer effects
from the very moment the initiatives are conceived. In
that regard, we call for the involvement of the African
Union from the outset of those initiatives in order to
ensure that they are recognized and influential at the
continental and subregional levels and integrated into
continental strategies. We would thereby be able to
intercept, neutralize and prevent the spreading of drug
production, trafficking and consumption to countries
and regions that are less affected.

Preventing terrorism and its financing, as well as
piracy and maritime crime, remains a priority for the
countries ofthe CentralAfricanEconomic andMonetary
Community. National and subregional initiatives, such
as the African Union Strategy on the Control of Illicit
Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons; the Intergovernmental Task
Force against Money-Laundering in Central Africa;
the 2013 Yaounde Declaration of the Heads of State
and Government of Central and West African States
on Maritime Safety and Security in their Common
Maritime Domain; and others, all tackle the issue of
drugs and interregional coordination.

Drug trafficking is a threat not only to international
security, but also to health and sustainable development
efforts. We believe that it is important for the Security
Council to remain involved in tackling this issue.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
commitment to fighting all forms of illegal drug
trafficking, production and consumption. Through our
Horizon 2020 national plan for sustainable development
and economic growth and our membership in Central
African and African Union organizations, we are
doing our utmost to collaborate effectively with all of
our partners in Africa and the world in this important
work. The Council can count on us.

