Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to express my sincere condolences
and sympathy to the Russian delegation following the
horrible terrorist attack that claimed the lives of the
President of the Chechen Republic of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Akhmad Kadyrov, and others.

Next, I would like to thank Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma for his excellent briefing on the
situation in Timor-Leste and to congratulate him on the
work that he and his team have accomplished in that
country. Finally, I wish to welcome the presence of Ms.
Ana Pessoa Pinto.

We have noted that, in recent months, Timor-
Leste has made significant progress in the areas of
security and economic and social development, thanks
to the efforts of the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste, but also to the valuable assistance of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). However, a number of challenges remain
to be met to better ensure stability, democracy and
justice and to strengthen internal and external security
and border control. Those are major challenges to the
peace-building process in the young republic of Timor-
Leste, but we are confident that they will be met with
success.

From that perspective, the elections to be
organized in villages - the first elections in Timor-
Leste - are a major test for the young republic.
Important measures taken in preparation for those
elections are timely and appropriate in that they will
enable us to lay the groundwork for the electoral
process in the country and will establish conditions for
success for the first national elections. My delegation
can only welcome that.

The development of Timor-Leste's relations with
all its neighbours will benefit the young republic
economically, but also from a political and security
standpoint. In that regard, we welcome the continued
improvement of the relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia, which has been made possible by the far-
sightedness of their leaders. We hope that the two
parties will soon reach agreement on the demarcation
of their land borders, given the importance of that issue
for the security of both countries. The willingness of
both parties to establish good-neighbourly relations
enables us to hope that they will swiftly resolve
pending issues, because we believe that an
improvement in bilateral relations will contribute
greatly to the consolidation of the stability and security
of Timor-Leste.

Along the same lines, we hope that the
negotiations between Timor-Leste and Australia on the
question of the maritime border will move forward and
that an agreement will soon be concluded, in view of
that issue's importance for the exploitation of mineral
resources in the Timor Sea, which will undoubtedly
benefit the economy of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste.

As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2004/333) indicates, there have been delays with
regard to the administration of justice and the training
of the police. While responsibility for policing should
be transferred to the national police of Timor-Leste on
19 May - and we welcome that - we believe that
continued support for the training of the national police
is necessary, since the establishment of public
administration and the strengthening of internal and
external security capacities are fundamental elements
for Timor-Leste's viability and political stability.
UNMISET's work in training the Timorese police has
had very positive results; we therefore believe that it
should continue during the consolidation phase.

The maintenance of external security also
requires UNMISET's presence to follow up on
developments in the security situation and to support
demarcation activities. We feel that the Secretary-
General's recommendations in that area are reasonable
and deserve support.

Timor-Leste will continue to need financial
support from the international community for some
time. The support of United Nations funds and
programmes, of international financial institutions and
of multilateral and bilateral donors must be sustained
and generous so that the country can attain the
objectives of its national development plan.

Finally, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendations concerning the extension of
UNMISET's mandate for a one-year consolidation
period.

