Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The Central and Eastern European countries associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - as well as the
associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, align
themselves with this declaration.

I would like to begin by paying warm tribute to
the Secretary-General's Special Representative and to
the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK) for the tremendous amount they have
achieved in Kosovo over the past 18 months or so.
When he took up his duties, Mr. Bernard Kouchner was
confronted with a profoundly traumatized and divided
society in Kosovo, a collapsed administration, a
dramatic humanitarian situation and an economy in
ruins. With his team, and in particularly difficult
conditions, he has relentlessly implemented the
mandate entrusted to him by the Security Council. He
has made resolution 1244 (1999) come to life. I wish to
salute here his tenacious efforts, which are now bearing
fruit.

Let us recall that, in 1999, hundreds of thousands
of Kosovars had been cast onto the roads or had chosen
the path of exile, far from their homes. Most have now
returned to the towns and villages from which they
came. One year after the exodus, it has been possible to
conclude the activities of the humanitarian pillar of
UNMIK.

The economy had been shattered and many
houses destroyed. This was the "year zero" for Kosovo.
Today, private initiatives have reinforced the massive
international aid effort to ensure that reconstruction is
successfully completed. The European Union is
playing a decisive role in this. Tens of thousands of
houses have been rebuilt, obsolete industries have been
gradually brought up to standard, a budget for Kosovo
has been established and a suitable legal framework is
promoting the recovery of economic activity. In all
sectors - housing, education, health, transport and
infrastructure - the results are there to see.

At that time, administrative structures were no
longer in existence. The old structures, subservient to
the parochial interests of a regime that had flouted the
rights of its people, had melted away in the turmoil.
New structures had to be built in accordance with the
principles of the rule of law. UNMIK ensured that this
happened. It worked methodically to set rules and to
create an administrative machinery from scratch. It
made every effort to encourage responsible Kosovars,
whatever their ethnic origin, to participate together in
this task. It did not persevere in vain.

I would like to congratulate the Special
Representative on the preparations for and conduct of
the municipal elections held in Kosovo on 28 October.
The Kosovo Force and UNMIK have worked together
to ensure security. The elections attested to the
favourable developments that we have witnessed in
recent months. The ballot took place in an atmosphere
of calm marked by a remarkably high turnout and
attested to the sense of responsibility of the people,
who carried out their civic duty in an orderly manner
and with dignity. The Administration will be closer to
the people and be able to listen better to its concerns. A
new and important step was taken towards the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), which
remains the keystone of the international community
activities in Kosovo.

The consolidation of democracy, the
establishment of the rule of law and respect for
minority rights remain among UNMIK's highest
priorities. In connection with the local elections, we
welcome Mr. Bernard Kouchner's intention to
nominate representatives of the Kosovo Serbs to
certain municipal councils and subsequently to
organize by-elections. Generally speaking, all the
initiatives undertaken by the United Nations Mission to
enable members of the Serb community and of other

minority groups to live at home in peace and security
should be hailed.

However, although less frequent, manifestations
of intolerance remain. Those who have an interest in
thwarting reconciliation among Kosovars of all
backgrounds continue their provocative acts. The
murder of four members of the Ashkali minority who
had returned to their village, mentioned by Mr.
Kouchner in his briefing, was a recent abhorrent
example that must be most strongly condemned. But
impunity will not prevail. The provocateurs will not
have the last word. They will be found and will have to
answer for their actions, as Mr. Kouchner has
promised.

All the inhabitants of Kosovo should be able to
live together on their shared land. That means the
return of Serb, Roma and other minority refugees. A
multi-ethnic, democratic and prosperous Kosovar
society, united in respect for the rights and identity of
all, is now, more than ever before, the express
aspiration of the international community. Despite the
obstacles that remain to be overcome, the United
Nations is resolute in its support for the Special
Representative in his tireless determination to attain
that goal.

Democratic change in the region will make
progress easier. The threads of dialogue can be taken
up afresh among men and women of goodwill.
Gestures of peace can now proliferate. Avenues of vital
cooperation can be explored anew. The return home of
the human rights campaigner Flora Brovina is among
the first significant manifestations of the new
circumstances, which will open the way to an early
solution to the overall issue of prisoners and missing
persons. Let us hope that these encouraging
developments will continue. They will thus enable us
to fulfil our aspirations and construct Kosovo on
foundations of law and justice.
Let me conclude on a more personal note. I want
Mr. Bernard Kouchner to know how much admiration
and affection the French men and women present in
this Chamber have for him as a man who all his life,
through his work - for the past year and a half in
Kosovo - has served the ideals of the Charter with
generosity, with enthusiasm and with effectiveness.
Sometimes the work of one individual can make a
difference. Bernard Kouchner, in Kosovo, has
demonstrated that magnificently, and we thank him.

