Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix; the Chairperson of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, Mr. Festus
Mogae; and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ms. Ursula Mueller, for their briefings.

After hearing the briefings on the monthly reports
of the Secretary-General on the deployment and
future needs of the Regional Protection Force and the
challenges faced by the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) in discharging its mandate,
let me thank the Secretary-General for the reports
and UNMISS for its work, despite the tremendous
difficulties and risks.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea is deeply
concerned about the ongoing and critical situation
in South Sudan. Five years after conflict broke out
in the country, which had recently gained national
sovereignty, it is of great concern that no tangible
progress is being made in the areas of politics, security
and the economy, nor with regard to the humanitarian
and the human rights situations. More than 7 million
are in need of assistance and 4 million are displaced
within the country and in neighbouring countries.
Food insecurity and ongoing clashes between the
Government and opposition forces persist, and the
situation could deteriorate in the upcoming dry season.
In his briefing to the Security Council on 7 December
2017 (see S/PV.8124), the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Lacroix, stated
that in such a challenging environment, UNMISS
is committed to enhancing its efforts in a proactive
manner in order to protect humanitarian facilities and
supplies, evacuate humanitarian personnel and protect
civilians, thereby preventing illegal recruitment, sexual
violence and so on.

It is clear that the Council and the international
community must redouble their support to the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and determine how to
shore up the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) in order to revitalize the
political process and end the current impasse. Although
sanctions could serve as a deterrent and break the
deadlock between the parties, it is also important for
the Council to consider other pragmatic approaches,
such as direct contact with the two sides and with
neighbouring countries.

By way of example, Ambassador Nikki Haley
travelled to Juba and Kinshasa in December last year.
The visit yielded positive results in Kinshasa, but not in
Juba, despite the promises made. In that regard, I call on
the Council to ensure that the African Union and IGAD
consider various options to help South Sudan to emerge
from the critical situation that worsens every day. This
year is a crucial one because the Security Council could
make a decision on the future of UNMISS based on the
outcome of the strategic review.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
entire UNMISS team for its determination amid
immense challenges. Without the efforts of UNMISS,
the situation in South Sudan would be much worse.
The Security Council should bolster such efforts and
work with the African Union and IGAD to establish
direct contact with the parties directly involved in
the conflict for the purpose of reaching agreement for
sustainable peace that would end the suffering of South
Sudan's people. As a member of the Security Council,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea will support all
measures leading to sustainable peace in South Sudan.

