Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): The
topic under discussion today calls on us to reflect
seriously on State and international responsibilities to
ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflicts on
the Security Council's agenda, as well as the tools with
which to achieve it. The briefings and analyses by
Under-Secretary-General Amos, Under-Secretary-
General Le Roy and Assistant Secretary-General
Simonovie illuminate the subject very well. We should
therefore remember that the Security Council has dealt
with the protection of civilians on several occasions
over the past decade. In that regard, I would like to
highlight the concepts embodied in resolutions 1265
(1999) and 1674 (2006), as well as in subsequent
resolutions and presidential statements.

The current circumstances demand that the
actions that United Nations bodies, including the
Security Council, take to address a crisis are framed
consistent with international law, in order to ensure
their legality and legitimacy. We believe that this is the
best way to guarantee lasting solutions in those
situations where the Council must act. The protection
of civilians in situations on the Council's agenda is a
matter that demands our commitment to concrete
measures such as those taken in recent months. In the
case of Cote d'Ivoire, for example, the mandate of the
peacekeeping Mission established by the Council
included explicit authorization for the Mission to use
any means necessary to counter the use of heavy
weaponry against civilians.

With regard to the situation in Libya, the
Council's response to that crisis was phased and
gradual, starting with a statement to the press, followed
by a resolution (resolution 1970 (2011)) adopted under
Article 41 of the Charter, and concluding with a second
resolution, this time adopted under Chapter VII
(resolution 1973 (2011)). The true theme of both those
resolutions is thus the protection of civilians.

Moreover, we believe that it is essential to
strengthen the work of other bodies with regard to the
protection of civilians, such as the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and, in particular, the
Human Rights Council. Establishing effective
cooperation in this area between the Security Council
and other relevant bodies and agencies of the United
Nations can make the Council's actions more
productive vis-a-vis the areas under its purview.

In that regard, recent international events have
prompted my delegation to reflect on the Human
Rights Council and its readiness to strengthen
mechanisms for prevention and cooperation with
States, in order to reinforce their own capacity to
protect civilians. We believe that work needs to be
done in order to ensure that governmental agencies are
aware of their responsibilities in this area and that they
are creating the institutions needed to ensure the
protection of civilians with a comprehensive and long-
term vision, including those entities charged with
investigating and prosecuting abuses in individual
cases. We believe that the creation of the Human
Rights Council, less than a decade ago, has enabled us
to address strengthening national capacities to protect
civilians more creatively and cooperatively. To that
end, we must move from a confrontational approach
towards one of cooperation. Only by building national
capacity to deal with the duties and responsibilities of
national authorities to protect civilians will we be able
to make a long-term difference.

As is the case with other thematic issues
considered by the Council, this too should be subject to
further reflection in order to strengthen the cooperative
mechanisms that enable us to achieve substantial
results in situations where civilians are particularly
affected. One way of doing this would be to resort
more frequently to other bodies and agencies in the
United Nations system able to work on building
national capacities when States request it.

The Security Council, pursuant to the functions
assigned to it by the United Nations Charter, must
address threats to international peace and security. In
that context, my delegation would like to recall the
request of the Council in November 2010 that the
Secretary-General include more extensive and detailed
information in his reports concerning the protection of
civilians in armed conflict when reporting on specific
events on the Council's agenda.

Colombia concurs with other Council members
that the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians belongs to each State. We therefore consider it
essential that international support be rendered in close
coordination with national authorities, in accordance
with the Charter and the norms of international law,
and with respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as well as for the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence. Any
initiative in this area should be mindful of the central
role played by Governments and relevant national
policies.

As Under-Secretary-General Amos mentioned in
her report, Colombia has suffered under the scourge of
a guerrilla group that has been described at the national
and international levels as a terrorist group, and which
has also been involved in illegal trafficking in drugs
and arms and has systematically attacked and
perpetrated deplorable acts against the civilian
population, using mines, bombs and explosives. With
international cooperation, for which we are grateful,
Colombian authorities are committed to a process that
is moving forward successfully in combating the
violence and providing redress for its victims. At this
very moment, we are in the final stage of enacting in
Colombia's national Congress a law providing redress
for victims and restitution of their lands, a reflection of
the Government's commitment to protect and make
reparations to the civilian population.

We understand that there are exceptional
circumstances where the Council may be required to
act without consulting the authorities, either because
the authorities as such do not exist or because the
authorities themselves are the ones deliberately
threatening the lives of their own citizens. This
underlines the fact that each and every situation is
unique, which in turn implies that efforts made to
resolve humanitarian issues must address the specific
features of a situation.

Lastly, we call on the Members of the United
Nations and the Secretariat to consider the thematic
issues discussed by the Council as an opportunity for
strengthening other bodies established with specific
aims in view. We believe this can improve our
performance, particularly regarding the results we
stand to achieve in the long term concerning the
protection of civilians.

