Judge Meron: It is a great honour to address this
body in presenting the second report of the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), pursuant to paragraph 6 of
Security Council resolution 1534 (2004). I am
particularly pleased, Sir, to speak here today under
your presidency.

It has now been slightly more than six months
since I delivered to the Council, as specified by
resolution 1534 (2004), assessments by me and by the
Prosecutor of the Tribunal's progress towards the
implementation of the completion strategy.

Let me turn first to the docket statistics. Since its
establishment the Tribunal has completed trials in 18
cases involving 36 accused. A further 17 accused have
pleaded guilty, three of whom entered pleas mid-trial.
The Tribunal's three Trial Chambers continue to
operate at full capacity, handling six cases
simultaneously. Currently, four trials are being heard.
Two other cases are currently in the judgement-writing
stage, with the first due to be rendered before the end
of December 2004, the second in January 2005. The
Brdjanin Trial Chamber rendered its judgement on
1 September 2004. The Tribunal has thus completed, or
is holding in the first instance, proceedings involving
60 accused in 24 trials and 15 separate guilty-plea
proceedings.

While many factors are important in determining
the Tribunal's ability to adhere to the schedule detailed
in the completion strategy, several factors stand out as
particularly important: the Tribunal's ability to refer
cases to competent national jurisdictions for trial;
improved cooperation with the Tribunal by States in
the former Yugoslavia; and a continued focus of
Tribunal resources on the most senior-level accused.

First, I will address the issue of the Tribunal's
ability to refer cases to competent national jurisdictions
for trial. Transferring some of the docket out of The
Hague has the potential to reduce the Tribunal's
workload in a meaningful way. Accordingly, the
adoption of rule 11 bis of the Tribunal's Rules of
Procedure and Evidence gave Trial Chambers the
power to refer an indictment to the authorities of a
State in which the crime was committed, in which the
accused was arrested or which has jurisdiction, and
which is willing and adequately prepared to accept the
case. In determining whether to refer an indictment, a
Trial Chamber must consider the gravity of the crimes
charged and the level of responsibility of the accused,
in accordance with the Security Council's intention that
the Tribunal retain jurisdiction over the highest level
defendants and the most serious crimes. Trial
Chambers may not, of course, refer cases to
jurisdictions in which the accused might not be
accorded a fair trial or in which the death penalty is a
possible consequence of the trial.

The Prosecutor has already begun to file motions
for the transfer of cases to domestic jurisdictions under
rule 11 bis. To date, she has filed six motions involving
10 accused, requesting that seven be transferred to the
courts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, two to Croatia and
one to the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. A
Trial Chamber has been tasked to review those requests
for 11 bis transfer, and, when it ultimately deems some
or all of those requests to be appropriate, the resulting
transfers will be of real assistance in keeping the
Tribunal on schedule for compliance with the
completion strategy.

Using the 11 bis process to integrate Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia and Montenegro into
the process of bringing offenders to justice will have
benefits that go well beyond a reduction of the
Tribunal's caseload and promotion of the completion
strategy. Involving those national Governments in the
process will bring reconciliation and justice to the
region, as well as promote the development of a
commitment to the rule of law. National courts can
play this role, however, only if trials are not used for
political purposes and if they meet international
standards of due process and fair trial. To that end,
other members of the international community have
begun lending support to the fledgling Sarajevo
tribunal. Substantial additional support is still required,
however, as the Security Council recognized in calling
for further financial support in paragraph 10 of
resolution 1534 (2004).

The States of the former Yugoslavia are in
varying stages of readiness to accept transfers of cases
from the Tribunal. A special chamber of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's State Court will soon be ready to accept
transferred cases of lower and intermediate level
officials. Officials from the Tribunal have provided
substantial support to the Office of the High
Representative with respect to creating the special
chamber. The Bosnian authorities expect that the
chamber will be operational by January 2005, and the
Tribunal is prepared to begin transferring appropriate
cases as soon as practicable.
The Tribunal is engaged in a number of initiatives
designed to expedite the process of preparing for
eventual referral of cases from the ICTY to Croatia and
to Serbia and Montenegro. For example, the Tribunal
organized an extensive programme of six training
seminars for Croatian judges and prosecutors who are
likely to take part in the trial of war crimes cases. That
programme, organized on the initiative of the Minister
of Justice of Croatia, consisted of seminars conducted
by the Tribunal's officials, held in the late spring and
the summer of 2004 and repeated in the autumn. The
seminars focused on the jurisprudence of the Tribunal
and on international humanitarian law, with the aim of
strengthening the familiarity of Croatian judges and
prosecutors with those subjects and of improving their
ability to try serious violations of international
humanitarian law.

During my first official visit to Croatia, in early
November 2004, I was impressed by the
professionalism of the Supreme Court of Croatia and of
the county court in Zagreb. I am optimistic about their
growing capability to try war crimes cases according to
international human rights and due process standards. I
have been advised by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission to Croatia, in a
letter dated 12 November 2004, that a limited number
of transferred cases could likely be dealt with
adequately by a limited number of courts in Croatia,
but that the transfer of any significant number of cases
from the ICTY to Croatia could overburden the
Croatian judiciary, given its present capacity.

The Tribunal has also hosted a week-long visit,
organized by the United Nations Development
Programme, of seven judges from the newly
established Department for War Crimes of the Belgrade
district court, commonly known as the Special Court
for War Crimes. That court is developing important
capability. The aim of the visit was to facilitate the
transfer of knowledge and experience from the practice
of the Tribunal and to establish channels of
communication between the Special Court and the
Tribunal. Upon the request of the Prosecutor, a Trial
Chamber is considering the transfer of one case to
Serbia and Montenegro.

A second critical factor affecting the Tribunal's
ability to adhere to the completion strategy is the
degree of cooperation from States of the former
Yugoslavia. At the moment, there is wide variation in
the several States' willingness to cooperate with the
Tribunal. While the cooperation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the Tribunal remains very good in all
areas, there is no cooperation on the part of Republika
Srpska. There has been no serious effort by the
Republika Srpska authorities to locate and arrest
fugitives, and the issue of missing and possibly hidden
documentation is still not resolved. Croatia's
cooperation with the Tribunal is good in all domains
except for the arrest of Ante Gotovina, the sole
remaining fugitive from justice from Croatia. The need
to arrest Gotovina and deliver him up to The Hague
continues to be an issue of the highest importance, and
one that should have been resolved a long time ago. As
for Serbia and Montenegro, despite the recent transfer
of Ljubisa Beara and some progress on the granting of
waivers for witnesses to be authorized to testify, the
ICTY remains gravely concerned over that
Government's lack of cooperation, in particular its
unwillingness to arrest fugitives. I agree with the
Prosecutor that the general cooperation of that State
with the Tribunal, especially with regard to taking
measures against the intimidation of witnesses and
against the pressuring of judges and prosecutors, is
particularly important.

Thirdly, the Tribunal will need to continue to
follow Security Council resolution 1534 (2004), in
paragraph 5 of which the Council called on the
Tribunal,

"'

in reviewing and confirming any new
indictments, to ensure that any such indictments
concentrate on the most senior leaders suspected
of being most responsible for crimes within the
[Tribunal's] jurisdiction".

Rule 28 (a) of the Tribunal's Rules of Procedure
and Evidence implements that directive by requiring
the Bureau, a body comprising the President and Vice-
President of the Tribunal and the presiding judges of
the three Trial Chambers, to confirm that every new
indictment submitted by the Prosecutor concentrates on
one or more of the most senior leaders suspected of
being most responsible for crimes within the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Up to now, the Bureau has
determined under rule 28 (a) that recent indictments
have all satisfied the seniority criterion.

I turn now to the question of our current standing
vis-a-vis the completion strategy schedule. The May
2004 Tribunal estimates suggested that we could still
complete the trials of those accused who were in
custody or on provisional release at that time, as well
as the trial, in all probability, of the fugitive Ante
Gotovina, before the close of 2008. But I also reported
that if new indictees or current fugitives were to arrive
at The Hague and require new and separate trials, it
would become increasingly unlikely that all accused
within the custody of the Tribunal could be tried by the
end of 2008.

Since my last report to the Security Council, one
new indictment has been submitted and confirmed: that
of Goran Hadzic. He is accused of, inter alia,
perpetrating mass murders and mass deportations in his
role as President of the Serbian Autonomous District of
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium. He remains at
large. Two more additions to the caseload come from
the arrests of Ljubisa Beara and Miroslav Bralo, two
fugitives who were already under indictment. Beara is
accused of playing a leadership role in acts of genocide
by the army of Republika Srpska at the Srebrinica
enclave. Bralo is accused of perpetrating a series of
war crimes including rape, murder and torture while he
was a member of the ethnic Croat HVO Jokers in the
Lasva valley region of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Both
accused have now made their first appearances before
the Tribunal.

Those new additions to the Tribunal's docket do
not require significant revision of the estimate I
presented to the Council in May 2004. At present, we
still estimate that - assuming a reasonable rate of
granting pending and anticipated 11 bis applications -
the Tribunal can complete the trials of all accused
currently in custody, including those on provisional
release, as well as the trial of Gotovina - provided
that he is transferred to The Hague before 2006 and is
tried together with Cermak and Markac - before the
close of 2008. But any further growth in the trial
docket, including the capture of Radovan Karadzic and
Ratko Mladic, or the arrest of any of the four Serbian
generals indicted in October 2003, would make
achievement of the 2008 deadline entirely dependent
on the ability to dispose of some pending or future
cases other than by a full trial at the Tribunal, whether
by guilty pleas or by 11 bis transfers. The new
indictments anticipated in the coming weeks, which
might result in four new trials, will further diminish the
likelihood of meeting the 2008 deadline if they
culminate in new arrivals, either arrests or voluntary
surrenders. We do not expect any of these new cases to
be appropriate for rule 11 bis referral. There may or
may not be the possibility of guilty pleas in these
cases, but that is a matter between the accused and the
Prosecutor.

This prediction rests, of course, on certain
important assumptions. Following the results of the
election of permanent judges on 19 November 2004,
we can assume that trials pending in November 2005
will continue uninterrupted. However, the Security
Council might be required to extend the mandate of
one permanent judge for a few months in order to
complete his case. Moreover, it is impossible to predict
delays related to the health of the accused or counsel or
other obstacles to the orderly conduct of trials.

Various factors bear on the Tribunal's future
ability to implement the completion strategy
successfully. First, it is absolutely essential that the
Tribunal have adequate personnel to stay abreast of its
steadily increasing workload. But that basic
prerequisite for effective and fair adjudication is
seriously threatened by the current hiring freeze, which
not only limits the Tribunal's ability to take on new
staff to meet its increasing workload but also forbids
hiring even to replace essential personnel who leave
the Tribunal. It is difficult to overstate the danger that
this poses to the mission of the Tribunal. Without
adequate assistance from legal officers, the time
required for the judges of the Tribunal to hear and
decide cases will increase dramatically. The current
shortage of essential staff throughout the Tribunal may
make it impossible to continue courtroom hearings in
six trials simultaneously.

I have myself been involved, during the past few
months, in attempts to persuade Governments to pay
their arrears. These efforts have had considerable
success. I wish, at this point, to express my sincere
appreciation to the Russian Federation and the United
States for having paid in full, in the last few months,
their assessments for 2004. This means that all five
permanent members of the Council have paid their
2004 dues in full. That is a welcome reflection of a
strong political will to see the Tribunal succeed, and it
provides a salutary example. The freeze must be lifted
without further delay if damage to the credibility of
international justice and far greater expenses are to be
avoided.

Secondly, the Tribunal must be able to focus its
resources on trying the most senior accused suspected
of being most responsible for crimes within the
Tribunal's jurisdiction within the time frame of the
completion strategy. That requires the development of
domestic institutions in the States of the former
Yugoslavia capable of receiving eligible cases referred
under rule 11 bis. The schedule would also be
positively affected in the event that additional accused
plead guilty. Improved cooperation by Member States
and appropriate measures to avoid interruptions due to
the expiration of the term of office of ad litem judges
in June 2005 would further assist the Tribunal's ability
to fulfil the goals of the completion strategy. It should
also be mentioned, as I wrote to the Legal Counsel,
that it would be helpful for elections of ad litem judges
to be held as early as possible in 2005, so as to enable
the Tribunal to achieve the most timely and efficient
organization of trials possible.

I have addressed some of the difficulties in
attempting to meet the Tribunal's completion strategy.
While taking those difficulties into account, I wish to
make clear that the Tribunal is fully committed to the
completion strategy and will not be complacent as it
makes every effort to successfully achieve the goals of
the strategy.

In this context, the Tribunal has a firm resolve to
do its utmost to conclude all trials at the first instance
by 2008. I was encouraged by the recognition by
members of the General Assembly, when the Assembly
took up the ICTY annual report on 15 November 2004,
of the measures already taken to increase efficiency
and cost-effectiveness at the Tribunal. I should like to
inform the Council that the judges have on their agenda
additional proposed reforms which, if adopted, would
have a real impact on reducing the length of trials
while at the same time respecting due process in all
respects. I will keep members of the Council and the
membership at large informed of the additional
measures to be taken.

I have a few concluding words. Despite the vast
scope and unprecedented nature of its task, the
Tribunal has gone a long way towards achieving the
Security Council's goal of ensuring that persons
responsible for war crimes, genocide and crimes
against humanity must answer for them in public trials
that meet the highest standards of international due
process. The jurisprudence that the Tribunal has
developed in matters of international criminal law and
international criminal procedure has already served as
an important resource for other war crimes tribunals
established under the aegis of the United Nations and
will no doubt provide guidance to the International
Criminal Court. Our legacy will include an impressive
corpus of decisions on substantive international
criminal law, humanitarian law, human rights and, just
as important, international criminal procedure and
evidence.

As the ICTY progresses through the most active
and productive period of its history, it continues to
send a powerful message of responsibility and
accountability to the former Yugoslavia and throughout
the international community. The Tribunal has
demonstrated that international prosecutions and trials
of war criminals under human rights and due process
are possible and credible. The Tribunal is committed to
continuing to improve its methods of work, its rules
and its procedures. But the completion strategy will not
be allowed to compromise due-process rights of the
accused or to create an impunity gap.

I repeat my past call and that of my predecessors
for each and every Member State to do its full part to
assist the work of the Tribunal. Twenty fugitives
remain at large and must be arrested. That number
includes Radovan Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and Ante
Gotovina. In this regard, I urge the Security Council to
be mindful of the risks posed to international justice in
seeming to allow fugitives the false hope that they can
outrun and outlast the Tribunal. With the end of the
Tribunal's life cycle in sight, we must together guard
against compromising the legacy of justice, the ending
of impunity and reconciliation in the former
Yugoslavia.

