At the outset, Andorra thanks France for organizing this open debate of the Security Council on children and armed conflict, as well as the speakers for their input on the importance of preserving and promoting the right to education in armed conflict. Andorra associates itself with the statement made by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. Andorra notes with concern the increase in violence against children reflected in the Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2020/525). Also worrying is the growing number of children displaced by armed conflict who are now unable to attend school. Similarly, the devastating effects of the coronavirus disease in recent times have deepened inequalities by disrupting children's right to education in conflict zones. This year we are celebrating the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established the monitoring and reporting mechanism, which has made it possible to significantly deter children's rights violations during armed conflict. This year also marks the twentieth anniversary of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, to which Andorra is party. It is clear that the work accomplished in recent years through those instruments reflects the commitment of the international community to protecting children. However, we must remain aware of the emerging challenges. The increase in attacks on schools and in the denial of access to humanitarian aid is alarming. We must step up our efforts to ensure that children receive the assistance and support necessary to secure their future. To that end, we acknowledge the role of the agencies on the ground, whose work and coordination are essential to ensuring the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Andorra also commends the essential work of the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to prevent violations of children's rights and to promote their reintegration. This year, the Office of the Special Representative has concluded 29 agreements with parties to conflicts. Andorra has strongly supported the work of the Special Representative in recent years through voluntary contributions. We are aware of her team's particular needs and the difficult conditions in which it must operate. For that, I thank her for her invaluable work and reiterate Andorra's commitment to her task. Andorra remains committed and will continue to work with the international community to ensure a protective environment and hope for the future for all children.
