Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council is meeting today
following a series of atrocious terrorist attacks that
resulted in hundreds of deaths. The Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates are now
threatening new attacks. We are all outraged by the
deaths of those killed in the Sinai Peninsula and in
Paris. Recent terrorist targets included Turkey, Tunisia,
Lebanon and, today, Mali. Boko Haram continues to
wreak havoc. ISIL has attempted to create a terrorist
caliphate in Iraq and Syria as a stronghold to further
expand its actions.

We unequivocally condemn all terrorist attacks.
We once again express our heartfelt condolences to the
bereaved friends and families and wish speedy recovery
to those injured. The masterminds and perpetrators of
those bloody crimes shall be resolutely punished. They
must be sought out wherever they may hide. We stand
ready to engage in broad cooperation with other States
to that end.

Mercilessly combating terrorism has been the
absolute priority for our country over the past few
years, which has been targeted by terrorist attacks
many times. The international community must fully
mobilize and once again demonstrate political will,
unity and solidarity in combating the common terrorist
threat, bolstering the fight with specific steps and
actions. We must be guided not by ambition, but rather
by shared values and interests based on international
law, in order to create a broad, international counter-
terrorism coalition. That is percisely what was called
for by President Putin in his recent address before the
General Assembly (see A/70/PV.13).

We welcome the growing understanding that
the time has come to join ranks in the international
community in the face of terrorism. The active efforts
and initiatives on the part of our partners in the Security
Council aim to tackle the challenge. This is indeed a
central concern for all that requires priority attention
and, most important, action, without any preconditions
or attempts to exert control.

Of course, we had to support France's draft
resolution. While resolution 2249 (2015) was prepared
in extraordinary circumstances and with a very tight
time frame, the French delegation did take on board
Russia's important amendments. We are convinced that
the Charter of the United Nations should be an important
foundation in combating international terrorism as it
relates to the use of force. We felt it important that that
be reflected in the text, as in fact it now is.

As clarified by the Russian delegation, the
preambular section of the resolution now clearly
states that documents adopted by the International
Syria Support Group on 30 October and 14 November
constitute a packet on the basis of which, in addition
to the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex), there
must be a settlement to the Syrian crisis.

The Council has taken a number of important
decisions aimed at strengthening the international
community's fight against terrorism and adapting it
to new threats and the changing tactics of terrorists.
Resolution 2199 (2015), on combating the financing
of terrorism by cutting off attempts to gain financing
through the illegal trade in oil, was adopted in February
at Russia's initiative.

In our view, the French resolution is a political
appeal, rather than a change to the legal principles
underlying the fight against terrorism. We consider
it a step in creating a broad anti-terrorism front by
marshalling comprehensive cooperation among all
States to end all manifestations of terrorism and
eradicate its root causes.

That was also the aim of the Russian draft
resolution presented to the Council for its consideration
on 30 September, which contains a number of practical
provisions without which combating terrorism in Iraq
and Syria will be difficult. We consider the attempts
by some members of the Council to block work on our
draft resolution to be politically short-sighted. One
cannot, on the one hand, combat terrorists while, on the
other hand, essentially play into their hands by trying
to achieve one's own aims. We aim to work actively for
the speedy adoption of our draft resolution.

