Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): We
have listened carefully to our colleagues. We share
many of their concerns. We welcome the expressions of
support. We join many in looking to the future, to a
better Iraq and we disagree profoundly with those who
still avoid the central issue.

The responsibility for the current situation lies in
the hands of the Iraqi regime, a regime which launched
two bloody wars and which has refused for 12 years to
give up weapons of mass destruction and join its
neighbours in peace. Iraq has repeatedly refused to
respond to diplomatic overtures, economic sanctions
and other peaceful means designed to bring about Iraqi
compliance with its obligations to disarm. The actions
that coalition forces are undertaking are an appropriate
response. The military campaign in Iraq is not a war
against the people of Iraq, but rather against a regime
that has denied the will of the international community
for more than 12 years.

It was regrettable that the Government of Iraq
decided not to take the final opportunity for
compliance provided in Security Council resolution
1441 (2002). The coalition response is legitimate and
not unilateral. Resolution 687 (1991) imposed a series
of obligations on Iraq that were the conditions of the
ceasefire. It has long been recognized and understood
that a material breach of those obligations removes the
basis of the ceasefire and revives the authority to use
force under resolution 678 (1990). Resolution 1441
(2002) explicitly found Iraq in continuing material
breach. In view of Iraq's additional material breaches,
the basis for the existing ceasefire has been removed
and the use of force is authorized under resolution 678
(1990).

As President Bush has said, we are acting to
compel Iraq's compliance with these resolutions,
because the United States, along with a coalition of
more than 48 countries, believes that the risk of
inaction is too great to tolerate.

I would now like to turn to the efforts being made
to provide the most rapid and effective assistance to the
Iraqi people. The current humanitarian situation in Iraq
is fragile, all the more so as a result of the policies and
actions of the Iraqi regime over the last two decades.
The United States has been planning, across all
relevant United States Government agencies and in
support of United Nations efforts, to anticipate likely
requirements. We and other members of the coalition
are prepared to administer necessary relief as quickly
as possible. We have consulted and are continuing to
consult with interested Governments, regional and
international organizations, civil society and, of course,
the United Nations.

We have pre-positioned $16.3 million worth of
relief supplies, including water-supply materials,
blankets and other shelter items in the region. In
addition, we have contributed more than $300 million
in food aid and more than $200 million in health and
other humanitarian assistance to United Nations
agencies, including the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF, the World
Food Programme and the World Health Organization,
and a multitude of non-governmental organizations.
Included in these totals is a $10 million contribution to
the International Committee of the Red Cross.

As we increase United States contributions, we
also urge other donors to contribute to these critical
humanitarian efforts.

We have also fielded the largest ever disaster
assistance response team, composed of United States
civilian humanitarian experts, to the region to assess
needs, liaise with partners and provide in-field grant-
making capacity. Forty-eight members of the team are
already positioned in Kuwait and additional staff will
arrive in the coming days. In fact, such a team
conducted an initial assessment of the port of Umm
Qasr yesterday. Its initial reports suggest that security
is acceptable for more detailed assessment teams to
move into the area.

We welcome the 19 March letter from the
Secretary-General requesting the necessary authorities
to ensure the continuity of the oil for food programme.
We fully support his request and we believe the
Council is close to agreement on a resolution that
responds favourably to the Secretary-General's
requests. We trust that other members of the Council
share the objective of resuming the flow of
humanitarian goods through the oil for food
programme as soon as possible. Progress on this
resolution must accelerate, putting political debating
points aside, if we are to minimize any interruption of
the programme.

There would be serious humanitarian implications
for the people of Iraq if the Council fails to do so.
Sixty per cent of the people of Iraq rely on oil for food,
regardless of the security situation. Insistence on
narrow economic interests and extraneous political
matters in what essentially constitutes a technical
adjustment of a humanitarian resolution would prevent
us from giving the Secretary-General the flexibility he
needs to begin immediately making arrangements for
the urgently needed humanitarian supplies. We urge
experts to move swiftly through their discussions and
provide the Council with a compromise text as soon as
possible.

As the coalition acts to enforce the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the international
community joins together to meet the humanitarian
needs of the people of Iraq, much thought has been
given to the future of Iraq. Our thinking is guided by a
number of principles. First, we will demonstrate to the
people of Iraq and the world that the United States and
the coalition aspire to liberate, not to occupy. Secondly,
Iraq must be disarmed of all nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons production capabilities and the
means to deliver such weapons. Thirdly, we must
eliminate Iraq's terrorist infrastructure. Fourthly, Iraq
must be preserved as a unified State, with its territorial
integrity intact. Concern for the safety of Iraq's people
has been foremost in our minds from the moment
hostilities began. The United States and the coalition
allies will provide security to prevent chaos and
retribution. Fifthly, along with other partners, we must
begin the process of economic and political
reconstruction, working to assist the people of Iraq in
putting their country on path towards prosperity and
freedom.

As President Bush has told the world:

"We cannot know the duration of this conflict, yet
we know the outcome. Unlike Saddam Hussain,
we believe the people of Iraq are deserving and
capable of human liberty."

Assisting and rebuilding a post-Saddam Iraq will
be a huge undertaking. Success will only be possible
by working with Iraq's neighbours and the international
community. This message was reinforced by President
Bush and the leaders of Portugal, Spain and the United
Kingdom in their statement at the conclusion of the
Atlantic Summit on 9 March in the Azores. The four
undertook a solemn obligation to help the people of
Iraq build a new Iraq at peace with itself and its
neighbours. They committed to work in close
partnership with international institutions, including
the United Nations, our allies and partners and bilateral
donors. The statement concluded with a call on the
international community to join with us in helping to
realize a better future for the people of Iraq.

We want to return control over the sovereignty of
Iraq to the people of Iraq as soon as possible. We will
stay as long as it is necessary to do this, but not one
day more.

