Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Salame for his briefing. We
very much appreciate his professionalism and diligent
efforts in the work of restoring the Libyan State. We
support the steps taken by the United Nations to help
to end the conflict in Libya on the basis of the Special
Representative's action plan. In that regard, we are
pleased to see the ongoing contacts between Libyan
parties, including the representatives of Tripoli and
Tobruk. We see progress in the discussion of issues
related to amending the Libyan Political Agreement,
which still represents the basis for a peaceful
settlement. However, it is clear that this is only the first
phase of the major job that lies ahead. We hope that
the negotiations will continue and will start to resemble
reliable agreements as soon as possible.

Once the amendments to the Skhirat agreement
agreed on by the Libyans have been incorporated into
it, its implementation should help to resolve the whole
complex of urgent tasks on Libya's agenda, including
restoring order on the security front, seriously
combating terrorism, reviving the economic and social
sectors, rectifying the humanitarian situation and
addressing the escalating problem of illegal migration.
At the same time, we believe that it will be crucial to
have the international cooperation of the appropriate
specialized bodies in order to counter the criminal
business networks associated with human trafficking.
That challenge cannot be left up to Libya alone.

We impatiently await the day when Libyans are
launched on the road to sustainable development and can
independently dispose of their country's rich resources,
which no one else has the right to infringe on. We are
concerned about the recent clashes around the Tripoli
airport. Such events are not uncommon in Libya,
unfortunately. Among other things, they are a sign of
inadequate control over the situation and a reminder of
how vital the task of establishing a unified system for
the State administration and security apparatus is.

A broadly representative inter-Libyan dialogue is
still the only effective way to deal with the protracted
crisis and achieve national reconciliation. There should
be no attempts to unfairly exclude patriotically minded
political forces from discussing the parameters of
national reconstruction. We hope that Libyans, with the
support of the United Nations action plan, will be able
to restore unity in their country, taking the interests of
every region into account.

We have consistently emphasized the importance
of consolidating international efforts to assist Libya.
Each mediating mission should function on the basis
of the same rules, aimed at uniting the country. We
welcome constructive initiatives, undertaken in an
understanding of the importance of strengthening the
central coordinating role of the United Nations. We urge
all the parties involved to give due and careful attention
to the ideas proposed by the African Union. We must
not forget that in 2011 a disregard for the regional
dynamics expressed by that important continental
organization resulted in the wasting of a genuine
chance for a political settlement for Libya. Instead,
in violation of a resolution of the Security Council, a
military aggression was launched that led ultimately to
the destruction of the Libyan State, which the United
Nations is currently attempting to restore.

On behalfofthe Chair ofthe Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni informed us about that sanctions
entity's work in the past few months. We appreciate
the Swedish delegation's efforts, led by Ambassador
Skoog. The problem ofthe illicit proliferation of arms in
Libya remains acute, affecting security in the country
itself and in the Sahara-Sahel region and demanding
the most stringent possible control over shipments
of military equipment to Libya conducted under the
current exemptions.

Russia cares deeply about the restoration of
peace and stability in Libya, which we envisage as a
united, independent State, playing a significant role
in international and regional policy. We are ready to
cooperate further in promoting the political process
in Libya, and to assist Mr. Salame' by supporting
trustworthy contacts with all Libyan stakeholders. That
is our principal doctrine.

