Mr. Schwarz-Schilling: This is the first time I
have had the honour of addressing the Security Council
as High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I am particularly pleased to be here alongside the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Adnan Terzic. That reflects my role
in Bosnia and Herzegovina today - a partner
alongside the Bosnian authorities.

I am addressing the Council today at a crucial
time in the development of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The phase of post-war reconstruction is coming to an
end. It is my job to complete it and to facilitate
progress towards Euro-Atlantic structures. This phase
will see the country progress from a framework set in
Dayton towards a structure established and owned in
Sarajevo, ready for closer integration with Brussels.

One of my key tasks in this process is to oversee
the end of the Office of the High Representative (OHR)
and the full establishment of the Office of the
European Union Special Representative. The end of the
OHR will also mean the end of the special executive
powers - the so-called Bonn powers. I look forward
to the support of the Security Council in completing a
successful transition. I hope that this can occur in the
first or second quarter of 2007, although it will depend
on a number of factors.

However, in order to achieve a successful
transition, an important principle is at stake:
ownership. That goes to the heart of my mandate. The
principle of ownership refers to the need for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to assume its full responsibilities as a
normal European democratic State, but the principle of
ownership also refers to the approach of the
international community. Our approach must change in
order to allow a democratic political culture to develop
that will be sustainable in the long term. There can be
no sustainability without ownership.

I would like to ask for the Security Council's
support in the new approach. That is easier said than
done. Indeed, there will be temptations for the
international community to act and intervene in order
to ensure short-term gains. Those are likely to increase,
rather than decrease, as we move towards the
completion of the present phase, but it is at that very
stage that such reactions and interventions can no
longer be compatible with the long-term development
of an independent and sovereign Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We have talked about ownership for some time.
Now we must be ready to uphold that principle in our
actions as well as in our words. That may mean that we
have to stand back and allow the Bosnian authorities to
take decisions, when previously we would have acted
and directed the process.

I see three priorities in 2006 for Bosnia and
Herzegovina: first, constitutional reform; secondly, the
general elections in October; and thirdly, the ongoing
stability and association agreement negotiations with
the European Union.

I shall start with constitutional reform. After
months of negotiations, the Bosnian political leaders
reached an agreement on a package of measures to
reform the Constitution. It is now up to Parliament to
take the responsible decision to adopt the package in
the coming week. The agreement is an important step
towards making Bosnia and Herzegovina a more
functional State, but it is only a first step.
Constitutional reform is a process and not an event.
Discussions on further constitutional reform will
commence after the October elections.

Bosnia and Herzegovina faces a historic
opportunity in the next few days. The decision by
Bosnian parliamentarians to pass the package will send
an important signal to the international community, and
specifically to Europe, about the country's readiness to
reform itself on the path to Europe and to serve its
citizens better. It is important that everyone understand
what is at stake. A "no" to constitutional reform would
send an entirely different signal to Europe and the rest
of the world.

In the general elections in October, the Bosnian
people will for the first time vote for leaders who will
have full responsibility for governing their own
country. There will in future be no safety net from the
international community to step in when there are
problems. That is how democracy gives ownership to
the voters of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Bosnian authorities have made a very clear,
positive start to negotiate a stabilization and
association agreement with the European Union (EU).
That sends a positive signal to Europe about Bosnia
and Herzegovina's professionalism and capacity to
negotiate with its future partners.

There are now two important topics on which I
intend to engage with renewed focus, namely, the
economy and education. Serious progress is required in
both areas if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to offer a
better and more prosperous future for its citizens.

Economic development is a prerequisite for a
stable democratic process and for the sustainable future
of the country. I will therefore make support for the
economy a personal priority of my term in office. I see
great economic potential in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There is annual economic growth of over 5 per cent
and scope for significant development in key
industries. But trade and investment are Vital to allow
Bosnia and Herzegovina to stand on its own two feet
economically. Moreover, we have a responsibility to
create favourable conditions for the economy to
prosper. We cannot encourage economic development
on the one hand while imposing restrictive Visa
regimes on the other. I am therefore lobbying European
Union member States on the question of visa
facilitation for citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Every healthy economy needs high standards of
education. There lies a key to a brighter future for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to reconciliation for
future generations. The young people of the country,
who represent the future, deserve a better education. In
order to be competitive alongside their future European
partners, they will need a better education. The lasting
division of the Bosnian education system along ethnic
lines has to end. The lack of responsible ownership in
the relevant domestic structures must change. The
Bosnian authorities and institutions have a major
opportunity to serve their citizens and to fulfil
international obligations in the field of education.
There will be great potential benefits across all aspects
of the country's development if progress is made on
this issue.

It is also our duty to resolve three outstanding
issues from the post-war period.

First, I regret that the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have not yet resolved the issue of full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), to ensure that the
remaining fugitives, chiefly Mladic and Karadzic, are
delivered to The Hague. Bosnia and Herzegovina's
advancement towards the Partnership for Peace and
NATO structures requires concrete results. We saw
good progress in 2005, but we have not yet seen the
same kind of progress in 2006. That is not acceptable.
The international community must take a firm stance.
Until the remaining ICTY issues have been resolved,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and others in the region will
not be able to take the final steps towards Euro-
Atlantic integration.

Secondly, I have already taken steps this month to
resolve the status of officials removed from public
positions by the High Representative. Removals played
an important role in Bosnia's post-war recovery, but
there are compelling reasons why those bans should
now be lifted before the Office of the High
Representative closes. That will not apply to those
removed for non-cooperation with the ICTY, which is
an obligation that Bosnia and Herzegovina has not yet
met in full. I have developed a parallel system to lift all
bans gradually, as well as to conduct reviews on an
individual basis. Such measures show the seriousness
of my commitment to transfer responsibilities to the
Bosnian authorities.

Thirdly, there remains one final issue whose
resolution needs the Council's support. That concerns a
legal anomaly that dates back to the United Nations
International Police Task Force (IPTF) mission. I
personally want to see this issue resolved before the
end of the mandate of the Office of the High
Representative. This concerns police officers who were
decertified by the IPTF without the possibility of
review or appeal. The EU Police Mission, the
successor to the IPTF, did not assume certification
responsibilities. That situation cannot be redressed
without the support of the United Nations.

I share and fully support the approach of the
Bosnian Government on that issue, and I have received
the full backing of the European Union to pursue a
solution. I believe the situation can be resolved
constructively to the benefit of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and to the credit of the Security Council.
The Office of the High Representative and the EU
stand ready to work with the United Nations to
establish a review body that can address this issue in a
proper manner. I am willing to send an expert to New
York to work with the United Nations, alongside
representatives of the European Union presidency and
the Council's secretariat, to facilitate setting up such a
body. It is time to resolve this issue. We should not
preach the principle of the rule of law and
responsibility for reforms and ownership while at the
same time contradicting that principle in our own
activities. I urge the Council to address this issue so
that it can be resolved once and for all.

I speak to the Council today as Bosnia and
Herzegovina stands at the threshold of a promising
future. Bosnia and Herzegovina has the opportunity to
be a fully independent, sovereign State. The country
must take on responsibility for its own political
reforms and economic development.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is now in a position to
signal to Europe and to the world that the country is
ready to become a full partner in Euro-Atlantic
structures. But we should be aware that the present
phase is probably the most challenging for both Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the international community,
with, on the one hand, the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina learning to take full responsibility for
their own progress and development and, on the other
hand, the international community learning to resist
intervention when key decisions are being taken by the
Bosnian authorities. The international community has
set out clearly the principles of democracy and the rule
of law, and put in place the foundations of a
functioning State. It is now time to hand over the reins
to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and their
elected representatives.

I look forward to assisting, advocating on behalf
of, and advising the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but no longer doing their job for them.
They must now seize the opportunities before them to
shape their own future.

