Mr. Zackheos (Cyprus): Allow me to extend to you,
Sir, my congratulations and to express my confidence
that, under your widely acknowledged wisdom and
leadership, our deliberations will be successful.

My delegation has aligned itself with the statement
made on behalf of the European Union, but in view of the
special significance of the item under discussion, I would
like to make a few additional remarks.

At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General and extend our appreciation for his
excellent, thorough report and to commend him for the
special importance the Secretariat and he personally attach
to the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. His recommendations merit the
most serious consideration and support of the international
community.

Cyprus considers this discussion in the Security
Council as a good opportunity for refocusing the attention
of the international community and its commitment to
strengthen peace and security and to support Africa's
endeavours for economic and social development. We
believe that Africa, with its talented people and vast
fertile lands, has the capability to face the challenge and
emerge as a significant factor in world politics in the next
century.

Cyprus welcomes the positive developments taking
place across Africa in the political field. We have been
encouraged by the democratization process and the efforts
of African countries in the field of protection of human
rights. We have also rejoiced at the termination of the
abhorrent policy of apartheid, which constituted an affront
to human civilization. We note in this respect the
contribution of Nelson Mandela, one of the greatest
figures of the twentieth century.

A major concern of the international community,
however, is the alarming number of mostly internal armed
conflicts in the continent, which, in addition to

 

endangering peace and stability, cause extreme suffering,
especially to women and children. In this respect, we
welcome the realistic recommendations of the Secretary-
General. In general, we support the close coordination for
early action and prevention between the United Nations, the
European Union and subregional groups. Our special
preoccupation, in view of similar bitter experiences since
1974, is the plight of more than 8 million refugees and
displaced persons. This problem needs to be addressed
urgently on the basis of human rights norms.

While we note the progress made in some African
countries, we observe that serious economic problems still
persist. Noting the courage and burden of African countries
in pursuit of economic reform, we believe that the
international community should redouble its efforts to
alleviate the suffering of millions of people. Special
attention should be given to debt relief and to the needs of
the least developed countries in Africa.

Economic development and social justice need to be
addressed as matters of high priority in order to enable
Africa to meet challenges and take advantage of
opportunities which have emerged internationally in recent
years.

My country, located at the crossroads of three
continents, has long been a bridge of cooperation in the
region. Being so close to Africa, we have always had
strong ties with the African peoples, especially in our
common goal to implement the provisions of the United
Nations Charter, which has always been a major factor of
our foreign policy.
Cyprus, within its potential, has consistently offered
assistance to African countries. In particular, the Cyprus
Government is providing scholarships for graduate and
postgraduate programmes, especially in the fields of
tourism, management, forestry and nursing, where we have
comparative advantages and experience. We have also
participated in election-monitoring in some African
countries.

We pledge our continued support to the efforts of the
international community, in solidarity with Africa, to
strengthen peace, cooperation and development in the
continent. In conclusion, we underline the need to act upon
the Secretary-General's report as soon as possible.

