Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): I, too, should like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Holmes for his informative briefing on the
humanitarian situation in the Sudan, Chad and the
Central African Republic. It is particularly helpful to
hear his first-hand observations, and we are grateful
that Mr. Holmes decided to focus his first field mission
07-29528
as Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
on that most pressing crisis.

The United States shares the View that the
international effort since 2004 has been largely
successful in stabilizing the humanitarian situation in
Darfur. The large-scale relief effort has helped bring
mortality and malnutrition levels below emergency
thresholds. However, as Under-Secretary-General
Holmes noted, in the past year key indicators have
taken a turn for the worse and our collective gains are
now under threat. Rising violence - including targeted
attacks on aid workers, increasingly restricted access to
populations in need, and the Government of the
Sudan's continuing bureaucratic stranglehold on relief
efforts - keep Darfur on the bring of catastrophe. We
commend the recent agreement between the United
Nations and the Government of the Sudan to lift
restrictions for humanitarian workers in Darfur.
However, we note that similar commitments have been
made and not honoured in the past. We therefore call
again on the Government of the Sudan to abide by its
commitments and to lift its obstruction of humanitarian
operations in Darfur.

We are deeply concerned about the continuing
rise of violence in Darfur, including the direct targeting
of humanitarian workers through vehicle hijacking,
detentions and armed invasions of non-governmental
organization (NGO) compounds. United Nations and
NGO staff who coordinate security awareness among
humanitarian actors are increasingly harassed and
prevented from doing their job. This environment of
violence and intimidation affects the morale of relief
workers who are already working in an incredibly
challenging environment and negatively impacts the
ability of United Nations agencies and NGOs to recruit
and deploy qualified staff.

In the last week, we have witnessed further
violence in eastern Chad, displacing up to 8,000
civilians in an area already hosting a large number of
Sudanese refugees. That highlights the broader impact
of the Darfur conflict on neighbouring regions. We
strongly support Under-Secretary-General Holmes' call
for the deployment of a peacekeeping force to eastern
Chad and encourage the United Nations to finalize
modalities for such a force with the Government of
Chad as soon as possible.
9

We share Mr. Holmes' positive outlook on the
humanitarian situation in southern Sudan. With a
negotiated settlement to the more than 20 years of civil
war, the people of southern Sudan are now able to
focus on recovery and development. We recognize that
continued support for the rehabilitation of social and
economic infrastructure in southern Sudan is critical to
sustainable peace and development.

We also recognize that assistance to returning
refugees and internally displaced persons, as well as
support for the communities that receive them, is
central to southern Sudan's recovery. We salute the
work of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration in leading efforts to assist displaced
Sudanese to return home and restart their lives.

Ending the violence and suffering in Darfur
remains among the highest priorities for the United
States. We continue to work closely with the United
Nations, the African Union and our international
partners to stop the conflict, ensure the delivery of
humanitarian relief and hold accountable those
individuals responsible for atrocities against the people
of Darfur.

We welcome the recent conversations between
Secretary-General Ban and President Al-Bashir
affirming the commitment of the Government of the
Sudan to the consensus reached on 16 November 2006
in Addis Ababa. We call on the Government of the
Sudan to honour its commitments and facilitate
implementation of the agreed-upon framework,
including the deployment of a hybrid United Nations-
African Union peacekeeping force to Darfur. The
Security Council will judge the commitment of the
Government of the Sudan by real advancement towards
peace and security for the people of Darfur.

