Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas for
his briefing.

I too can be quick because, as the German
Ambassador said, there is a good degree of consensus
in the Council on today's topic. I agree with the points
made by almost everyone here today. Let me just
highlight three issues.

First, concerning the elections, we very much
endorse the Special Representative's assessment of the
recent elections in West Africa and welcome all the
good work he has been doing to support those elections.
The United Kingdom believes that inclusive democratic
processes are critical, not just for international
peace and security, but also for creating an enabling
environment for investments and, more broadly,
sustainable development. It is absolutely vital that all
authorities and international partners work together to
ensure that future elections in the region are timely,
peaceful and credible.

Secondly, the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/549) highlights the devastating effect that the
deteriorating security situation in north-east Nigeria is
having on the people of the Lake Chad basin region.
It is a region that is often overlooked by the Council,
particularly in recent years. The United Kingdom is
discussing with the Nigerian Government what more
the international community can do to help it tackle the
crisis. Clearly, extending State authority into so-called
ungoverned spaces will be essential in order to stem the
advances of Boko Haram. We welcome the efforts of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel to
date and encourage further support to Governments in
the region to tackle the crisis and implement resolution
2349 (2017), on the Lake Chad basin region.

Thirdly and finally, turning now to the Sahel, which,
of course, remains a major concern for all of us on the
Council, I am pleased to say that the Government of the
United Kingdom has announced this week that it will
make a future commitment of 250 troops to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. However, we must all do more to help
address the root causes of the situation in the Sahel.
As we heard during our recent visit to the Sahel, that
includes reducing abuses by security forces, helping
Governments provide basic services and mitigating
the conflict over resources by helping people to adapt
to climate change. It is a good thing that the Council
has become more focused on the link between climate

change and conflict in recent months.
I also agree with my Chinese colleague who
said that we need to make better use of international
coordination mechanisms on the Sahel. We should
be using the Council, the Sahel Alliance and the
Lake Chad Basin Commission to make sure that the
international community and our partners in the Sahel
work effectively together to address the long-term
drivers of instability and poverty.

