Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by congratulating Ambassador Zahir Tanin,
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. I would
also like to thank His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora Citaku of the
Republic of Kosovo for their statements.

My delegation welcomes the fact that, despite some
residual tension, there has been an improvement in the
political situation in Kosovo, marked by a palpable
decrease in demonstrations and violent acts, as well
as the holding of legislative elections that unfolded
without any major incident. Furthermore, we welcome
the fact that the new President and the new Prime
Minister have reaffirmed their commitment to the
process of normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina as launched under the auspices of European
Union, as well as the fact that they are committed to the
full implementation of all agreements already reached,
including the agreement on the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo.

While we regret the lack of progress since the
latest meeting held in Brussels, Senegal would like
to encourage both parties to keep up the momentum
towards improving the political situation. I encourage
political actors in Kosovo to work to maintain a
peaceful climate, which depends largely on the quality
of the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade. My
delegation also encourages both parties to continue
and intensify that dialogue to the highest possible level
under the auspices of the European Union and urges
partner countries with influence to exert that influence
to promote the talks. Furthermore, my delegation
welcomes the progress made with respect to integrating
the judges, prosecutors and support staff of the Serbian
judicial system into that of Kosovo pursuant to the
relevant agreement between Belgrade and Pristina.

Further grounds for satisfaction for my country
are the European Commission's positive assessment of
Kosovo's fulfilment of requirements to advance its visa
liberalization application, givingrisetothe Commission's
proposal to lift the European visa requirements for the
people of Kosovo, on the understanding that, by the
day of adoption of the proposal, Kosovo would have
ratified the agreement on territorial demarcation with
Montenegro and strengthened its track record in the
fight against organized crime and corruption. Finally,
my delegation welcomes the efforts undertaken by
the Government of Kosovo in terms of promoting
the rule of law, as well as its intention to establish an
inter-ministerial coordination group between ministries
and relevant institutions.

It is for those reasons that the extension of the
mandate of European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) through 14 June 2018 seems
appropriate to us, as it will no doubt contribute to
the consolidation of the achievements in the areas of
the rule of law and human rights. Furthermore, we
welcome the activities undertaken by UNMIK in terms
of promoting reconciliation, transitional justice, human
rights and support for the process of normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina.

In addition to encouraging continued dialogue,
Senegal would like to urge all stakeholders to work
to calm the situation and make strides towards
development by promoting the implementation of the
agreements of 25 August 2015 in Northern Kosovo. We
therefore reiterate our support for the joint European
Union-United Nations programme aimed at building
trust among communities by protecting their cultural
heritage. Accordingly, we advocate strengthening
cooperation on the exchange of information to resolve
the issue of disappeared persons.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to again
pay tribute to Special Representative Tanin for his
enlightened leadership of UNMIK. We also welcome the
positive contributions of the Kosovo Force, EULEX, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and, of course, the European Union, all involved players
clearly committed to peace and progress in Kosovo.

