Mr. Ging: More than three years have elapsed
since the beginning ofthis conflict, and throughout this
time civilians in Yemen have been facing and bearing
the deplorable consequences of the conflict. We have
heard the statistics many times. More than 22 million
people - 75 per cent ofthe population, in fact - require
humanitarian assistance and protection. Three years of
conflict have left 2 million people displaced from their
homes; 8.4 million people do not know where their next
meal is coming from; and the worst cholera outbreak
in the world occurred in the country last year, with
1.1 million cases. The humanitarian situation is indeed
shocking both in scale and severity, and these figures
represent an urgent call to action.

In my briefing today I will focus on the
humanitarian situation in Al-Hudaydah, the expansion
of humanitarian operations across the country, obstacles
that humanitarian workers are facing and the impact of
the conflict on civilians.

Conflict in Al-Hudaydah governorate has escalated
significantly. Earlier today, we received reports that
attacks occurred around the entrance to one of the few
functioning public hospitals in Al-Hudaydah and an
adjacent fish market, causing civilian casualties. Since
1 June, violence has forced more than 340,000 people
from their homes across the governorate. Most are
taking shelter in host communities near their areas of
origin, while smaller numbers have arrived in Sana'a,
Aden and surrounding areas.

Sustained hostilities in Al-Hudaydah city,
interruptions to port operations or a siege of the city
would be catastrophic and must be avoided. There
is no contingency plan that can effectively protect
civilians from dire humanitarian consequences if
conflict in Al-Hudaydah escalates, as the capacity of
international organizations and their response will
quickly be overwhelmed. In addition, it is important to
recall that Al-Hudaydah was the epicentre of last year's
devastating cholera outbreak, and cholera infections in
the city are currently rising. It is therefore essential to
bear this in mind when considering incidents like the
one reported today, which affect public hospitals where
humanitarian partners are treating cholera patients.

Last week, air strikes hit water facilities in
Al-Hudaydah city and sanitation facilities south of the
city. Water and sanitation lines have also been damaged
in Al-Hudaydah as forces in the city dig trenches. As
we all know, damage to health, water and sanitation
infrastructure significantly increases the risks of the
spread of cholera.

Al-Hudaydah and nearby Saleef are the lifeline for
the majority ofimports of the essential commodities of
food and fuel needed by millions of Yemenis every day
to survive. I am pleased to update the Security Council
that these ports remain open and operational. In fact,
commercial food imports in May rose to their highest
levels since November 2016 and fully met requirements.
However, food and fuel imports fell in June and again
in July. While keeping all ports open is critical, we
are equally concerned about maintaining adequate
quantities of affordable imports through these ports. To
do so, the conditions must be created whereby shipping
companies have enough commercial confidence to
continue supplying them.

As conflict has escalated in Al-Hudaydah,
humanitarian workers have stayed and delivered,
and we thank the Special Envoy for his recognition
of this fact. About 90 per cent of people displaced
by recent violence have in fact received emergency
relief packages. These packages contain food, hygiene
supplies and other items intended to preserve dignity.
Within this, humanitarian partners are also providing
additional assistance to the most vulnerable, including
food rations, cash, basic household items and shelter
supplies. Programmes also continue in Al-Hudaydah
to provide medicines, equipment and staff to health
facilities, maintain water and sanitation infrastructure,
and truck water to displaced people who cannot access
piped networks.

In addition to efforts in Al-Hudaydah, regular
humanitarian programmes have expanded significantly
across the country. They are working in difficult
and dangerous conditions. In June, the international
humanitarian effort provided emergency food assistance
to 7.5 million people - an increase of 200,000 people
since January. It also provided water, sanitation and
hygiene services that benefited 6.3 million people - a
60 per cent increase since January. Similar increases
have taken place in other sectors. As of mid-year,
about 60 per cent of the people whom we are targeting
with assistance had been reached, and humanitarian
partners continue to work tirelessly to expand their
programmes further.

Partnerships have played a very important role in this
expansion. This year, 169 front-line partners - United
Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations and Yemeni non-governmental
organizations - are working together to reach millions
of people every month. Assistance is coordinated
through hubs in Aden, Al-Hudaydah, Ibb, Sa'ada and
Sana'a. A sixth hub will open soon in Mukalla.

Generous and flexible funding has also been key to
this scale up. The humanitarian response plan, which
has been recently sequenced to show first-line, second-
line and full-response activities, has received more than
60 per cent ofthe required $3 billion. A large part ofthat
funding came early in the year through a $930 million
unearmarked contribution from the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Additionally,
the United States, Kuwait, the United Kingdom and
Germany are among the most generous donors this year.

Notwithstanding the continuous scaling up of
humanitarian operations, serious obstacles persist.
Inside Yemen, humanitarian personnel face numerous
restrictions, particularly in areas controlled by
decision-makers in Sana'a. These include delays in
movements, detention of staff and supplies, attempts
to influence the selection of beneficiaries and
implementing partners, and other harassment. The
Yemen humanitarian country team is doing a tireless
and commendable job to engage decision-makers at all
levels to ensure that aid is safely delivered to the people
who need it across the country. However, more support
is needed to overcome those obstacles to humanitarian
access, including bureaucratic impediments.

The toll of this conflict on civilians and civilian
infrastructure is devastating. Incidents in which
civilians are killed or injured continue to be reported
with alarming regularity. I have already mentioned
several recent incidents, including today's, that
damaged critical civilian infrastructure in Al-Hudaydah
and their consequences. In addition, in Sa'ada, a water
facility was hit for the third time in July, depriving over
10,000 people access to water. Last week, air strikes
in Al-Hudaydah hit sites very close to humanitarian
premises, causing structural damage. In a separate
incident, air strikes landed less than 500 metres from
United Nations premises. All parties must respect
international humanitarian law, including the obligation
to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure, and to
take all feasible precautions to avoid and minimize
incidental harm. We also call on the parties not to use
civilian sites for military purposes and to allow civilians
to leave conflict-affected areas safely and voluntarily.

Finally, all parties must seize the current
opportunity for dialogue and work with the Special
Envoy to achieve a lasting political settlement and
sustainable peace. Humanitarian assistance - however
effective and large-scale - cannot mitigate the
destructive effect of conflict on every facet of daily
life. The Yemeni people have suffered too much for too
long. An end to this conflict is long overdue.

