Mr. Malok (South Sudan): Since this is the first
time my delegation takes the floor to address the
Council during your presidency, let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February. Although it is rather late in the month,
I would like to assure you of the full cooperation of
my delegation. Let me also thank you and members
of the Security Council for giving me the opportunity
to address you on this issue of vital importance to
my country.

Given the concern of the Council about the crisis
situation in my country, allow me to reiterate that
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan is
steadfast in its commitment to the implementation
of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudanin its entirety.
The commitment has been demonstrated by the
establishment and operationalization of the different
committees stipulated in the peace Agreement, such as
the Joint Military Ceasefire Commission, the National
Constitutional Amendment Committee, the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism and the Strategic Defence and Security
Review. These are clear precursors to a successful
implementation of the peace Agreement. These entities
have embarked progressively on doing what they have
been asked to do, and their work is crucial to the
implementation of the peace agreement.

On 11 February, His Excellency the President of
the Republic of South Sudan, Salva Kiir Mayardit,
appointed Mr. Riek Machar, leader of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition
(SPLM/A in Opposition), and His Excellency Mr. James
Waniga First Vice-President and Vice-President,
respectively. Mr. Waniga was sworn in to his new post
on 12 February and has officially assumed his duties
as Vice-President. As Council members already know,
President Salva Kiir Mayardit appointed 50 additional
members of the Parliament who had been nominated by
the SPLM/A in Opposition to serve in the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly. The parties also agreed
on the distribution of ministerial and deputy ministerial
positions in the forthcoming Transitional Governmental
of National Unity. President Kiir has already nominated
people who will take up the positions given to the
Government, and he is ready to form the Transitional
Government of National Unity as soon as the SPLM/A
in Opposition and the other political parties submit the
names of their nominees.

The return of Mr. Riek Machar Teny to Juba
to take up his position will open a new page in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. Therefore,
we call upon the Security Council and the Secretary-
General to use their good offices to call on him to return
to Juba for the immediate formation of the Transitional
Government of National Unity.
The security arrangements required by the peace
agreement for the demilitarization of the capital city
was unilaterally rolled out by the Government and today
Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) command has
embarked through GPS and started moving forces to
the new 25-kilometre-radius locations. We appeal to
the international community to provide support for the
establishment of new military barracks outside Juba.
The South Sudan National Police Service has also
finalized the list of its personnel to the Joint Integrated
Police. The leadership of the South Sudan National
Police Service is therefore waiting for their counterparts
from the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army
in Opposition (SPLM/A in Opposition) to finalize the
formation of the unit and the Joint Operation Centre.
The support of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, therefore, is required in realization of the
function of the Joint Integrated Police.

On 13 February, the joint command of the SPLA
and the SPLM/A in Opposition inspected the sites
allocated to be a residential area for the bodyguards
of Mr. Riek Machar. The security arrangements also
provide for Mr. Riek Machar Teny's security details to
be in Juba prior to his return to Juba. The logistical
details of such a huge force also require assistance
from the international community. The security in the
country has improved significantly, although we still
experience insecurity in Mundri and Gbudwe from
elements of the Arrow Boys. I wish I had enough time
to delve into the details of the situation in those States.

The greater Western Equatoria has been the beacon
ofpeace in South Sudan for the past 27 years, having been
the first area to be liberated by the gallant SPLA forces.
What we are seeing today is not the failure of politics
or poor leadership for that matter, but an extension of
what the world is facing. Climate change is a reality
and its negative effect is what we are seeing today in
my country. My Government actively participated in
both the Sendai Risk Reduction Conference and the
twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in Paris, not because of what our industries
have contributed to carbon depletion since we have
none, but due to what we are facing.

Today, the Dinka pastoralists cannot graze in
their traditional grazing land because they do not have
enough water and grass, as they used to have. That
forces them to look south where they can find water and
healthy grass for their animals. The newfound grazing
and water sources are predominantly inhabited by
farmers. Those are the causes of what we are seeing in
the Gbudwe and Mundri. The Government will restore
peace in the region and life will return to normalcy.

It is a well-known fact that the mainstay of the
economy of the Republic of South Sudan is mainly
from oil revenue. Therefore, the drop in global oil
prices affected local returns in South Sudan. That,
coupled with the conflict that has ravaged the country
for the past three years, has made the situation dire.
Nevertheless, as stated in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2016/138), the Government has introduced
some reforms that are aimed at improving the economic
situation of the country in the long run.

The Government further initiated negotiation
with the Government of the Republic of the Sudan on
the terms of the Agreement signed on 22 September
2012 between President Salva Kiir Mayardit and
President Omar Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir specifically
in the area of oil transport fees through the Sudanese
pipeline. President Al-Bashir agreed and the Minister
of Petroleum of the Republic of the Sudan was in Juba
to share ideas with his South Sudanese counterpart. To
further improve the economic situation in South Sudan,
the Government of the Republic of the Sudan agreed to
open its border and allow free movement of goods and
people between the two neighbours.

The humanitarian situation in my country will
improve only when we fully implement the peace
agreement. With its implementation, displaced persons
will be able to go back home and resume normal
life. The new non-governmental organization law
promulgated in the Republic of South Sudan gave the
Government the necessary tools required to restructure
how humanitarian issues are managed and delivered.
We call upon all stakeholders to join the Government
in exercising its sovereign responsibility through
the proper governance of humanitarian activities in
accordance with the new law.

On 12 February, my delegation was invited by
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan and
regional countries neighbouring the Republic of South
Sudan to discuss the state of the implementation of the
sanctions regime. As we told the Committee then and
I would like to reiterate the position once again before
the Council today, I strongly believe that the Republic
of South Sudan needs assistance, not sanctions, in
resolving the conflict it is going through. Sanctions
will complicate the already complicated situation and
shock it further.

We should instead focus our efforts towards the
implementation of the peace agreement as the best
way to foster peaceful coexistence among the people
of the Republic of South Sudan. The international
community can use more constructive and productive
means of engaging the parties, rather than sanctions.
The Government is disappointed by the plan to
impose sanctions, rather than adopt measures that
will encourage the parties to cooperate with the
international community for peace. Sanctions at this
crucial time in the history of South Sudan will only
harden the stance and encourage confrontation and,
above all, devastate the economy, increase economic
pressures and inflict additional hardship on people who
are already suffering and desperate. I call upon the
Security Council not to adopt the four recommendations
submitted to the Council by the Panel of Experts. Those
recommendations, if adopted, will derail the milestones
we have achieved so far.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating the stance of
my Government about the implementation of the peace
agreement in letter and spirit. We call upon the Security
Council and the international community to genuinely
support the implementation of the peace agreement
more positively both financially and morally.

