Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): We welcome this timely
public meeting to discuss the Secretary-General's latest
report on the situation in Sierra Leone. We also
welcome the statement by Ambassador Oluyemi
Adeniji, the Secretary-General's Special Representative
for Sierra Leone. I wish through you, Mr. President, to
assure Ambassador Adeniji of Pakistan's fullest
cooperation with him in his efforts to facilitate
restoration of durable peace and stability in Sierra
Leone, a country with which we have strong and
abiding bonds of friendship.

Even as I speak, Pakistan is in the process of
deploying its contingent in Sierra Leone. I am pleased
to announce that as of today a total of 910 Pakistani
peacekeepers have arrived in Sierra Leone. They are a
part of the first batch of over 4,300 Pakistani troops
who will be taking up their duties as part of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). In spite
of logistical problems not of our making, we are
implementing the timeline for our deployment, which
will be completed in August this year. When I speak of
the logistical problems, I refer to the fact that since the
aircraft provided to transport our troops is, perhaps, of
the forties vintage, it developed some problem and had
to land somewhere en route. That is why a new aircraft
had to be brought in to take our troops to Sierra Leone.

Our decision to participate in the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone was motivated by our
commitment to the cause of peace and the United
Nations peacekeeping role the world over. This
commitment is time-honoured and unconditional. Our
presence in UNAMSIL will be yet another
manifestation of our long-standing and well established
commitment to peace and prosperity in Africa.

Over the years, we have followed the situation in
Sierra Leone very closely and with concern. We are
therefore pleased to see in the Secretary-General's
report some signs of improvement in the political and
economic situation in the country. We share the
Secretary-General's cautious optimism on the positive
developments which have taken place recently,
including the forward deployment of UNAMSIL and
the relaunching of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programme. We also
appreciate the bold steps that have been taken by the
Government of President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah in
moving towards peace and reconciliation. We believe
that even bolder steps need to be taken by all
concerned to ensure the effective implementation of the
Abuja Accords and the rehabilitation of communities
adversely affected by the war.

However, we also agree with the Secretary-
General's views that in spite of hopeful signs, many
challenges and difficulties remain. In addition, there is
also a danger of complacency. We saw only last year
how a promising situation so easily and so quickly
deteriorated into chaos. We need, therefore, to guard
against over-optimism. The Security Council and the
Secretariat must not only remain vigilant, but also
ensure that mistakes of the past are not repeated.

We therefore urge both the Security Council and
the United Nations Secretariat to work closely with all
the relevant actors, including troop-contributors, to
ensure success for ourjoint efforts in Sierra Leone.

While the situation still remains uncertain, we
hope that we now have a window of opportunity on
which we can capitalize, and replace war and terror
with peace. We consider the recent developments but a
first step in the long and arduous process of building
peace and reconciliation in a country which has seen
some of the most brutal forms of conflict. The earlier
we, the international community, can bring the country
back to normal, the better. This includes the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons to their
homes, the restoration of State authority throughout the
country and the reconstruction of a society so heavily
scarred by war.

Moreover, we feel that the problem that afflicts
Sierra Leone is not restricted to that country alone. The
difficult humanitarian and security situation in all three
Mano River Union countries - Sierra Leone, Guinea
and Liberia - is clear for all of us to see. We therefore
also need to address the entire subregion as a whole,
not just one country at a time. We must work
constructively with all three countries not only to try to
remove the tensions between them, but also to find
ways to collectively address all their problems. To this
effect, we fully support the efforts which are being
made by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), and we urge the United Nations
also to take a more proactive role in finding a
comprehensive solution to the subregion's problems.

We believe that collective and determined efforts
are now under way, not only on the part of the
Government and the people of Sierra Leone, but also
by others from both within the region and beyond, to
heal and reconstruct this war-ravaged country. Pakistan
is looking forward to working with all concerned
parties to achieve our joint objective of restoring
permanent peace and stability to Sierra Leone.

