Mr. Kukan (Slovak Republic): Slovakia
appreciates and commends the efforts of the
Philippines presidency of the Security Council, which
took the initiative for our thematic debate today. We
feel very strongly about the role played by non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) in conflict
prevention and would like to add several observations
in our national capacity and from our own experience.

We find it very reasonable and worthwhile that
the Security Council would like to lend a helping hand
in the area of prevention and conflict resolution to the
Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed
Conflict, an integrated, global programme for research,
consultation and discussion, as well as to thousands of
small activists on the ground at locations of emerging
or full-on conflicts. For the same reason, it is necessary
that we support the conclusions of a number of events
jointly organized by the United Nations Department of
Public Information and the NGOs.

The citizens of Central Europe had an
opportunity to experience the strength of civil society
in the 1990's. Civil society offered them a peaceful
road to the resolution of inter-ethnic issues lingering
from the past and served as a catalyst for political
change. In Slovakia, we have very fresh memories of
that period, when our country was overlooked at the
corner of the international democratic community for
our own political reasons. The period was a cradle of
cooperation between forces oriented towards
democracy and like-minded civil society entities. Due
to the aforementioned specific track, Slovak NGOs
gained an assortment of practical knowledge, skills and
experience, which can be seen as very specific civil
society know-how.

Nowadays, the cooperation between Slovak
diplomacy and NGOs is broadly used in several fields,
such as domestic and foreign affairs, official
development assistance and democratization processes
in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe. Such
NGO engagement helps to avoid the risk of conflict
and possible destabilization of the region as a whole.

The birth of this systematic cooperation dates
back to the late 1990's. It was also the time when the
bloodiest conflict in Europe since the Second World
War, which took place in the former Yugoslavia, was
coming to an end. In my country, we initiated the so-
called Bratislava process, which involved, alongside
democratic representatives from the former Yugoslavia,
various Slovak NGO entities and those from the former
Yugoslavia. The Bratislava process contributed its own
part to peaceful political change in Belgrade and the
fall of the Slobodan Milosevic regime.

In the last few years, civil society organizations
in Central and Eastern Europe undoubtedly have
demonstrated their capacity for tolerant and peaceful
means of conflict prevention. I can well recall the
respect for non-violence shown by youth movements
and a variety of Ukrainian NGOs during the recent so-
called Orange Revolution.

Finally, facing the threats and challenges of the
twenty-first century, we believe that the United Nations
needs to be able to intervene to avert regional and local
conflicts more effectively. In order to enable the
Organization to really do so, we are convinced that it
might be of tremendous benefit for it to maintain a
constant and effective dialogue with the NGO sector, a
sector that would operate courageously at centres of
conflict. This applies especially to prevention and post-
conflict periods, because, during a conflict, NGO
operations are objectively limited, perhaps with the
exception of deliveries of humanitarian aid.

Therefore, let us follow the slogan, "cooperation
is appreciated", also speaking of the contribution of
NGOs to conflict prevention. Let us combine the same
goals and diverse tools, and we can profit more for the
benefit of us all.

