The President: The next speaker on the list is the
representative of Micronesia (the Federated States of).
I have pleasure in giving him the floor.

Mr. Lippwe (Micronesia (Federated States of)):
At the outset, the delegation of the Federated States of
Micronesia associates itself with the statement made
earlier today by the representative of Papua New
Guinea on behalf of the Pacific Small Island
Developing States.
The Federated States of Micronesia would first
like to thank you, Madam President, for the
opportunity to bring its views on climate security to the
Council. The Federated States of Micronesia welcomes
the fact that the Security Council today takes the
important first step to recognize its role in addressing
climate security. Indeed, for the Federated States of
Micronesia and other small island developing States,
climate change has been a serious security problem for
quite some time. So by necessity, my delegation is
speaking today, as it has been constantly and
consistently on many occasions elsewhere, about the
security threat climate change poses to our very
existence as a country and as a people.

As the climate change debate takes place in this
Council for the first time, members of the United
Nations have the luxury of a mixed political, scientific
and intellectual debate over its implications and even
on the appropriateness to of its being up by this
Council. But from the Viewpoint of an islander living
on island atolls merely a few metres above sea level,
global climate change is a security threat that must be
confronted urgently by the Council, in terms of our
cultural and geographic mortality. The circumstances
that confront us today because of global climate
change are unprecedented and threaten to render
meaningless all apparent social and economic
achievements and development in all spheres of our
societies.

The international community faces an
unprecedented threat from climate change, with a wide
range of possible impacts that can potentially cause
instability in all regions of the world. In the Pacific,
which is highly vulnerable to environmental changes,
the results are severe and widespread. In my own
country, Micronesia, within the past three months, from
January to March, islands in the state of Chuuk have
experienced unusually high tides that have caused
damage to food crops, sea walls and homes, and have
displaced residents, prompting the declaration of a
state of emergency in the affected areas. The truth is
that climate change is a security threat - and a threat
to every aspect of life on Pacific islands.

Climate change will create a set of problems in
the Pacific region. Rising sea levels will change
coastlines and quite likely submerge entire islands. In
addition to the irreversible loss of territory of
sovereign States, changes in geography could lead to
disputes over exclusive economic zones. Saltwater

intrusion has already destroyed crops in islands
throughout the region. Damaged fish stocks would be
devastating to the livelihood of regional residents. The
frequency of tropical storms will increase. As a result,
environmental refugees will put additional strain on
our small and vulnerable economies.

The Council is charged with maintaining
international peace and security. Thus, it should first
formally recognize that climate change is a threat
falling within its mandate. It should then have the
Secretary-General identify regions at risk and the
potential impact on international peace and security, as
well as appropriate responses, in line with Article 99 of
the Charter. Finally, the Council should remain seized
of the matter, since climate change is evolving.

