Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank the briefers for their statements. I
especially want to express our gratitude to Mr. Kubis,
for his three years of service in leading the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) through
what has been a very challenging period.

Just three years ago, Iraq was in a very different
place. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
controlled Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, and it
captured territory stretching to within 30 minutes of
Baghdad. ISIS fighters were committing unspeakable
atrocities against Iraqis, including selling women into
sexual slavery and murdering religious minorities.
They were using their safe haven to plan attacks against
the West.

But that was three years ago. Today Iraq is
liberated. With the support of the United States and
other coalition allies, Iraqis have taken their country
back. Displaced persons are returning to their homes
and beginning to rebuild. Most importantly, Iraqis
have successfully conducted national parliamentary
elections. Iraqi security forces went from taking
territory back from ISIS to protecting polling places in
just a few short months.

Government-formation talks are already under
way. This is a key moment in Iraqi history. Iraq's next
Government is going to make a series of important
decisions that will set Iraq's course for decades to come.
It will fall to Iraq's next Government to decide whether
to truly value diversity and create opportunities for
all of Iraq's people, including some of Iraq's most
vulnerable citizens, in towns and villages far from
Baghdad. The next Government will have to decide
whether Iraq is serious about elevating female leaders,
and it will be responsible for governing inclusively.
That means setting policies that allow Iraq to close the
door on the extremism and the sectarian politics that
have caused so much suffering before.

Iraq's next Government has its work cut out for
it. Bold leadership will be required. Government
formation is a challenging process, but once it is
complete, the United States will stand ready to support
Iraq as it continues moving towards a more peaceful and
prosperous future. As Iraq emerges from the shadow
ISIS terror, the Government has to focus on getting the
basics right. Keeping the lights on and paving roads
may seem like small steps, but delivering such services
will be essential for the credibility of the new Iraqi
Government. It will also be vital for the Government
to respect and promote human rights. Especially
after the crimes of ISIS, Iraqis must be confident that
their leaders will uphold the rule of law and pursue
accountability for atrocities. One important part of
that effort will be the work carried out by the United
Nations and Iraq under resolution 2379 (2017) to collect
evidence of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide by ISIS. That collaboration could serve as a
model on how to achieve justice throughout Iraq.

There is no question that Iraq is in a tough
neighbourhood. Surrounded by serious threats, Iraq
must be a force for stability in the region. The United
States looks forward to a partnership with the next Iraqi
Government that will allow us to address these threats,
combat terrorism and strengthen the independence
of Iraq's institutions. Just as Iraq is starting a new
chapter, the United Nations and its Mission in Iraq must
adapt too.

Last year, the Security Council requested that
the United Nations carry out external assessment of
UNAMI. The review team came back with a long list of
recommendations. Many are quite technical, but they
add up to an important vision for reform, one that would
make UNAMI more efficient and better at coordinating
among the many different United Nations agencies
that operate on the ground. Now the responsibility
falls to the Secretary-General to fully carry out the
recommendations and keep the Council informed on
the progress made on them. The United States will
closely follow that progress.

This month we will also launch the most substantial
review by the Security Council of the UNAMI mandate
in years. The new mandate will be more focused,
responsive to the needs of the Iraqi people and tailored
to address the current challenges in Iraq. The United
Nations must target the areas where Iraq needs the
greatest support, such as political reconciliation, the
delivery of humanitarian aid and support to Government
institutions to provide basic services.

Iraq's achievements in defeating ISIS and carrying
out elections deserve our collective recognition and
praise. Iraq has taken major strides towards a more
stable, secure and democratic future. Now Iraq's leaders
have the hard task of assembling their Government and
showing that they can deliver on the high expectations
of their people. The United States will be ready to
support Iraq in achieving that goal.

