Mrs. Gonzalez Lopez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank the Belgian presidency for convening this open debate on transitional justice, which is a matter of high priority for El Salvador. At the same time, we thank and take due note of the briefings delivered earlier today (see S/PV.8723). Our history has taught us that transitional justice is a fundamental pillar in the process of consolidating peace and democracy. One cannot move towards a future of peace and progress without addressing the troubles of the past and creating comprehensive strategies and mechanisms with a view to achieving truth, justice, memory, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence. Our 1992 peace accords ended an internal armed conflict that had lasted for more than 10 years. The agreements resulted in a reform process aimed at strengthening the legal and institutional framework of the State and transforming its political, judicial and security bodies. However, the agreements did not comprehensively address the other causes of armed conflict, such as poverty and _ socialinequality - and neither did they guarantee a path towards genuine reconciliation. At the start of our transition and with the support of the international community, important advances were made in the areas of truth and guarantees of non-recurrence. A truth commission emerged from the peace accords in order to investigate and clarify the most serious human rights violations that occurred during the civil war. That commission, supported by the United Nations, published its report documenting cases of human rights violations in 1993. It also provided a series of recommendations for the investigation of those cases, as well as for institutional reform and national reconciliation measures. However, days after the publication of the report, a general amnesty law was issued, completely voiding the possibility of complying with those recommendations. Moreover, the lack of economic opportunities and our vulnerable social fabric, on top of erroneous approaches taken in the past, served only to exacerbate the fundamental issues that caused the conflict in the first place. Those are the consequences of a partial approach to a conflict, and they continue to impact our search for peace today. That is why the Government of El Salvador is firmly committed to ensuring that our population lives in dignity, while guaranteeing the protection of human rights and supporting actions that enable us to advance towards truth and reconciliation. That is how, just hours after taking up office, the President of the Republic gave the order to withdraw from the San Miguel Third Infantry Brigade an individual listed in the truth commission's report as one of those responsible for the El Mozote massacre in 1981. That was of symbolic importance for the victims of abhorrent human rights violations that took place during our armed conflict. We consider it pertinent to note that a series of measures have been taken to reinvigorate efforts to promote the transitional justice process in my country. Those measures include the creation of two national search commissions, one for children and one for adults, as well as the small investigation unit within the Attorney General's Office for crimes against humanity and crimes that occurred during the armed conflict. Together with the United Nations, we promoted a virtual project for recovering historical memory, which arises out of the need for Salvadoran society to have an official space for building historical memory that collects and recognizes various perspectives on the country's recent history. We also enjoy an open and sincere relationship with other international human rights protection systems. In that connection, we hosted Mr. Fabian Salvioli, Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence, in May 2019, and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, in December 2019. We wish to emphasize that, when extending external support to a country in transition, it is essential to take into account its specific needs and the current state of the human rights protection systems in place, carry out a comprehensive analysis of the situation of vulnerable groups and promote the meaningful participation of women and young people. Finally, El Salvador firmly believes that transitional justice is critical to any peacekeeping or peacebuilding process. We take this opportunity to renew my country's commitment to peace, justice, democracy and respect for international law, which are the only way to ensure lasting and sustainable peace.
