Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I will also make a statement in my national
capacity.

At the outset, we wish to commend the Chinese
presidency of the Security Council, as well as Angola
and Senegal, for their initiative in organizing this open
debate. We are also grateful to Assistant Secretary-
General Zerihoun for his briefing.

Cyprus is a maritime nation with a ship registry
ranking tenth among international fleets. It is a major
ship-management centre, representing 20 per cent
of the world's third-party ship-management market.
Hence, maritime security is vital to my country. Cyprus
has been a member of the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) since 1973 and a member of
its Council since 1987. We have always been a keen
supporter of the IMO as the principal international
regulatory body on matters of maritime security and
safety. We have ratified all international conventions
developed by the organization in that respect.

In the context of contributing to the call contained
in the concept note before us (S/2016/321, annex) to
share national experience and best practices, we wish
to state that, at the national level, efforts against piracy
and armed robbery are regulated by a particular law
that includes West Africa and the Gulf of Guinea. The
law empowers the competent minister to regulate the
passage of ships through risk areas. Furthermore, when
a ship is in a risk area, the master of the ship and its
operator are obliged to implement additional measures
and use any means to ensure the security of the ship and
its personnel.

However, self-protection measures applied by ships
and their crews are limited in effect if not combined
with regional and international cooperation in law
enforcement and preventive measures. In that regard,
the Yaounde process needs to be firmly implemented
and reinforced. Furthermore, a renewed United
Nations focus on the issue of maritime crime in the
region, possibly in the form of a new Security Council
resolution, would be helpful in that regard.

In conclusion, let me say that Cyprus applauds
and endorses all initiatives undertaken to combat
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the context of the
United Nations, and remains committed to enhanced
cooperation and synergies at the international and
regional levels, in particular through cooperation with
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
Last but not least, we fully recognize the nexus between
maritime security and the need to promote economic
development, eliminate poverty and support regional
coordination mechanisms logistically and financially
to respond to the challenges we face. There can be
no security, stability or peace without development,
equality andjustice in all respects.

