Mr. Morejen (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for placing this
open debate on the Security Council's programme in
order to apprise us of the Council's efforts with regard
to threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. There is no doubt that this type of public
meeting and the growing interaction of the Council and
its subsidiary bodies with non-member States are
important efforts in the common goal of the
Organization to combat terrorism.

On behalf of the Government of Ecuador, I join
other delegations in expressing our most sincere
condolences to the Government and people of India in
connection with the reprehensible attacks in Mumbai.

Ecuador attaches great importance to the role of
the United Nations in establishing a global order based
on respect for international law, the principles and
norms set out in the Charter and the observance and
promotion of human rights and international
humanitarian law. In that regard, my country supports
the efforts of the United Nations to address the serious
security problems we face - including combating
terrorism, the global drug problem and transnational
organized crime - by implementing the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We also support efforts to
strengthen cooperation with the Security Council
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1540 (2004) and 1373 (2001).

In accordance with the new Constitution of
Ecuador, adopted this year by a large majority, my
country shall undertake additional reforms in the
criminal, banking and customs areas that will facilitate
the implementation of counter-terrorism measures, in
particular the financing of terrorism. The national
Government has also been working with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on a proposed
reform to the criminal code.

At the same time, Ecuador has installed
information technology in its ports and airports and
strengthened its cooperation with international
organizations, including Interpol, to share information
on the movement of those suspected of transnational
crimes and to prevent the international trafficking of
arms, explosives, hazardous goods and chemical
precursors. The country's security agencies are
continuously updating the consolidated list on
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated persons and
entities. Finally, with regard to transport security,
Ecuador applies international standards for the security
of air and maritime transport.

The implementation of Plan Ecuador represents
to the international community our ongoing desire to
address the problems of unconventional security issues
from a different perspective as our concrete national
and sovereign contribution to building peace in our
border regions and the Andean subregion. We have
enhanced our control operations along the border,
leading to the dismantling of more than 160
clandestine camps of irregular groups, including rest
posts and temporary drug-processing labs, and to the
capture of arms and communications equipment.

Ecuador is the largest host for Colombian
refugees in Latin America. In order to address that
situation, together with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees we have
implemented clear standards and humanitarian
procedures for processing asylum requests so as to
grant refugee status only to those who comply with the
parametres established in our national legal
instruments and international law.

In conclusion, my delegation is very interested in
the statements made in this debate by various
delegations, especially on the issue of the causes of
terrorism. We believe it necessary to stress the
importance of cooperation being aimed not only at
strengthening national counter-terrorism capacities,
which of course is critical but does not take into
account the fact that, as stated in the Strategy, the fight
against terrorism includes the fight against poverty and
social inequality. That in turn requires international
cooperation in the implementation of national policies
to achieve sustained economic and social development
through dialogue and inclusion.

We have spent many years and engaged in
numerous deliberations on the ways to eliminate
international terrorism. We therefore urge all States to
overcome their differences and allow progress to be
made on the relevant instruments, whose entry into
force is imperative to strengthening counter-terrorism
mechanisms.

