Mr. Hetesy (Hungary): Hungary is deeply
committed to the protection of civilians and welcomes
the Lithuanian presidency's initiative on the protection
of journalists in conflict situations. We also thank
today's speakers for their informative briefings.

While we fully support the statement recently
delivered by the observer of the European Union,
Hungary would like to add the following comments in
its national capacity.

For people in conflict situations, access to quality
and timely information can be a matter of life and
death. Furthermore, the unhindered work of journalists
has a mitigating effect on a conflict and on the worst
violations. Conversely, restrictions or attacks on
independent media, together with biased propaganda,
easily contribute to escalation. Yet in the past decade,
attacks againstjournalists reporting from conflict zones
have steadily increased in both number and severity. As
others have already mentioned, there is also have the
gender factor. According to a 2014 survey, nearly half
of women journalists said they had experienced sexual
harassment. Many of those crimes remain unreported
for fear of reprisals and stigmatization. When incidents
do receive public attention, blaming the victim is a
frequent phenomenon.

Mushrooming conflicts, asymmetrical warfare
and also a hunger for negative sensations in reporting
will continuously send media workers into harm's way.
Therefore, we must protect those on whom our access
to information partially depends. We commend the
Security Council for adopting resolution 2222 (2015)
today. Hungary is a proud co-sponsor of the resolution.

As many have also pointed out, outside these
walls General Assembly resolution 68/163, on the
safety of journalists and the issue of impunity, also
recommends practical measures to promote a safe and
enabling environment for media workers. Furthermore,
the resolution clearly identifies the threat posed
by non-State actors, including terrorist groups and
criminal organizations.

As your concept note (S/2015/307, annex) points
out, Madam President, the vast majority of these crimes
still go unpunished. Since 2014, the International Day to
End Impunity for Crimes against Journalists has served
to ensure that this issue receives constant attention.
While accountability for crimes can help prevent future
attacks, we must also point out that ending impunity is
first and foremost a State responsibility.

However, the increased number of attacks on
journalists is a symptom of a much broader problem
related to the diminishing respect for international
human rights law and humanitarian law obligations
in conflict situations. Therefore, besides treating
the symptom we will also have to focus on the
root causes. Based on that understanding, violence
against journalists can be addressed only through the
cooperation of States, United Nations agencies and the
relevant stakeholders.

The United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue ofImpunity is the first holistic
effort to address these issues. We commend UNESCO
as the overall coordinator of the implementation of the
Plan of Action. We also urge the Security Council to
build on the resolution adopted today in order to further
contribute to these endeavours in conflict situations.

