Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Let me
begin by expressing my gratitude to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing, as well as to Ambassador Tanin for his
remarks. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the current situation in Afghanistan
(S/2010/ 127). We would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the appointment of Mr. Staffan de Mistura as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan. We wish him every success in his work.

Bosnia and Herzegovina also aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union.

In the light of the latest key developments in
Afghanistan and the various important challenges that
the international community and Afghan authorities
will face in the near future, Bosnia and Herzegovina
commends the high level of intensity in recent
diplomatic activities aimed at helping Afghanistan and
its institutions. Our delegation therefore appreciates the
organization and outcomes of the Conference on
Afghanistan held in London on 28 January. Bearing in
mind the importance of regional cooperation for the
achievement of the long-term goal of a stable and
democratic Afghanistan, we also emphasize the
significance of the summit on the theme "Friendship
and Cooperation in the Heart of Asia", which was held
in Istanbul on 26 January. We also look forward to the
conference in Kabul scheduled for spring. That
conference is a very encouraging sign, as it will be the
first high-level meeting hosted by the Afghan
Government.

At the outset, Bosnia and Herzegovina would like
to emphasize its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan, as well as its support for all of
Afghanistan's efforts aimed at rebuilding the country
and achieving sustainable peace and constitutional
democracy. We expect that the United Nations will
continue to play a central and impartial coordinating
role in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan,
jointly with the Government, in order to implement the
Afghanistan Compact.

However, we are deeply concerned about the
humanitarian and security situation in the country. We
condemn the increased attacks on civilians,
humanitarian workers and Afghan and international
forces.

Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that current
efforts to promote and establish the process of
democratic transformation in Afghanistan deserve
strong support from the international community. In
that regard, we are convinced that several issues are of
fundamental importance.

First, it is evident that the organization of
parliamentary elections in September will be a great
challenge, not only for Afghan institutions but also for
the international community. We strongly encourage
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to provide overall political coordination of
the international support for the elections. The
elections should not lead us to forget the necessity of
future long-term electoral reform. We endorse the
efforts of the United Nations to continue to assist the
Afghan Government in that essential work. In order to
have an independent, impartial and credible electoral
process, it continues to be important to facilitate and
encourage the cooperation of the international
community and Afghan authorities to ensure a
conducive environment for the upcoming elections.

Bosnia and Herzegovina would also like to
underscore the crucial importance of the roles of the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission. We are convinced that they
play fundamental roles in the electoral process in
Afghanistan, and thus we stress the importance of
safeguarding their independence and transparency.

We consider the participation of all segments of
Afghan society in those elections to be of great
importance for the democratic transformation of the
country. We strongly support the measures aimed at
improving the participation of women and minorities.
We also welcome the efforts made to accelerate the
implementation of the national plan for women. Our
delegation encourages the Afghan Government's
continuing efforts in that direction, as we believe that
women's participation can only bolster the
Government's capacity to find solutions to numerous
challenges that Afghan society will have to deal with in
the future.

Secondly, Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches great
importance to UNAMA's role in providing good offices
to the Afghan Government, in particular in the area of
reconciliation. We believe that there is no alternative to
the dialogue between the Afghan Government and
opposition forces. In that regard, we support the
reintegration process and commend the proposal to
establish a donor-funded peace and reintegration trust
fund that would provide employment and financial
incentives for insurgents who wish to renounce
violence. We believe that such instruments are of
crucial importance to future social and political
cohesion within Afghan society.

Thirdly, our delegation recognizes the importance
and necessity of the leading role of UNAMA in
coordinating international humanitarian aid. At the
same time, we encourage UNAMA to include and
consult Afghans and to work through Afghan
institutions in the implementation of projects. We
would like to see the Afghan Government play a
greater coordinating role, as that is one of the
pragmatic and concrete ways to support the process of
transition to Afghan leadership.

Fourthly, Bosnia and Herzegovina firmly
supports the return of internally displaced persons in
Afghanistan. We would like to express our concern
about the estimated 296,000 such people, as indicated
in the latest report of the Secretary-General. Our own
experience in the post-war period allows us to insist
that these returns are essential to building a democratic
society and to re-establishing a climate of security and
confidence among citizens. We welcome all efforts
made in this direction.
We would also like to encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to continue with its positive
achievements in the implementation of the mine action
programme, with the support of the United Nation and
all relevant actors.

We believe that the aforementioned activities and
commitments constitute important steps towards the
new transition phase emphasized and announced in the
London communique and aimed at encouraging
Afghan-led leadership and ownership in different
areas.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the
renewal of the UNAMA's mandate for an additional
12 months.

