Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Judy Cheng-Hopkins for her comprehensive
briefing on the Organization's progress on post-conflict
peacebuilding. We would also like to thank Ms. Sylvie
Lucas for her briefing.

I may be repeating what has perhaps already been
said this morning when I say that the primary role of
States that have experienced the active phase of
conflict is furthering national reconciliation and
rebuilding safe and favourable living conditions for the
entire population of the country. That is absolutely
essential in order to avoid renewed conflict.

Experience shows that, in most cases, countries
exhausted by war or crises are unable to address by
themselves the entire range of problems related to
rebuilding security, ensuring law and order, protecting
human rights and alleviating poverty. There is a
significant need for international assistance in that
regard.

We are convinced that there can be no successful
and long-term benefits of peacekeeping support
without State ownership of the process. Countries must
define their own peacebuilding priorities, and national
Government bodies must manage the implementation
of those goals. That has been confirmed by experience
in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, where the
capacity of the international community to take
account of the interests and priorities of the host
country was leveraged by the readiness of national
Governments to assume responsibility for
implementing reform.

As has been noted, the United Nations
undoubtedly has a special role to play in coordinating
international efforts in post-conflict peacebuilding.
This work requires the coordinated efforts of Member
States, United Nations programme and funds, the
Secretariat, regional organizations and international
financial institutions. I would also note that United
Nations peacekeeping operations now undertake many
early-stage peacebuilding tasks. In addressing their
principal task of disengaging the warring parties,
stabilizing the situation and establishing conditions
conducive to a political process, United Nations
peacekeepers are also playing a critical role in creating
conditions favourable to providing more significant
peacebuilding support.
We should, however, take into account the fact
that peacebuilding is a multifaceted and long-term
process that extends far beyond the limited time frame
of peacekeeping operations. Therefore, providing basic
assistance to States for institution-building,
development and social and economic stability falls to
the Organization's specialized agencies, whose efforts
must not be duplicated but mutually reinforcing. In that
context, we support statements concerning the activity
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which is striving to
formulate recommendations to ensure uninterrupted
and coordinated international support for countries
emerging from conflict.

We note with pleasure the heightened attention
being accorded by Member States and the Secretariat
to various aspects of peacebuilding that require further
consideration and the development of strategies and
frameworks for practical implementation. In that
respect, I would refer in particular to security sector
reform, strengthening the rule of law and the
development of civilian capacities.

It is clear that positive peacebuilding results have
been achieved by regional actors, including
neighbouring countries and subregional organizations.
A fine example of such regional cooperation is the
experience of several African countries that have
overcome conflict and achieved some success in
peacebuilding. Such countries are ready to share their
experiences and could be the source of initiatives that
could be successfully implemented by States that have
recently emerged from crises. Such experiences are
tried and tested, empirical examples, and not just
theories.

The Peacebuilding Fund is an important
mechanism for rapid financing that helps to attract
long-term resources for reconstruction. It is important
that we support its work, and my country, Russia, has
confirmed its policy in that respect by making an
annual contribution of $2 million to the Fund, which
we will continue to provide.

