Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the situation in Timor-Leste,
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing
and Ambassador Santos for his statement this morning.
I join others in expressing New Zealand's deep concern
at the recent attacks in Timor-Leste on the President
and the Prime Minister. We wish President Ramos-
Horta a quick and full recovery.

We commend the people, Government and
parliament of Timor-Leste, the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the
International Stabilisation Force (ISF) for their initial
responses to the attacks. We emphasize the importance
of continued close cooperation between the

Government, UNMIT and the ISF over security
operations, in accordance with established procedures.
Thankfully, Timor-Leste's two democratically elected
leaders survived the attacks, but the attacks have
underscored how fragile Timor-Leste continues to be
and how easily recent progress could have been
undone.

New Zealand strongly supports the
recommendation by the Secretary-General to renew the
mandate of UNMIT for a further 12 months. It is
important for the United Nations to demonstrate its
sustained commitment to Timor-Leste, both for
practical reasons and for the reassuring message this
will send to the people of Timor-Leste. New Zealand
contributes personnel to both UNMIT and the ISF, and
we will continue to do so.

New Zealand welcomes the progress that has
been made by the Government of Timor-Leste, in
particular the successful conduct of national elections.
We commend the efforts of UNMIT in assisting Timor-
Leste towards those achievements. We recognize,
however, as others have today, that a number of serious
issues remain unresolved, including the future of the
security forces, the internally displaced persons
situation, Reinado's supporters and the petitioners.
Furthermore, Timor-Leste will need the long-term
support of the international community to overcome
the challenges of poverty, unemployment and fragile
institutions.

New Zealand supports maintaining police
numbers at current levels because we recognize that,
while there has been improvement in the overall
situation, it does remain fragile. The presence of the
United Nations police is an important deterrent to a
return to violence. UNMIT needs the capacity to fulfil
its two primary roles: to provide security, and, at the
same time, to support the durable reform and
rebuilding of the police force through capacity-
building and training. Both roles are equally important
to future stability in Timor-Leste. Close attention is
needed to the skills sets of United Nations police
officers and the way in which those officers' skills are
utilized. New Zealand hopes that the upcoming visit by
the Police Adviser of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations will help in identifying ways to strengthen
the United Nations police, including reviewing the
process for the handover of police posts to the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) to ensure that
PNTL is fully ready to assume those responsibilities.
New Zealand continues to believe that security
sector reform is essential for ensuring long-term
stability in Timor-Leste. UNMIT has a critical
supporting role to play. New Zealand strongly
encourages UNMIT to step up its efforts to engage
with Timor-Leste to find a suitable approach to
supporting them in institutionalizing and strengthening
Timor-Leste's security forces. A single coherent plan
that all stakeholders are committed to would help to
ensure a sound and enduring outcome to that process.

There are many other areas in which UNMIT and
the international community need to assist Timor-Leste
to help the young country stand on its own.
Strengthening the justice sector is a high priority.
Every effort needs to be made to counter perceptions of
impunity. In that regard, it is important that all the
recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry into
the events of April and May 2006 are fully
implemented.

Addressing the multifaceted challenges of
underdevelopment and poverty must also be pursued in
parallel with those other efforts. New Zealand will
continue to assist through its bilateral and multilateral
programmes.

New Zealand stands ready as a regional partner
and friend of Timor-Leste. We continue to offer our
support and encouragement to the leaders and people
of Timor-Leste and to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Atul Khare, and the UNMIT team.
New Zealand remains committed to working with the
international community in assisting Timor-Leste. We
thank the Security Council for its ongoing support and
for the leadership of South Africa in that respect.

