Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First, may
I join colleagues in thanking Ms. Sandra Honore for
her briefing. We are very pleased to see her here again.

The Security Council meets every six months to
assess the situation in Haiti, a country that has seen
instability and uncertainty with regard to its future.
We must therefore conduct an in-depth assessment of
the changing nature of the situation, so as to respond
appropriately to the situation on the ground and in line
with the needs of the Government and the people of
Haiti.

I first would like to thank Chile and the United
States, as well as the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), for organizing the
Council's visit to Haiti in the beginning of this year.
The visit proved invaluable in that it provided members
of the Security Council with an opportunity to note the
progress achieved in Haiti along with the challenges
that the Haitian people must face in order to realize
their aspirations.

We note the important work undertaken by
MINUSTAH, as well as the significant initiatives to
build the capacity of the National Police. We welcome
the increase in the capacity of the Haitian National
Police and call on the international community to
ensure sufficient funding to promote police capacity on
the administrative and planning fronts, as well as to
ensure an increased presence, in particular in hard-to-
reach regions.

We discussed with the Government a number
of topics having to do with health, education and the
economy, and it was clear that Haiti has made significant
strides forward after the destructive earthquake that hit
the country. However, more has to be done to deal with
the difficult situation. One fourth of Haitian children
suffer from hunger and only 35 per cent ofthe country's
inhabitants have access to potable water, not to mention
the still imminent threat of cholera as the summer
approaches. We have noted the desire of civil society
leaders to achieve stability and development, as well
as the courageous efforts of women's organizations
aimed at achieving greater justice and equality. We
must support those efforts, as well as those aimed at
revitalizing the economy and society.

We must work to create an inclusive and constructive

environment that promotes political stability, democratic
governance, development and guaranteed prosperity in
Haiti. We welcome the efforts of President Martelly
aimed at preserving the continuity of the State and at
strengthening the commitment of the opposition parties
and their leaders to work together with the President in
order to overcome the political crisis, in particular by
strengthening the capacity of the legislative authorities
to carry out their functions appropriately. We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her
efforts to promote dialogue among the various national
parties. On many occasions, we have emphasized the
importance of holding legislative and presidential as
well as local elections, following the 2015 time frame.
We call upon all Haitian political parties to better
engage in dialogue and cooperation in order to attain
that objective. We reiterate the importance of a fair,
transparent and comprehensive electoral process.
The Haitian Government faces formidable
challenges on the security and logistical fronts in
its efforts to enable the elections scheduled to be
held. It is essential for the United Nations and the
international community to remain in support of Haiti
and to stand ready to provide assistance in various
areas, including operational assistance through police
services. The United Nations has succeeded, through
various scenarios, in providing electoral assistance in
local contexts, and Haiti should not be an exception.
Efforts to promote the rule of law and the independent
institutions tasked with those efforts are essential
elements for realizing stability.

During the Security Council's visit, we saw that
there was an urgent need for an increase in services
in general, and particularly for legal assistance. On
the matters of provisional and prolonged detention,
overcrowding and the inhumane conditions in penal
institutions, we call upon the Government to act. I must
stress the situation of women in the prisons that the
Council visited, where some women had been awaiting
trial for as many as eight years. We do not know whether
they are guilty or not. The situation in the prisons was
extremely difficult and should be rectified as swiftly as
possible. We call upon the Government to consolidate
the major institutions for guaranteeing the rule of
law and improving the capacity of the monitoring
mechanism.

Finally, I would like to express our thanks to the
United Nations peacekeepers working in Haiti for all
their efforts and sacrifices.

