Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on an
item that relates to one of the most significant
challenges to international peace and security. I thank
Their Excellencies the Chairmen of the three Security
Council Committees for their briefings. The briefings
were of great importance because, although the work
of the Security Council counter-terrorism Committees
is of interest United Nations Member States, their only
chance to learn about this and formally make
comments on it is at these open biannual briefings.
With each of these meetings, we see progress in
the work of the three Committees, but we continue to
have the same concerns about their work. Today, I
would like to touch again on issues such as the lack of
a definition of terrorism, the need to observe legal due
process and human rights in counter-terrorism efforts,
the importance of objectivity and transparency in the
work of the Committees and the importance of
coordination with other United Nations organs,
especially the General Assembly.

At their summit meeting in Doha in March, Arab
States condemned terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of its source, its motives or
its justifications. They stressed the need to work to
address the roots of terrorism and to eliminate the
factors that fuel it. We are fully aware of the difference
under international law between terrorism and the
legitimate right to struggle for liberation from foreign
occupation. We call upon all Member States to work
professionally in the month ahead during the review of
the draft comprehensive convention on terrorism,
which will deal with the question of the definition of
terrorism.

The work of all United Nations organs, including
the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies, should
be guided by the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, which the General Assembly
adopted at its sixtieth session and reaffirmed this past
September. Consideration must be given to the
objectives and elements of the Strategy, including the
need to take human rights and international law into
account in the context of combating terrorism: the
Strategy was not adopted to guide the work of the
General Assembly alone.

Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) too
called for respect for human rights while countering
terrorism, as also stipulated in resolution 1456 (2003).
Moreover, efforts must be intensified to strengthen
system-wide coherence, as work is under way on
Council reform, in order to achieve genuine
coordination with the General Assembly in the field of
counter-terrorism.

We have repeatedly called for greater objectivity
in the Council's methodology for assessing the
progress made by States in implementing resolution
1373 (2001). We therefore welcome the adoption this
past December of procedures to be followed by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) to assess
progress, and we look forward to the balanced
implementation of those procedures in practice.

Resolution 1822 (2008) was the culmination of
tireless efforts to emphasize due process in the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). The resolution stated that sanctions measures
are not based on specific criminal criteria, but are
solely preventive and political in nature, but this does
not absolve the Council or the Committee of the
responsibility to respect the judgements of national,

regional and international courts. Furthermore, the
adoption of these procedures, especially in including
individuals and entities on the consolidated list,
enhances the credibility of the Security Council and of
the actions it takes to combat terrorism.

Accordingly, it was encouraging to see
communication between the Committee and the
European Court of Justice last year. It was also
encouraging to note that in December the Committee
set out to implement the provisions of resolution 1822
(2008) regarding amending its guidelines, and that it
has started the de-listing, as necessary, of certain
entries on the consolidated list and the granting of
more humanitarian exemptions. The Committee should
continue to review all the names on the consolidated
list and complete the task as soon as possible, before
next year's scheduled date, with a view to remedying
certain unacceptable situations, such as the inclusion
on the list of the names of deceased persons. To that
end, throughout our membership of the Council, two
years ago, we strove to have the names reviewed
periodically, in accordance with the Committee
guidelines.

In stressing the commitment of the State of Qatar
to the aforementioned principles, allow me to note that
a few days ago the capital of my country, in
cooperation with the United Nations, hosted a regional
workshop on the observance of human rights in the
context of the fight against terrorism, with a view to
raising awareness about the legal framework for
combating terrorism, respect for human rights and
international cooperation in that area.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I would like to
emphasize that no political issue should interfere in the
Committee's non-proliferation work. The Committee
must remain focused on preventing the flow of
weapons of mass destruction to non-governmental
actors. That being said, the best way to achieve that is
to eliminate such weapons, prevent their proliferation
and enforce relevant international instruments, in
particular the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.

In the same vein, resolutions relevant to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
should not be used as a pretext to hinder the use of
materials, equipment and advanced technology for
peaceful purposes or to prevent countries from
enjoying their rights to such use, in accordance with
relevant international instruments.

Like other Member States, the State of Qatar
recognizes the importance of the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In that
regard, I note that, last March, Doha hosted a regional
workshop on the implementation of the resolution,
which highlighted the importance of regional
information-sharing and provided an opportunity to
improve understanding of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

There can be no doubt of the importance of
regional information-sharing and of convening similar
workshops in the countries of the North, with the
participation of other countries. All such workshops to
date have been held in Africa, Asia, the Caribbean or
the Middle East, while none have taken place in
developed countries. The problems discussed in these
meetings are not exclusive to the countries of the
30
South. Similarly, the convening of international rather
than regional workshops is essential to the sharing of
information, since smuggling can occur between two
countries on different continents.

Finally, I should like to join previous speakers in
emphasizing the need for all States and regional
organizations to cooperate with the Security Council's
counter-terrorism Committees. In that regard, I stress
the commitment of the State of Qatar to cooperating
directly and through regional organizations, pursuant to
the decision on countering international terrorism
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the League of
Arab States in March.

