Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Some representatives have talked today about
the existence of chemical weapons in Syria. Their
talk is misleading and irresponsible because there are
no longer any chemical weapons in Syria. There have
been none since Ms. Sigrid Kaag announced before
the Security Council in 2014 that there were no more
chemical weapons in Syria

In her briefing today, Ms. Nakamitsu welcomed
the destruction of all the 27 chemical weapon facilities
in Syria, as well as the signing of the Tripartite
Agreement, which allows the United Nations Office
for Project Services (UNOPS) to continue its work
in Syria. It would seem that this information has fallen
on the deaf ears of certain colleagues who still insist
in this Chamber on waiting for the arrival of someone
named Godot who never arrives for decades, like in the
absurdist play by Samuel Beckett, Waitingfor Godot.

The threatening language used in the Security
Council will have no impact, especially if it is coming
from the presidency. We are diplomats and our task
is to prevent wars and threats while searching for
diplomatic solutions to international crises. That is our
understanding as diplomats and as ambassadors. The
Security Council is not a battleground. The Council has
made several mistakes in Iraq and Libya, and it is about
time to learn from our mistakes.

When my and other delegations first saw the
programme of work for the month of September, we
were convinced that certain permanent members did
not want the Security Council to live up to its mandate
of maintaining international peace and security; rather,
those members are prepared to stop at nothing to exploit
the Security Council and the working instruments of
the United Nations to pursue their own political gains,
to the detriment of maintaining international peace
and security.

There are Governments of permanent members
of the Security Council that have abdicated their
responsibilities and become parties that are politically,
morally and legally unqualified to defend international
peace and security. To be Clearer, I would say that any
party that protects and covers up the Israeli nuclear,
biological and chemical arsenal; uses pretexts to
maintain its own chemical arsenals; destroyed Iraq by
hiding behind the weapons-of-mass-destruction lie;
withdrew from the international agreement with Iran;
stopped funding United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees and withdrew from
UNESCO; and continues to put pressure on United
Nations funding while also threatening to withdraw
from the World Trade Organization, has no right
to launch forged and false accusations against my
country, Syria, of using chemical weapons, especially
if it has an historical record replete with established
and non-fabricated facts about its own use of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons against civilians in
many parts of the world.

Speaking of lies and fabrications, I would like
to share with the Council the details of a comic and
shameful television report that was prepared by a CNN
reporter called Arwa Damon, who, in Turkey, met the
self-styled victims of the alleged chemical attack in
Douma in April. That alleged attack was used as a pretext
by the American, British and French Governments, as
Council members recall, for their tripartite aggression
against Syria on Saturday, 14 April. Immediately
following that aggression, there was a meeting of the
Security Council (see S/PV.8233).

Going back to the television report in Turkey,
hundreds of kilometres far from the site of the alleged
incident that supposedly occurred in Douma, the CNN
reporter met with the so-called victims just one week
after the alleged attack. The reporter said that she
smelled the strange and stinky odour of a chemical
substance emanating from a school bag belonging to a
child in Turkey to justify the military aggression against
Syria. What a level of political and media decline!

Council members are aware of the fact that Syria
and its allies are engaged in a ferocious battle against
terrorist organizations, such as Da'esh, Al-Qaida
and the Al-Nusra Front, as well as affiliated terrorist
organizations. Members are explicitly and implicitly
convinced that we do not need to use internationally
prohibited weapons to eliminate terrorism. Members
know for sure that we have waged war against
international terrorism on behalf of their peoples and
Governments. We will not yield to shameful political
blackmail or to the threats of direct military aggression
posed by the Governments of the United States, Britain
and France. Those Governments have engaged in
every kind of prohibited act in Syria, supported takfiri
terrorism and given orders to the terrorist Al-Nusra
Front and its affiliated groups and organizations, in
particular the White Helmets, to use chemical weapons
against civilians in Syria in order to accuse the Syrian
Government and find a pretext to launch a further
military aggression.

We in Syria are fighting Al-Qaida on our
territories, not in Washington, DC, New York, London
or Paris. We are fighting Al-Qaida itself, which was
responsible for the aggression of 11 September 2001 in
New York City. We are fighting Al-Qaida, which has
attacked Paris, London and many European capitals.
However, some members of the Council are rewarding
us by supporting Al-Qaida against us, while we have
been fighting Al-Qaida on their behalf and their
peoples' behalf.

Those in this Chamber who are supposed to
uphold international law and the legitimacy of the
Charter should ask themselves why Syria would use an
internationally prohibited weapon that we do not possess
it and that does not yield a real military benefit. Why
would we do that? It is simply being used as a pretext
for the three aggressors to wage one aggression after
another against us. Why is it that the chemical weapon
allegedly used only impacts women and children and
not terrorists? How are the Governments of the three
aggressors able to predict the place, date and kind of
chemical weapon that is going to be used in Syria? Why
are these Governments are in sync with the terrorists of
the Al-Nusra Front and the White Helmets regarding
the predictability of the time and place of an attack?
Why are the Security Council and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weappons (OPCW) unable
to deal with the information provided by Syria?

In that regard, in recent years Syria has sent
156 official letters to the Security Council and the
OPCW regarding the toxic chemical weapons that are
possessed, stockpiled and prepared by terrorist armed
groups in Syria to be used against civilians in order to
accuse the Syrian army of using them. Nobody reads or
wants to read those letters. Nobody wants to cooperate
with the Syrian Government to combat terrorism and
stop the terrorist groups from using chemical weapons.
Why? Because some people are opposed to resolving
the problem in Syria and want to invest in terrorism.

We have many questions to ask, and the answers
are already known. Those three Governments have
failed over the past eight years to achieve their goal
in Syria by supporting terrorism. That is why those
three Governments are carrying out their actions
today openly and flagrantly. They are conducting
direct military aggression against Syria and illegally
deploying military forces in parts of my country.
Those Governments are hindering the political
process in Geneva, Astana and Sochi. They will try to
prevent the eradication of terrorism in Idlib and other
places, continue to impose a suffocating economic
embargo on the Syrian people, block the funding of
Syria's reconstruction and recovery, and prevent the
repatriation of Syrian refugees and displaced persons
so that they can live a dignified, safe and peaceful life.

I would like to underscore the fact that, following
the destruction of the two last facilities, to which
Ms. Nakamitsu referred earlier, and the dispatch of the
OPCW Fact-find Mission to verify their destruction
and clear the debris from the two sites, the Syrian Arab
Republic has fulfilled all its obligations by destroying
all sites related to the production of chemical weapons.

The Government of my country confirms that two
days ago it sent an official letter to the members of the
Security Council containing precise and highly credible
information about preparations under way by terrorist
groups in Idlib and in the suburbs of Latakia and Aleppo
in connection with toxic chemical substances to be
widely used against civilians, with a view to hampering
the military operation against terrorism in those areas.

Lastly, it is all too clear and sad that certain
permanent members of the Security Council, including
the current presidency, have conflated the actual topic
of today's meeting with that of tomorrow's meeting.

The meeting rose at 4.45 pm.
