The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Afghanistan in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhddi
(Afghanistan), took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/l278, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the Council's prior
consultations.

I should also like to draw attention to the
following documents: S/2002/ll96, which contains a
letter dated 21 October 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of Turkey to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, and S/2002/l296,
which contains a letter dated 25 November 2002 from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council transmitting a joint letter from the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Germany and the
Netherlands.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. If I
hear no objection, I shall now put the draft resolution
to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Colombia, France,
Guinea, Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway,
Russian Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America


The President (spoke in Chinese): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1444 (2002).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.

