Mr. Schori (Sweden): I thank Mr. Guehenno for
his very informative briefing; he left no questions
unanswered. As members know, I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and on behalf
of all the associated countries of the European Union,
as well as of the European Free Trade Association
country member of the European Economic Area
Iceland.

I will spare the Council my full statement, copies
of which are available to members. Let me pick out just
three points. First of all, I would mention the situation
of minorities in Kosovo. According to recent reports
from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the situation is
getting worse and worse. But not only that: there are
signs that these terrorist acts, harassment and attacks
are increasingly well coordinated and organized. It is
therefore so important to insist that all political leaders,
especially Kosovo Albanian leaders, act in deeds as
well as in words.

My second point relates to missing persons. I
welcome the constructive attitude just expressed by the
previous speaker. I would say that it is important to
clarify the fate of all missing persons. The setting up of
the joint mechanism is one positive step that must be
continued.

Thirdly, the European Union welcomes the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1345 (2001)
regarding the situation in south-eastern Serbia and the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. At a time
when new perspectives for the region are opening up,
we wish to underline that there is no future for those
who seek to achieve their aims by violent means,
whether for nationalist or other causes. The European
Union will support only those who choose the path of
peace, democracy, reconciliation and regional
cooperation. In that context, we welcome the signing
today of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
between the European Union and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.

Finally, Ambassador Mahbubani evoked the ghost
in Hamlet and put some questions. I would say that the
difference between Hamlet's times and these times is
that we have hundreds of thousands of ghosts to deal
with - and that is why we are here.

