Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this month and for holding this important open debate during a milestone year for the United Nations - the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Organization, which embodies the sum of the collective memory and achievements of humankind of more than three-quarters of a century and its hope for the future. I would also to thank the Deputy Prime Minister of Viet Nam for presiding over this debate earlier last week, the Secretary-General, Mr. Antoenio Guterres, and the Chair of the Elders, Mrs. Mary Robinson, for their interventions. I would also like to congratulate the new non-permanent members - Tunisia, Estonia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and the Niger - on starting their two-year term on the Security Council and wish them the best of luck. Lebanon, is proud to have been one of the founding Members of the United Nations and to have been represented in San Francisco 75 years ago. Lebanon is also honoured to be one of a handful of countries that drafted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. A country with such a legacy and history does not look at the United Nations as a mere organization, regardless of its limitations and shortcomings; it sees it as the best hope for humankind, especially for small States. Lebanon sees the United Nations, as all small States do, as the guarantee of its sovereignty and independence, and views it as the embodiment of a rules-based system in which all enjoy equal rights and the principle of sovereign equality, as Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations promises. In San Francisco, the then Governor of California, Earl Warren, addressed the attendees of the United Nations Conference on International Organization and said that, "We have learned that understanding of one another's problems is the greatest assurance of peace". It is this peace and the determination to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war that have guided the work of Member States over the past seven decades with successes, as well as failures. At the United Nations, the world community has achieved many successes over the past 75 years in political, economic, and social issues. Human rights and their protection around the world - no matter how imperfect - are one of the success stories. With regard to gender, it should be remembered that only 4 out of the 850 representatives who signed the Charter were women. We have come a long way, but we still have a long way to go. In conflicts around the world today, people say that the United Nations did this or failed to do that, but we all forget that, as my predecessor Ambassador Charles Malik put it, the United Nations in its activities mirrors the objective political realities of the world. Let us all look in the mirror, and we will find the answers to what ails our world. Some expect the United Nations to achieve miracles, as if the United Nations had a power of its own, independent of its components. Conflicts are mushrooming and becoming resistant to solution. Nature and the environment have been under attack. Force, not the rule of law, is the guiding principle instead of the last resort. Inequality is becoming the norm, especially in international relations. Member States are doing this to themselves and to others. Seventy-five years ago, the world came together and we committed ourselves to upholding the set of principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. President Truman, at the conclusion of the San Francisco Conference, considered the failure to fulfil our commitment to the principles of the Charter as an act of betrayal. He warned that, "If we seek to use [the Charter] selfishly - for the advantage of any one nation or any small group of nations - we shallbe equally guilty ofthat betrayal." It is the responsibility of all Member States not to betray the ideals upon which the United Nations was built. The more power a country has, the greater its responsibility to uphold the Charter and its principles. The Charter entrusts the Security Council with maintaining international peace and security. There are a number of conditions that are necessary for the Council to succeed in its mission. First, concerning the unity of the Council, when the Security Council is blocked and prevented from taking any meaningful decisions, it is not fulfilling its responsibilities under the Charter. The unity of the Council is more urgent today than ever, as the multilateral system is facing many critical tests and conflicts are multiplying. Secondly, with regard to leading by example, Council members are the City on the Hill for the world. They should let their actions speak louder than their speeches when it comes to their commitment to the peaceful resolution of conflicts and world peace. Thirdly, the Security Council should stop the practice of double standards and implement its resolutions, especially those that affect peace and security and are related to ending occupation, mass atrocities and human rights. In Article 1, the Charter makes prevention the foremost priority in maintaining peace and security. The Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres, considers the inability to achieve prevention the most serious shortcoming of the international community. Prevention should become our overarching concern - in this building, and around the world. The international community has been too preoccupied by crisis overload around the world to be able to focus on prevention. But we have to remember that it is easier, cheaper and more humane to prevent crises than to have to deal with their consequences. In conclusion, I would like to join the voices of the more than one hundred countries that took the floor during this debate and reaffirmed their commitment to the Charter and its principles. Lebanon is going through difficult times, as it has on many occasions in its history. But like the phoenix behind the President, which symbolizes rebirth, Lebanon, the phoenix of the East, will rise again.
