Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome to this Chamber
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Adnan Terzic, and we
thank him for articulating the position of his
Government.

We express appreciation to the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Lord
Ashdown, for the report (S/2004/126, annex), which
gives us a comprehensive picture of the Bosnian
settlement process, as well as for his thorough briefing
on the current phase of implementation of the Peace
Agreement. We also wish to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his further
comments.

We are pleased to note the persistent efforts of the
High Representative and his Office in advancing the
programme of scheduled transformations for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Tangible advances have been
achieved in establishing the competent State bodies for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, first and foremost with
respect to strengthening the supremacy of the rule of
law. Significant progress has been made in such
important areas as refugee return and resolving
property rights matters, which has made it possible to
transfer these issues from the Office of the High
Representative to the jurisdiction of local
administrative authorities. In particular, we see the
transfer of a fuller range of responsibilities to the
legally elected representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as the strategic task in the further efforts
to implement the Dayton Agreements.

We also favourably assess the results achieved to
date in reforming the military and other areas to which
the High Representative and the head of Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina alluded today. It is
significant that these results were achieved through
adherence to the foundational Dayton principles.

The experience of conducting military reform
prompts us to draw two substantive and interrelated
conclusions.
First, real advances are possible only on the basis
of a clearly expressed consensus of all of the peoples
comprising Bosnia and Herzegovina. The so-called
Bonn Powers must then act through the High
Representative in exceptional cases and with a
mandatory prior agreement with the members of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council.

Secondly, the Peace Agreement still remains the
optimal basis for a settlement. Modifications to it are
possible only with the consent of all Bosnian parties.
As we understand, this conclusion is shared by all
members of the Steering Board, and therefore we must
rely on them for preparation of the relevant reports, as
well as on the work of the Security Council in further
advancing the Bosnian settlement process.

Today's report is totally justified in emphasizing
the challenge of countering organized crime and
corruption in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this context,
we note the need to pay constant attention to the issue
of countering international terrorism, a problem that is
topical for the entire Balkan region.

Like the High Representative, we are concerned
by attempts to review the results of officer certification
for Bosnian law enforcement agencies conducted at the
time of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are prepared to take a constructive
look at the proposals of the High Representative in this
regard. We believe that the Security Council must send
a clear signal to the Bosnian authorities on the
inadmissibility of any attempts to disavow the results
of the work done by the international presences in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope that Mr. Terzic will
hear this signal and will help correct the situation.

The Office of the High Representative is quite
right in viewing as one of its key priorities helping to
strengthen the cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
with neighbouring countries, especially Croatia and
Serbia and Montenegro. This holds the promise of
establishing a climate of harmony and security in the
Balkans, which in turn will help improve the situation
in those very countries.

Russia will continue to play an active and
constructive role in the process of implementing the
international community's agreed principles for a
Bosnian settlement within the specific existing
mechanisms and in close contact with the High
Representative.

