Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We thank Japan for its
valuable efforts as President of the Security Council
for the month of December, as well as for convening
today's very important open debate on crucial issues.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his important
comments, underscoring intensive international efforts
and cooperation to foster peace and security.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for international peace and security. The General
Assembly and the Secretary-General play major
important and complementary roles, along with other
offices and bodies of the United Nations. Those roles
often overlap and should therefore reinforce one another
in order to be effective.
Indonesia commends the Security Council when it
has decisively and justly enabled peace. But like many
previous speakers in today's debate, we are also deeply
concerned that conflicts have increased threefold in
recent years, with an unprecedented number of people
displaced forcibly. The rise of intolerance, xenophobia,
hate and islamophobia is aggravating the international
environment, which impedes efforts. We owe it to
our people to do everything in our capacity to enable
harmony, peace, development and prosperity, near and
far. Driven by that national resolve, Indonesia strongly
supports the call by the Secretary-General for the surge
in political diplomacy in conflict prevention, which
should be translated into concrete action.

In addressing various complex contemporary
challenges to international peace and security, we
would like to highlight the following points.

First, the diversity of challenges - including pandemics,
famine, organized crime, drug trafficking - and an
inability to tackle the root causes of disputes can spark
and sustain conflicts. We are therefore encouraged
by the fact that the United Nations is increasingly
examining conflict in a comprehensive manner and
has committed to deepening the connection between
sustaining peace and the Sustainable Development
Goals. However, much more needs to be accomplished
in practical terms.

Secondly, it is Vital that the Secretary-General's
proposal to restructure the peace and security pillar
succeeds in making the engagement of the United
Nations in the entire peace continuum more effective
and nimble. Indonesia is actively contributing in
intergovernmental discourse, with the view that reform
is not an end in itself and should lead to concrete
improvement for conflict-affected countries and the
way we do business.

Thirdly, national ownership is essential. As
countries affected by conflict establish their future
objectives and governance, meaningful participation
by everyone in the citizenry, including woman, youth
and minorities, is critical. Having the concerns and
aspiration of all legitimate national stakeholders
reflected in the national programmes builds their stake
in an enduring vision of peace and development.

Fourthly, we emphasize that in tackling the root
causes of conflicts, the Security Council must fully
uphold the principles of international law, human rights
law and humanitarian law. It must be judicious, not
dictated by any particular national perspective. That
commitment is once again tested on the question of
Palestine. Marred by vetoes, the Council's inaction has
not only had devastating consequences for populations
on the ground; it has made finding a solution to the
situation more complex.

Fifthly, while the Security Council is the
main organ of the United Nations whose job is to
maintain international peace and security, it cannot
single-handedly solve those challenges. It needs better
cooperation and understanding, including with troop-
and police-contributing countries and host countries in
peacekeeping operations and with the Peacebuilding
Commission in dealing with new peace challenges
and establishing integrated strategies for conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and recovery, as well as with
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
and strengthening Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Although global challenges are plenty, Indonesia
will steadfastly continue to play its role in the
United Nations ideals with concrete contributions to
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, not
only by providing peacekeepers, but also through ideas,
capacity-building and by proposing and pushing for
global collaboration.

I also agree with many of the points made by
several speakers. Time is of the essence for us in terms
of working together to carry the flag of peace.

