Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council during
this month. We thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/93 8). We also listened to Ms. Raemer's briefing.

As Christians around the world prepare to celebrate
Christmas, Palestinian Christians join them in
decorating trees, singing carols and praying for peace
in the Holy Land and across the globe. But the reality
of occupation has not spared them, even in this special
period of the year. Palestinian Christians from Gaza
have been barred by Israel from celebrating Christmas
in Bethlehem and Jerusalem, the two twin cities
separated, for the first time in history, by a shameful
wall. As Palestinians prepare to welcome another year,
their ordeal is nowhere close to an end. They continue
to fear for their lives, their families, their homes and
their future. And yet every day they find the courage
to persevere. The Palestinian people are a very resilient
people. They remain steadfast in the face of adversity
and carry the hope that they will be able to live and
thrive on their own land in dignity and freedom.

Here I would like to draw a map of our reality,

which can be summarized in two words - confinement,
for Palestinians, and expansion, for illegal Israeli
settlements. When I say "confinement", the members of
the Council may have in mind, and rightly, the 2 million
Palestinians besieged in the Gaza Strip. But Palestinians
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have also
been confined to the areas where they already lived in
1967. In the so-called Area C, which represents 60 per
cent of the West Bank and includes the resource-rich
Jordan Valley, only 1 per cent has been planned for
Palestinian development, while 70 per cent of the area is
included within the boundaries of the regional councils
of illegal Israeli settlements. Similarly, only 13 per
cent of East Jerusalem, much of which is already built
up, is zoned for Palestinian construction, while 35 per
cent of the land in East Jerusalem has been confiscated
for Israeli settlement use. The purpose of that policy
is crystal clear - to acquire the maximum amount of
Palestinian land with the minimum of Palestinians.
The illegal annexation of Palestinian land is not an
unexpected result of the Israeli occupation. It is its
overarching objective.

Three years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016), reaffirming the international
consensus concerning a just and lasting peace, based
on international law and identifying the obligations of
the parties and the international community at large.
Had there been enforcement and accountability, I
assure the Council that the report of the Secretary-
General today would certainly be different. Instead,
Israeli exceptionalism and impunity have continued,
emboldening Israel to pursue and entrench its illegal
occupation, to the detriment of the Palestinian people's
inalienable rights. Peace requires the fulfilment of
those rights, not acceptance of their continued denial.

This morning, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 74/139 on the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, including the right to
their independent State. The resolution has garnered
the support of more than 90 per cent of the United
Nations membership, with 160 Members voting in
favour and five against. Is such support for our right
to self-determination, which is a principle enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and has been a
cornerstone policy of the United States of America since
President Wilson, an expression of bias against Israel?
Can resolutions on Palestinian rights, the peaceful
settlement of the conflict and Jerusalem or against
Israeli settlements be characterized as anti-Israel?

The General Assembly resolutions on Palestine
are firmly rooted in the Charter of the United Nations,
international law, human rights and the resolutions
of the Council itself. Yet it is cynically called biased
and one-sided, with the Israeli representative calling
the countries making up the General Assembly
"morally bankrupt". The General Assembly is not
morally bankrupt. Those who are occupying us and
promoting occupation are morally bankrupt. The
General Assembly is more universal and representative
today than at any point in history. Israel therefore
cannot celebrate resolution 181 (II) - as the Israeli
representative celebrated it not long ago in the General
Assembly - and commend the General Assembly for
adopting it 70 years ago, while dismissing all other
resolutions adopted since then. Israel's very selective
approach to United Nations resolutions and international
law, claiming rights and dismissing obligations, should
never be condoned or encouraged.

The claim that the United Nations adopts a
disproportionate number of resolutions on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is a distortion that disregards key
facts and the relevant context. Any reference to the
number of resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
on the Palestine question must be seen in the context of
the paralysis of the Security Council when it comes to
the conflict. Therein lies the real imbalance and bias.

In the past decade, out of 636 Security Council
resolutions, only two have been adopted on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict - only two over the past 10
years - namely, resolution 1860 (2009), to stop the war
of aggression against our people in Gaza in 2009, and
resolution 2334 (2016). Likewise, out of 271 presidential
statements adopted over the past decade, only three
concerned Palestine and Israel - only three out of 271.

Therefore, claims that the United Nations is singling
out Israel through an inordinate number of resolutions
are selective and misleading at best and biased at worst,
as such claims ignore the situation in the Council, where
the opposite is true and any effort to address Israel's
blatant contempt for international law, the authority
of the Council and its resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016), as conveyed once again in the Secretary-
General's report, is obstructed.

The Security Council has not adopted any resolution
regarding the Palestinian-Israeli conflict under Chapter
VII, although more than 50 per cent of the resolutions
adopted concerning other conflicts in the past 10 years
have been under Chapter VII. Of 50 per cent of the 636
resolutions that were adopted under Chapter VII over
the past 10 years, not a single one has had to do with
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, although the situation
demonstrates the need for such an endeavour.

The fate of the region depends to a great extent
on the ability of the international community to
demonstrate that the international will to achieve peace
is stronger than Israel's will to colonize Palestinian
land. We call on the Council and all States to act now to
advance accountability, justice, freedom and peace for
the sake of the Palestinian people, the Israeli people,
future generations, regional and global peace and
security, and the international rules-based order.

Before concluding, I would like to take a moment to
express our deep appreciation to the outgoing Security
Council members on the completion of their service on
the Council with principle and distinction. We thank
and congratulate the delegations of Kuwait, cote
d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Peru and Poland. I also
wish everyone happy holidays.

