Mr. Mubarak (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to extend to you,
Mr. President, and to the other members of the Council
my sincere and profound thanks for convening this
emergency meeting to consider the Israeli acts of
aggression in the Gaza Strip and the occupied
Palestinian territories.

On behalf of my delegation, I convey our
profound and sincere condolences to the Palestinian
people with regard to the killing of unarmed civilians
in Beit Hanoun in the Gaza Strip as a result of the
barbaric and brutal acts committed by the Israeli
occupying forces. We express our strong condemnation
of the continued Israeli contempt for innocent
Palestinian lives, particularly the lives of women and
children. This is a clear and flagrant violation of
international law and norms and the role of the United
Nations and its Security Council. The Council has
continued to hold repeated meetings to consider the
bloody violence that has been occurring in the
occupied Palestinian territory since 1967. The violence
is due to continuous Israeli aggression and to the
Council's inability to take decisive measures to stop
the repetition of such aggression, sometimes because it
adopts resolutions that it cannot implement.

The brutal massacre perpetrated by the Israeli
occupying forces yesterday, which killed elderly
people, women and children in Beit Hanoun, was not
the first and only massacre in the annals of the
occupying Israeli forces, nor will it be the last. It is
simply one in a series of massacres perpetrated in Deir
Yassin, Kafr Kassim, in Sabra and Shatila, the first
Qana incident, Jenin, the Ibrahimi Mosque - the
Tomb of the Patriarch in Hebron - the second Qana
incident and, finally, in southern Lebanon, in Gaza and
now in Beit Hanoun.
Israel has committed those massacres, which
have transcended the massacres and atrocities of the
Second World War. It is as if the Israelis had not
learned the lessons of the past or benefited from
international agreements. Israel has refused to receive
fact-finding missions and investigative committees to
examine its practices that violate the rights of the
Palestinian people.

The international community deliberately ignores
these Israeli violations and breaches, as manifested in
the Security Council's inability to take strict punitive
measures. There are those who use self defence as a
pretext to justify the practices of the occupation, which
has been rejected by all international laws, norms and
instruments.

Double standards and double positions,
inattention to and overlooking Israeli practices
destabilize the credibility of the Security Council and
cast doubt on its main role - the maintenance of
international peace and security. In fact, they impact
the prestige of the United Nations itself and open the
door to more tension and aggressive acts. That can
threaten security and stability in the region and in the
world as a whole.

We convey to the Security Council the requests of
the innocent victims to take immediate steps to protect
the Palestinian people from the continuous aggression
of the Israeli occupying forces, which violates the
provisions of international law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 in particular. We make a strong
call for sending an international observer force to
provide the needed protection for the Palestinians and
their property. We also call for immediate measures to
stop repressive and oppressive measures, such as the
closing of border crossing points and the siege by
Israeli forces that aims at starving the Palestinian
people and confining them to a large prison by
constructing the separation wall that it has been
building in the occupied territories. This threatens the
lives of the Palestinian people as a whole; it blackmails
and starves the population by preventing assistance
from reaching them and by not releasing their due
customs and tax revenues.
All efforts and initiatives concerning the
Palestinian question since 1948 have not been
successful, because they did not deal with the root
causes of the problems, namely guaranteeing the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.

President Muammar Al-Qadhafi has provided a
vision of Palestinian and Jewish rights at the same
time, through living in one democratic State on an
equal footing on the land of Palestine, to be recognized
by its neighbours, like what occurred in South Africa.
The Israeli Government has always ignored such
initiatives, as well as resolutions and agreements of
international legitimacy. It has always rejected the
principle of investigating acts of violence and
destruction that continuously target innocent
Palestinian people. Israel justifies its aggressive
conduct sometimes as "self defence" and other times as
"military mistakes". Israel's objective is to quash the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people and
their inalienable right to self-determination on their
national territory.

The time has come for the Council to shoulder its
responsibility vis-a-vis the humanitarian crisis faced by
the Palestinian people. We call for serious
consideration by the Council of the draft resolution
presented by the brotherly State of Qatar on behalf of
the Arab Group. This is the least we and you can do
here.

