Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks you, Sir, for convening this debate,
which comes at a time when the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts is assuming particular importance.
Although the obligations stemming from international
instruments on international humanitarian law, human
rights and refugee law are well known, the scope and
impact of conflicts continue to have serious effects on
people in various regions of the world.

We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his statement and introduction of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277). We also
appreciate the document from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs that has been
issued today.

The number and complexity of current conflicts,
the lack of respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law and the use of ever more
sophisticated weapons that have indiscriminate effects
on civilian populations have all served to increase the
challenges facing the Security Council. They also
constitute the backdrop against which to evaluate the
results obtained in implementing the recommendations
that have been made in the 10 years that this item has
been on the Council's agenda. Unfortunately, the
catalogue of acts of aggression of various kinds from
which civilians suffer has become part of our daily
lives. The diverse nature of the situations that have
been mentioned today is also something that the
Council should respond to appropriately.

Mexico expresses its concern about the fact that
in recent conflicts the parties involved have made

illegal and excessive use of force and have used
weapons that have been prohibited under international
humanitarian law. My delegation would like to reiterate
the importance of the principles pertaining to
distinguishing between civilian and military targets, to
proportionality and to the prohibition of indiscriminate
attacks and of certain weapons. We should recall once
again that we have an obligation to abide by and
enforce international humanitarian law, as established
in the 1949 Geneva Conventions.

The lack of access to humanitarian assistance, the
use of cluster munitions and the availability of small
arms, as well as the right to housing, land and property,
are just some of the challenges that require concrete
action, given their pernicious effects in the proliferation
of armed conflicts and in the toll in innocent lives.

We once again call on the Members of the
Organization to take every necessary measure to
facilitate and guarantee the safe, unobstructed and
timely delivery of humanitarian assistance to people
affected by conflict. In that regard, we recall the
relevance of resolution 1502 (2003), for which Mexico
advocated, on the protection of United Nations and
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in
conflict zones.

We join the Secretary-General in calling on States
that have not yet done so to ratify without delay the
Convention on Cluster Munitions and the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production
and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction.

Given the negative effects of the excessive
availability of small arms and light weapons in
exacerbating conflicts, Mexico would like to reiterate
its commitment to honour and promote the
implementation of Security Council arms embargoes.
We urge States to honour their commitments under the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as well as those
under the relevant regional conventions in that regard.

With regard to the issue of housing, land and real
property, we should strengthen the Council's
commitment to ensure that refugees and internally
displaced persons are able to freely return to their
homes in safety.

As the guarantor of international peace and
security, the Security Council has the obligation to take
every measure necessary against those who commit
any violation that threatens or severely endangers
civilians during armed conflict. Mexico believes that
Council resolutions on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict should be grounded in the norms and
principles of international humanitarian law. That will
make it possible to strengthen and further develop that
body of norms. It would also confer greater legitimacy
on the decisions and actions of the Council.

My delegation acknowledges the efforts by the
international community to strengthen international
humanitarian law, as exemplified by the initiative
launched by the Government of Switzerland and the
International Committee of the Red Cross to draw up
the Montreux Document on pertinent international
legal obligations and good practices for States related
to operations of private military and security companies
during armed conflict. Those initiatives contribute to a
better understanding about the participation of
non-State and non-traditional actors in armed conflict.
In the first few months of its participation in the
Security Council, Mexico has endeavoured to adhere to
the principles underpinning this issue and to contribute
to developing agreements conducive to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

With regard to the humanitarian crisis in Sri
Lanka, we encouraged the Government's efforts to
protect civilians and persons displaced by the conflict.
We also called on the parties to always respect
international humanitarian law. Furthermore, we
repeatedly called on the Government to coordinate its
efforts with those of the United Nations agencies in
order to evacuate the people trapped by the conflict, as
well as to ensure the best possible accommodation and
conditions for displaced persons in dignified and safe
facilities in which they could receive basic
humanitarian assistance, including appropriate care in
hospitals. Although the military part of the conflict has
come to an end, various sources have mentioned grave
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights norms committed by the
parties that warrant investigation by an independent
commission. Accounting for what has happened is not
merely about justice, it is also a necessary step in
facilitating the process of national reconciliation in
every society emerging from conflict.

With regard to the situation in the Middle East,
we have underscored that all parties should constantly
abide by the provisions of international humanitarian
law, honour their international obligations and avoid
actions that may put civilians in danger. Since the end
of the crisis in Gaza at the beginning of this year,
Mexico has emphasized the need to put in place an
international monitoring mechanism to ensure a lasting
ceasefire, the opening of the border crossings, an end
to the illicit trafficking in weapons and humanitarian
assistance to the population.

The situations that I have just referred to, as well
the others that have been mentioned today, illustrate
that the responsibility to protect - a principle adopted
by the General Assembly in 2005 - is not an abstract
concept but rather one whose real value we can
appreciate when we face crisis situations. Let us not
fall into an endless theoretical debate while reality
outpaces our Organization's capacity to act.

We should bear in mind that violations of the
norms and basic principles of international humanitarian
law constitute war crimes, and that it is the Member
States who bear the primary responsibility to investigate
and prosecute those allegedly responsible for them.
Transparency and accountability acquire an essential
prime significance when it comes to protecting civilians
in armed conflict. Should States lack the capacity or
willingness to prosecute alleged perpetrators, the
International Criminal Court has the jurisdiction to
take up such crimes, as set forth in the Rome Statute.

In the case of Darfur, following the presentation
of the report of the Prosecutor early this month, we
underscored that it was unacceptable that hundreds of
thousands of individuals have been murdered, raped or
forcibly displaced without access to basic humanitarian
assistance. Mexico has repeatedly affirmed that the
decision of the Government of the Sudan, in response
to the Court's decision in March, to expel humanitarian
organizations that were providing humanitarian
assistance was unfortunate, to say the least. It has only
increased the harmful consequences for the civilian
population in Darfur.

To conclude, Mexico reiterates the urgent need
for all parties to conflict to put an end to flagrant
violations against civilian populations. It is essential
that the international community focus its attention on
the prevention of conflicts and the promotion of a
culture of respect for the principles and norms that
enshrine the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and the eradication of impunity. The report of the
Secretary-General and the aide-memoire submitted by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
are an excellent foundation for our future work in this
area.

