Mr. Mahmood (Pakistan): As this is my first
opportunity to do so in a public meeting this month, let
me begin by extending our warmest felicitations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of July. We would also like to commend
Ambassador Baja and other members of the delegation
of the Philippines for an outstanding job during their
presidency in June.

We would like to thank Ambassador Jones Parry
for his superb leadership of the mission and for the
precision and eloquence with which he articulated the
Council's messages to the various interlocutors in West
Africa. We are also grateful to the countries of the
subregion that the mission visited. The views they
expressed today provide crucial input as the Council
further deliberates on the issues relevant to them.

The mission to West Africa reaffirmed the value
of this instrument at the Council's disposal. It
underscored the Council's commitment to Africa. It
provided an opportunity to interact directly with the
stakeholders, enhance understanding of the ground
realities, deepen cooperation with regional and
subregional partners, and appreciate first-hand the
excellent work being done by the peacekeeping
operations, the special representatives of the Secretary-
General and other United Nations presences in
translating into reality the mandates approved by the
Council.

The mission also reaffirmed our belief that, while
individual conflict situations require the close attention
of the Council, there is a need for a regional approach
to address the cross-cutting issues. This is an essential
prerequisite for a comprehensive, coherent and
integrated approach to all aspects of peace and security.
We have no doubt that the mission's wide-ranging
recommendations will be systematically followed up.

Allow me now to make a few observations on the
individual situations.

In Cote d'Ivoire, Linas-Marcoussis is the agreed
road map and its concrete, time-bound implementation
remains imperative. Immediate confidence-building
measures are required to breach the prevailing gulf of
distrust. All Ivorian parties must come together for the
unity, long-term stability and development of their
country. The regional leaders deserve the Council's
commendation for their efforts to help break the
political impasse and to find a way forward. We hope
that the Accra summit on 29 July will put the peace
process firmly back on track.

In Liberia, the deployment of the United Nations
Mission there has led to a steady improvement in the
security situation, while the implementation of the
comprehensive Peace Agreement continues apace.
However, notable challenges remain, including an
effective reintegration and rehabilitation programme

for ex-combatants, as well as economic recovery and
reconstruction. In this context, the issue of economic
sanctions is important and the Council must revisit it as
Liberia makes progress in achieving the benchmarks
related to the diamond and timber sectors. Equally
important is the need to redeem the pledges made at the
reconstruction conference in February this year.
In Sierra Leone, the United Nations Mission there
has contributed enormously to building a solid
foundation for peace. The gains are significant, yet
fragile in the face of internal challenges and potential
external threats. Accelerated progress must be achieved
on some key benchmarks, including the building of the
armed forces, the extension of State authority and
control over the diamond-mining areas. These issues
have an important bearing on decisions about the
residual presence of the United Nations force.

In Guinea-Bissau, the process of political
transition seems firmly on track and the country's
leadership resolutely committed to reform. As a typical
post-conflict case, stabilization in Guinea-Bissau
requires institutional capacity-building and the means
to address the long-term economic challenges. The
country is about to enter into crucial negotiations with
the Bretton Woods institutions. The flexibility and
cooperation of international partners are critical in
ensuring sustainable peace and economic development.

In the regional context, efforts are under way to
address the cross-cutting issues. Special attention must
continue to be accorded to stemming the proliferation
of small arms, mercenaries and child soldiers. Among
the challenges that need to be tackled are the
harmonization of demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement or repatriation processes throughout West
Africa. In this regard, close coordination between
various peacekeeping operations and the Governments
concerned is critical. The issue of youth unemployment
requires urgent attention.

Three countries - Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and
Cote d'Ivoire - are scheduled to have elections in
2005. These are significant milestones in their full
transition to peaceful and democratic governance. The
international community must provide the necessary
technical and financial assistance to ensure successful
elections.

The leadership role of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) in the subregion is
highly commendable. In a relatively short time,
ECOWAS has emerged as a reliable partner of the
Security Council. It is essential to provide assistance to
build the capacity of the ECOWAS secretariat and to
help regional States enhance their capacities to deal
with the issues of peace and security. Recent efforts to
re-energize the Mano River Union also deserve the
Council's encouragement and support.

In the larger context, the link between peace and
development is most obvious in West Africa. Of the
seven peacekeeping operations in the African
continent, three are in West Africa. Thirteen of the 15
ECOWAS States are least-developed countries.
Sustainable peace and security in the subregion cannot
be achieved without social and economic development.
The underlying structural causes of conflict -
including poverty, hunger, disease, economic
underdevelopment and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources - must be addressed. While doing
so, attention should increasingly turn from conflict
management to conflict prevention and resolution. A
coherent prevention strategy, developed in cooperation
with regional actors, is essential.

Lastly, the need for a comprehensive, coherent
and integrated approach by the United Nations system
to the complex crises and challenges in Africa is self-
evident. The Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council are usefully cooperating in addressing
the post-conflict situation in Guinea-Bissau. The
proposed ad hoc composite committees of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council could be a useful framework for
enhancing system-wide coordination and developing
appropriate responses to the challenges of peace and
development. The representative of the Netherlands,
speaking on behalf of the European Union, called
attention to that proposal today, while emphasizing the
need for a comprehensive approach. We believe it
deserves the serious consideration of the three principal
organs.

