Ms. Ekomo-Soignet (spoke in French): I thank His
Excellency Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra of Peru
for having invited me to participate in this debate on
youth, peace and security.

Beyond this debate, I believe now is a key moment

for reaffirming the place and role of youth in building a

better world. I am from the Central African Republic - a
country in which 72 per cent of the population is under
the age of 35 and which, sadly, is known as one of the
poorest and most dangerous nations in the world, and
one of the worst in which to be young. As we all know,
our position in such international rankings is not a death
sentence. Currently, together with many other young
people from other countries with whom we share last
place in those rankings, we are aware that this is merely
part of the story. In that widely disseminated version of
the story, we often wear the label of persecutor, victim
or of the mere recipient of aid.

The other part of the story concerning us 4 the
youth of the Central African Republic - lies elsewhere,
and we are vividly writing it today. It is the story of our
acknowledged role as women and men in peacebuilding,
peacekeeping, our families, communities, countries,
continents and the world. Many of us are working
tirelessly to prevent and end violence, silence the
weapons, promote dialogue and social cohesion and
foster our own blossoming through actions we are
taking within our organizations and in other meeting
places. It was my honour and fortune to work every day
with my peers in the Central African Republic, and I
had an opportunity to work with many young people
from various countries in the context of the study on
youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86) carried out
after the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015).

I wish to stress that, for many young people,
the resolution and the study are much more than
documents. They are key strategic tools that allow us
to forge new relations with our authorities and with the
United Nations system. It is true that there has been
a shift in recent years on the representation of young
people in forums on peace and security at the local,
national, regional and global levels. But does that signal
their true participation at all levels? Can we be sure
that our contributions, our needs, our aspirations will
be effectively taken into account in the final decisions
and recommendations?

Our representation must not be merely symbolic.
It must not be limited to public launchings and
demonstrations. Unfortunately, in many of our countries,
there are still attempts to validate the representation of
our youth as a favour to them. The consequences of that
favour, without real Vision or collaboration with young
people, are not generally felt immediately, but rather in
the long term, widening the gap between the youth and
the State.

For a long time, youth in the Central African
Republic have not been taken into account in the various
attempts at conflict resolution. It is only recently that
the work carried out by our youth, alongside their peers,
to prevent violence, combat rumours and strengthen
social cohesion has started to be highlighted. We see
new willingness among Government partners, the
United Nations Mission and United Nations agencies to
commit to working with us. And we are proud of that.
We move forward with the feeling that we are helping
our country. We are making our contribution.

I come before the Security Council today to launch
an appeal to partnership. The Council is no longer alone.
We are here, at its side, to build the peace we all strive
for. That partnership will not be possible unless we
agree to move beyond our prejudices and stereotypes,
unless we agree to work together constructively and
effectively and move past our eloquent speeches. We
must take action now.

The partnership will take various forms and will
require strategic choices and substantial, crucial
financing. We are counting on the Security Council
and all Member States to adopt and implement quotas
in order to ensure the direct participation of young
people, with equal representation of the sexes at all
stages of the formal processes for peaceful political
transition. That must start with the negotiations
preceding the implementation stage, in the framework
of a national dialogue. in the drafting of a constitution
and of a transitional justice mechanism, or in any
other political process related to peace and security.
Those mechanisms should enable enhanced exchanges
among young people from all walks of life, focusing
more specifically on ensuring the participation of
young women, and should guarantee that the necessary
financing and security measures are in place.

We also call on our Governments to institutionalize
measures to bridge the gap between young people and
local and national representatives in institutions and
mechanisms for governance by creating youth advisory
committees and by facilitating the participation of
young people in elective tenures by aligning the age
of eligibility with the voting age. We call upon States
to invest in the establishment of protected local
spaces where civic dialogue can take place and where
young people identify together priority actions for
their communities in the areas of peacebuilding and
development, and participate in decisions regarding
the allocation of financial resources. We call for the
integration of young people with local representatives
in order to evaluate their economic needs before
any measures are drafted, and in the planning,
implementation and monitoring of youth employment
programmes. Such programmes must target the most
disenfranchised young people in order to ensure that
they are the primary beneficiaries of such employment
initiatives and to avoid exclusive access by the elite,
which would only accentuate inequality.
Finally, we call for the preservation of the rule
of law, particularly by protecting young people from
being arrested and arbitrarily detained, putting an
end to impunity and ensuring that the principles of
access to justice and accountability are enforced even-
handedly. Young men and women must be the preferred
discussion partners in the context of the creation and
implementation ofsecurity and criminaljustice reforms.

The year 2025 will mark the tenth anniversary of
resolution 2250 (2015). We expect an investment of
$1 per young person by then - that is, $1.8 billion
to support the commitment to youth and peace and
security. Let us meet that challenge to make those
aspirations a reality.

