Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting. We also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for
his useful information, as well as the other briefers.

Peru is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Syria. We deplore in particular
the extreme vulnerability of civilians in the north-west

of the country. Such vulnerability is exacerbated by the
extensive control exercised by terrorist groups over the
area and the devastating consequences of the escalating
violence. We reiterate our firm condemnation of
terrorist activities of all kinds. But we underscore the
need for any counter-terrorism response to uphold the
humanitarian principles of proportionality, distinction
and precaution.

In the same vein, we deplore and decry the extensive
damage suffered by civilian infrastructure, including
schools and medical centres, often as a result of aerial
attacks that fail to distinguish between combatants and
civilians. Faced with that grim scenario, we urge the
Syrian Government and all relevant stakeholders in
this conflict to prevent further deterioration, which in
concrete terms means preserving the ceasefire agreed
by Turkey and Russia last September.

We commend the laudable efforts being undertaken
by the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies
to provide sustained assistance to the more than 70,000
internally displaced persons living in Al-Hol camp
in circumstances of great logistical complexity, and
where the risk of the spread of diseases is growing as
temperatures rise markedly. We note that almost half
of the displaced persons are of Iraqi origin, for which
reason we urge the authorities ofIraq to spare no effort to
facilitate their return, which, we underscore, must take
place under internationally accepted parameters and
with the support and assistance of the United Nations.

Turning to the situation in Rukban, Peru urges
the Syrian authorities and countries with influence
in the area to facilitate the delivery of United Nations
humanitarian aid. The failure to grant the requisite
permits is unjustified and should be roundly condemned
by the entire international community. Building on
that point, we underscore that efforts must continue
to facilitate the movement of those displaced persons
who wish to leave the camp in Rukban, the majority
of whom lack the economic resources to turn that
wish into reality. We therefore lend our backing to
the operational plan that the United Nations has been
developing to support such persons, together with other
actions aimed at guaranteeing their safe return. We
wish to draw attention equally to the importance of the
continued mobilization of the international community
to support humanitarian de-mining and the clearance of
improvised explosive devices in Syria, which continue
to wreak havoc among the population and hamper the
delivery of aid and assistance.

I conclude by recalling the urgent need to make
progress in achieving a political solution on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex), which is all the more pressing in
the current fragile circumstances, characterized as they
are by an upswing in violence, the upshot of which is
likely to bode ill for regional and global stability.

