Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
African Group and to start by expressing the Group's
appreciation to the Nigerian presidency and to you
personally, Mr. Minister, for organizing this important
debate focusing on the issue of optimizing the use of
preventive diplomacy tools, which is of significant
importance to the African continent. I would also like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General for her valuable
introductory remarks and to welcome the participation
of the World Bank in this valuable discussion.

Today's debate constitutes an integral part of the
broader discussion on the most effective ways to
address threats to international peace and security, as
well as to enhance the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in that regard.
Despite the fact that several conflicts have plagued
different parts of Africa over the past decades, the
leaders of the African continent have always been
aware of the importance and benefits of adopting
conflict prevention approaches. Preventive measures
that were designed to address some of the root causes
of conflicts in Africa and to prevent the eruption of
further conflicts include the Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution, the legal
instruments on unconstitutional changes of government
and the conflict prevention mechanisms within the
African Union, such as the Peace and Security Council
and the Panel of the Wise. Similar mechanisms within
subregional organizations, such as the early warning
system and the Mediation and Security Council of the
Economic Community of West African States, are
additional important manifestations in this regard.
They are also complemented by other efforts in other
subregions, such as the efforts of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) in this context that
were just mentioned by the Foreign Minister of South
Africa.

These efforts should be seen in the framework of
the larger context of dealing with various stages of
conflicts in our continent, including efforts within the
framework of Africa's significant contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping missions, including the
first hybrid operation, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as well as African
Union operations mandated by the Security Council,
such as the African Union Mission in the Sudan and the
African Union Mission in Somalia.

The African Group believes that efforts to
enhance conflict prevention, particularly in Africa,
should be part of a strategic vision and a
comprehensive approach which combine and make use
of all tools within the framework of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in order to
avoid the eruption of disputes and conflicts, and to
avoid relapsing into conflict in countries in post-
conflict situations. Such a comprehensive approach
should include defining clear entry and exit strategies
for peacekeeping, making full use of the synergies
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and building
capacity in countries emerging from conflict situations.
This should include enhancing the capacities of State
institutions, strengthening civil society and further
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, particularly the
African Union, while always maintaining the centrality
of the national ownership principle.

On conflict prevention, the African Union
believes that the increasing budget for United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be an additional reason
for devoting more attention to peacebuilding and
conflict prevention, in order to move beyond the
traditional conflict management approach, building on
the steps taken by the United Nations in this regard
since the 1992 report of Secretary-General Boutros-
Ghali entitled "An Agenda for Peace: Preventive
diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-keeping"
(S/24111).

In this context, the African Group underscores
that, in order to fulfil the aims of Chapter VI of the
United Nations Charter, there is a need for the United
Nations to develop an integrated strategy in the field of
conflict prevention that harnesses the capacities of the
United Nations Development Group, the United
Nations Development Programme, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Department of Political Affairs and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the
relevant areas.

That includes, inter alia, mediation, negotiation
and good offices, along with other tools such as inter-
group confidence-building and dialogue processes.
That integrated strategy should be implemented in
close cooperation and coordination with the tools
existing within regional and subregional organizations.
In this regard, the cooperative efforts in mediation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
which proved to be successful in early stages such as in
the case of Kenya, gives us an indication of the
positive outcome of this kind of partnership.

In the meantime, while recognizing that the
maintenance of international peace and security is the
primary responsibility of the Security Council, the
African Group believes that the development and
capacity-building aspects of conflict prevention and
conflict resolution makes it imperative that other
United Nations bodies, particularly the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, give
their input to any United Nations preventive diplomacy
strategy.

In this regard, the Department of Political Affairs
should continue to play a central role in activities
related to conflict prevention, especially through its
Mediation Support Unit and other capabilities and
mechanisms available and with full cooperation with
the Security Council and the General Assembly.

While understanding that the focus of our debate
today is on preventive diplomacy, the African Group
cannot ignore, in this context, the importance of
achieving sustainable development in Africa,
especially in countries emerging from conflict. For the
success of our collective efforts in the field of conflict
prevention, we have to depart from the basic
assumption that development, peace and security and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. In this context,
the Group looks forward to the high-level plenary
meeting on the Millennium Development Goals in
September as an opportunity to reaffirm the
international community's commitment to development
and sustainability in Africa.

This year, 2010, which has been designated by
the African leaders as the Year of Peace and Security in
Africa, coincides with the fiftieth anniversary of the
attainment of independence by 17 African countries.
The African Group believes that this occasion should
be seen as an opportunity for African countries, the
United Nations, other international organizations,
donors and partners to scale up their support for the
African Union and other subregional organizations in
order to enhance their capacities in the field of conflict
prevention and conflict resolution to further promote
peace, security and stability in Africa.

In this regard, allow me to stress the importance
we attach to the 10-year capacity-building programme
of the African Union. We believe that its full

implementation would contribute to enhancing the
capacity of the African Union in the areas of conflict
prevention, particularly in terms of African Union
mediation capacity.

Finally, Mr. President, allow me to thank you
once again for organizing today's debate, which we
consider a further step in making the best possible use
of all our preventive tools and assets existing within
the United Nations system as well as within the
regional and subregional organizations in order to
achieve our collective aspirations towards peace,
stability and development.

