Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by warmly welcoming to New
York the new Permanent Representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. I would also like to express my
gratitude for the way that you, Ambassador Dabbashi,
have guided the work of the Council during the time
you have been responsible for representing Libya. I
would also like to welcome the participation of the
Secretary-General and the presence among us of
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro; the Foreign Minister
of South Africa; the Chairman of the African Union-

United Nations panel, Mr. Romano Prodi; and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Mr. Lamamra.

The international collective security system will
not be able to ensure observance of the principles of
international law unless it enjoys the active
participation of regional and subregional organizations.
Including them in the process of creating an
international environment conducive to harnessing
national efforts in ensuring the development and well-
being of peoples is an imperative of our day. That was
the message that Costa Rica wanted to impart last
November when it organized an open debate on
strengthening collective security mechanisms, reducing
military expenditures and increasing spending on
social development (see S/PV.6017). The first and most
important contribution that regional organizations can
make to international peace and security is to actively
participate in establishing an environment in which
rights are respected, obligations honoured and all
members participate in extending international
guarantees as to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States.

History has indisputably illustrated the value of
the participation of regional organizations and
arrangements in preventing conflicts and resolving
them peacefully. Geographic proximity, shared history
and cultural affinities have always been extremely
valuable to international efforts to prevent conflict. For
instance, is it not the case that peace in Kosovo was
facilitated by the regional effort that led to the
Rambouillet Accords? Was not last year's tension
between Thailand and Cambodia eased as a result of
the efforts of their regional partners in the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations? Was not the peace that
was achieved in Kenya following the tension during
the elections the result of the decisive intervention of
that country's African friends? My own country's
decision not to possess an army was only ratified
following the intervention of our regional body to
guarantee our peace and territorial integrity. The whole
world of the past 50 years provides numerous examples
that confirm the decisive contributions of regional
organizations.

In addition to their contribution in the prevention
and peaceful resolution of conflicts, regional
organizations can also play an indispensable role in
focusing attention on a conflict early on. Often, the
cumbersome machinery of the United Nations lacks the

09-2716]
necessary flexibility to act in the early stages of a
conflict. In addition, it is also frequently the case that
decisive action by regional and subregional
organizations is successful in ending a conflict before
it can have devastating effects.

Those examples of the real and potential
contributions of regional organizations inform our
meeting today. As the debate last April (see S/PV.5868)
illustrated, this is not an easy subject. However, the
current circumstances and the direction that the
international Organization is taking compel us to begin
to design new models for cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations. It is no
surprise that it was the African Union that once again
raised an issue that has always been on the agenda. The
attention that the international community pays to
conflicts in Africa, as well as the growing desire of
Africans to contribute to resolving them, albeit with
very limited resources, make it very urgent for the
Security Council to consider this issue.

The report before us today (S/2008/813)
constitutes an important step forward on a long road
that requires us give up old habits and think creatively
about how to solve new problems. Costa Rica firmly
believes that cooperation between our two
organizations must go far beyond merely agreeing on
support packages to provide African forces with boots,
bulletproof vests, communications equipment and light
weapons, as we did recently with regard to Somalia.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union is of strategic importance. We must
move ahead with identifying responsibilities and
modalities for cooperation. To that end, it is necessary
to increase and improve the quality of communication
at all levels. It will not be an easy process; nor will it
produce results very quickly.

Costa Rica appreciates the report of the joint
panel as a tool to identify goals and make
recommendations, which must now be the subject of a
great deal of consideration, analysis and dialogue. In
order to arrive at the needed answers, we must continue
to build up experiences and learn lessons. A detailed
examination of the experience of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and of the
process launched by resolution 1863 (2009) on Somalia
will undoubtedly contribute to the consideration of this
issue.

Everyone knows that financial cooperation issues
will be the most difficult to resolve. Our previous
meeting on this issue identified potential significant
differences in that regard. Such differences are
inevitable. My Government is carefully considering the
recommendations made by the panel in that
connection. We look forward to the Secretary-
General's recommendations in order that we can
contribute to developing greater cooperation with the
African Union.

Despite the fact that the report clearly establishes
the need to build this ad hoc relationship without
creating a precedent, my delegation believes that
strengthening the relationship with the African Union
must go hand in hand with the construction of more
flexible and effective models for cooperation with
other regional and subregional organizations
throughout the world. In the last analysis, what we are
building is not a link that will result in preferential
treatment for one particular organization; rather, we are
bolstering multilateralism and the international
collective system of security in our world.

