Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Quinlan, as well as the Panel of Experts, for their
continued work in supporting the implementation of the
Security Council's resolutions on Iran.

On 24 November, the United Kingdom, France and
Germany and Iran reached a first- stage agreement on the
nuclear issue. That was an important and encouraging
milestone. For the first time, we reached a detailed
agreement that goes a long way towards addressing
the most worrisome aspects of the Iranian nuclear
programme. The unity of all five permanent members
of the United Nations Security Council behind the
agreement in itself sends a powerful signal. The United
Kingdom commits to fulfil our part of the agreement in
good faith, and we look to Iran to do the same. The deal
provides for more time to negotiate a comprehensive
solution by halting further advances in Iran's nuclear
programme. Meanwhile, and most importantly, the
majority of the sanctions remain in place, including, as
the Committee's 90-day report makes clear, all United
Nations sanctions. We must continue to enforce those
sanctions robustly, as a powerful incentive for Iran to
reach a comprehensive solution that would ensure an
exclusively peaceful nuclear programme.

Reaching an interim agreement has been a difficult
and painstaking process. We are right to test to the full
Iran's readiness to act in good faith, to work with the
rest of the international community and to enter into
international agreements. If Iran does not abide by its
commitments, it will bear a heavy responsibility. Early
signs indicate that Iran is cooperating. For example,
we welcome the recent signature of a joint statement
for a cooperation framework between Iran and the
International Atomic Energy Agency. We are pleased
to see that Iran has finally decided to cooperate with
the Agency so as to resolve all present and past issues.
That is a step in the right direction. However, Iran has
yet to address the substance of the Agency's concerns
over the possible military dimensions to Iran's nuclear
programme.

Turning to the work of the Committee, we remain
concerned by breaches and possible breaches by Iran
of its international obligations. The Committee has
reported the recent discovery of a consignment of
high-grade carbon fibre destined for Iran. The Panel
of Experts investigated the circumstances of that case
and concluded that Iran's attempted procurement was
indeed a violation of its obligations under resolution
1929 (2010). That is deeply regrettable. The United
Kingdom welcomes the Panel's work and calls on it
to continue to investigate those reports and to bring
relevant information to the Committee's attention. The
Committee must take appropriate action in response,
including considering an implementation assistance
notice to assist Member States.

In January, the Panel of Experts reached a clear and
unanimous conclusion in its report that Iran's launch
of a ballistic missile last year constituted a violation of
resolution 1929 (2010). Efforts by the Chair to engage
with Iran on that issue have unfortunately been spurned.
Iran has still not responded to the Committee's letter
of 12 April requesting further information, despite
multiple requests to do so. The evidence of that breach
is compelling. The Committee should now take further
action in response.

The Panel's reports on Gaza and the illicit arms
interdiction reported by the Government of Yemen
provide credible information that Iran continues to
illicitly transfer arms within the region, in contravention
on the United Nations embargo on the export of weapons
by Iran. Such actions are unacceptable and serve only
to undermine regional security. We encourage the Panel
to continue to monitor that issue, identify individuals
and entities responsible and make recommendations to
the Committee, as appropriate.

The United Kingdom is committed to finding a
peaceful, negotiated solution on the nuclear issue. The
first-step agreement is in the interests of the whole
world. We will apply the same rigour and determination
we have shown in the negotiation when it comes to
implementation of the agreement and to the search for a
comprehensive settlement.

