Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes the fact that you, Sir, are
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council as
your country's Minister for Foreign Affairs. This
clearly demonstrates the importance that Singapore
attaches to the work of the Security Council on African
issues, and to our Organization's peacekeeping
activities.

The Security Council is responsible for resolving
conflicts and maintaining peace and security. At the
international level this task is particularly meaningful
for Africa. In association with the other bodies of the
United Nations and with the joint support of the
international community, this implies a capacity, when
conflicts loom, to engage in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and above all to erect an
architecture of peace that will promote development for
the peoples of Africa in spite of whatever conflicts
there may be in the region.

It is of particular importance to the work of the
Council that the ad hoc Working Group on Africa has
been created, because it reflects a commitment to
dedicate to African affairs the attention, priority and
continuity that they deserve within the Council and the
United Nations. The Working Group on Africa has
enabled the Council to focus and integrate its efforts on
Africa. In the immediate future it must continue to be a
focal point for meetings between the Security Council
and African countries, regional organizations and other
groups within that region.

The Security Council's responsibility for Africa is
one of its greatest challenges and it strains the
Council's ability to discharge its Charter mandate. The
perspective from which the Council should work
jointly with Africans in maintaining peace and security
in the region is to consider in an integrated way peace
as a continuous effort that must be pursued in a well
defined manner and in strategic association with the
international community as a whole and in close
coordination with the other organs of the United
Nations.

The starting point for this activity must be
consultations with the African countries and with their
regional organizations. The guidelines for Security
Council action in Africa must be provided by the
Africans themselves. The Security Council must be
receptive and must apply criteria based on the
understanding that the Africans themselves have of
their situation and their possibilities. The effectiveness
of the Security Council therefore depends on its ability
to communicate its tasks and nourish its activities with
the points of view that the Africans themselves bring,
and also with the existence of strong and solid regional
institutions.

It is therefore of particular importance to my
country to stress the need for the Security Council to
continuously promote the participation of the African
organizations as being immediately and primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security in that area. The Security Council must
support those organizations and assist them in
discharging their missions.

The Security Council, given its restricted powers
and the way they are described in the Charter, cannot
ignore the close linkage between economic and social
development, and peace and security in Africa.
Therefore, it is incumbent upon it to forge close links
with the Economic and Social Council so that a
genuine strategic association enables the two organs to
work together, each within the scope of its
responsibilities, to build lasting peace in the region.
From that perspective, and viewing the Working
Group on Africa led by Ambassador Koonjul of
Mauritius as the focus of Council action, my country
considers that the Council must immediately target its
activities regarding initiatives that can be considered
by the Working Group on four immediate regional and
subregional priorities.

The first is the task of enabling peace through
political arrangements that guarantee the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Any democratic
transition that could result from political agreements
reached through the inter-Congolese dialogue must
immediately lead to the withdrawal of foreign troops
from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Success by the United Nations and the African
community, in keeping with the promises and
commitments set out in the Lusaka Agreement, is the
foundation for peace, progress and development in the
Great Lakes region. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in view of its size and its wealth of resources,
could become a tremendous engine for development in
the whole Great Lakes area and an invaluable factor for
stability. It could just as easily, however, remain a
factor of instability and conflict. Therefore the Security
Council must attach a high level of priority, as it has to
the search for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That is what prompted the recent visit of
members of the Security Council to the Great Lakes
region.

We must work with the Africans within the
framework of existing agreements. We must contribute
to the success of the inter-Congolese dialogue by
means ofthe instruments designed for that purpose.

Mexico fully trusts the capacities of the
signatories of the agreements on which the inter-
Congolese dialogue is based. We are fully confident in
the capacity of the Congolese to quickly arrive at an
inclusive arrangement on a political solution that will
guarantee the integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We trust that it will also be achieved with
the active participation of the Organization of African
Unity and interested countries, in particular South
Africa. My country greatly appreciates the efforts of
South Africa in seeking peace for the Great Lakes
region.
Whatever success we achieve in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will be a starting point from
which to stabilize the entire region and to find a way
out ofthe internal conflict in Burundi and full recovery
of peace and security in Rwanda. It is from this
perspective that we believe that the Working Group on
Africa is responsible for continuing to focus the
interest and the political will of the members of the
Council on finding, in cooperation with the African
countries and organizations, a quick solution to the
very risky and volatile situation in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

The second topic that we feel should have priority
in the work of the Security Council is consolidating the
achievements in the region of the Mano River Union,
especially in Sierra Leone. There should be an effort to
ensure that the commitments undertaken by the
countries of the Mano River region become a reality
and that they live within secure boundaries, in an
atmosphere of mutual respect. These objectives should
also be analysed very carefully and thoroughly by the
Council's ad hoc Working Group on Africa.

The third issue to which my country attaches high
priority in the short term is the situation in the Western
Sahara. The right of the Saharan people to self-
determination must be guaranteed, whether through
political negotiations or through the active
participation of the Security Council in the search for a
definitive solution to this conflict, which is one of the
oldest issues addressed by the Council. We have
mandatory deadlines, and we have a situation that
cannot go on any further. The ad hoc Working Group
on Africa is the proper forum in which to hold
consultations between the members of the Security
Council and interested African countries in order to
arrive at an agreement. The Security Council obviously
cannot unilaterally impose a resolution to the conflict,
but it can certainly further the possibility for the parties
concerned to find a way out.

The fourth priority which my delegation
considers a fundamental task of the Council in its
current agenda is to continue working for a satisfactory
and definitive demarcation of the border between
Ethiopia and Eritrea in order to put an end to their
conflict.

The Working Group should serve as a forum in
which to analyse the effectiveness of United Nations
peace missions in Africa and their ability to discharge
the tasks they have been entrusted with. We should
look at their resources and the commitments
undertaken by the international community. The
collective thinking of the Working Group on the
lessons learned in the different experiences of the
existing peace missions in Africa can help and make a
contribution to enhancing their effectiveness. The
Working Group should also examine the efficiency and
the timeliness of existing sanctions and should examine
the future of sanctions regimes as an instrument which
could contribute to the creation of conditions of peace
and security in the regions.

The Working Group has an express mandate to
facilitate and promote strategic interaction among
organs and bodies both in the United Nations and in
regional countries to reach the Council's peace and
security objectives.

I would like to conclude by saying that among the
tasks that we consider essential for the Council, we
cannot ignore the importance of humanitarian action
undertaken by the United Nations and the international
community in Africa. A fundamental element of
conflicts that so threaten peace in the area relates to
refugees, human rights violations, problems of
intolerance - whether interracial or inter-ethnic -
and the building of mechanisms for mutual confidence.

The Security Council also has at its disposal and
should make maximum use of, the knowledge of
international non-governmental organizations in Africa
itself and outside Africa. It should rely on them for
valuable information in order to make its decision-
making more sound.

This working meeting shows the Security
Council's interest in deepening its presence in Africa
with a greater sense of responsibility and purpose,
which must always and above all be done with the
inclusion of the points of View of the African countries
and following their initiatives.

