I thank Under-Secretary Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for their detailed briefings. I also welcome the Permanent Representatives of the Sudan and of Ethiopia at today's meeting. At present, the situation in the Abyei Area remains generally calm and stable. The political situation in the Sudan and South Sudan has witnessed positive progress. The two sides have strengthened their interaction and cooperation on Abyei and have been actively cooperating with the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). These positive developments have not come easily, especially during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Secretary-General notes in his report that the Abyei Area still faces many challenges and that the security situation remains fragile (S/2020/308). The proper resolution of this issue is of vital importance to the stability of the Sudan, South Sudan and the entire region. The Security Council should continue to fully respect the leading role of the Sudan and South Sudan in resolving the Abyei issue, listen carefully to the views of both sides and support the efforts of regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We hope that the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan will continue to seek a political solution to this issue, including through the establishment of administrative, judicial and public security institutions. The international community should provide assistance to both sides, especially on fighting COVID-19. We continue to support UNISFA in implementing its mandate. The mission has an important role to play in maintaining the stability of the Abyei Area. China welcomes the efforts that Ethiopia has undertaken as one of the main troop- contributing countries, notes the Secretary-General's recommendations, and supports the extension of UNISFA's mandate. In this regard, we should listen carefully to the views of the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, the AU and the troop- contributing countries. At the same time, we appreciate the efforts being undertaken by the Secretariat to address the COVID-19 pandemic and encourage it to improve the safety and security of peacekeepers in UNISFA. China stands ready to work with African countries and the international community to contribute to resolving the Abyei issue and to promote peace, stability and development in that region.
