The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Japan and the Republic of Korea to
participate in this meeting.

I am pleased to welcome the distinguished Ministers
and representatives gathered here this morning.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on the agenda.

1 shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Secretary of State of the United States of America.

Time and time again, over the past quarter-
century, the United Nations has made it clear that the
world cannot accept a nuclear-armed North Korea.
That is not just the United States position; that is the
world's position. Past diplomatic attempts to halt North
Korea's nuclear and ballistic missile development were
unsuccessful, but now we are at the dawn of a new day.

Since taking office, President Trump has led the
international pressure campaign that has resulted in the
first significant diplomatic breakthrough in decades.
During President Trump and Chairman Kim's historic
Singapore summit, Chairman Kim committed to
working towards the complete denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. The two leaders share a common,
personal understanding of what must take place for
the transformation of the relations between the United
States and Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

The United States continues to engage with
North Korea to implement the commitments made in
Singapore. Yesterday, I had a very positive meeting with
Foreign Minister Ri Yong Ho to discuss how we can
move forward on all four commitments in the Singapore
joint statement. We also discussed the second summit
between President Trump and Chairman Kim Jong Un.

We must not forget what has brought us this
far - the historic international pressure campaign that
the Council has made possible through the sanctions
that it has imposed. Until the final denuclearization
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is
achieved and fully verified, it is our solemn collective
responsibility to fully implement all Security Council
resolutions pertaining to North Korea.

President Trump has made it abundantly clear that
if Chairman Kim follows through on his commitments,
a much brighter future lies ahead for North Korea and
its people, and the United States will be at the forefront
of facilitating that bright future. We want to see that
time come as quickly as possible, but the path to peace
and a brighter future is only through diplomacy and
denuclearization. That means that any other path that
North Korea may choose will inevitably lead to ever-
increasing isolation and pressure. It is imperative for
Members of the United Nations to take that to heart.
Enforcement of Security Council sanctions must
continue vigorously and without fail until we realize the
final, fully verified denuclearization of North Korea.
The members of the Council must set the example on
that effort and we must all hold each other accountable.

Particularly, we must all be accountable for
enforcing resolution 2397 (2017), which lowered the
annual cap on refined petroleum imports to North
Korea. The United States has made its assessment, and
we can say in no uncertain terms, that the cap of 500,000
barrels has been breached this year. We continue to see
illegal imports of additional refined petroleum using
ship-to-ship transfers, which are clearly prohibited
under the resolution. As Security Council members,
we must convey to the captains of those ships, their
owners and anyone else involved in those transfers that
we are watching them and that they must cease their
illicit activity.

We must all be accountable for cutting off North
Korea's illegal coal exports, which provide funds that go
directly to its weapons of mass destruction programmes.
We must be accountable, too, for curbing the number of
North Korean labourers permitted within our borders.
The United States is troubled by recent reports that
Member States, including members of the Security
Council, are hosting new North Korean labourers. That
violates the spirit and letter of the Security Council
resolutions that we all agreed to uphold.

While sanctions remain part of the total approach
we are pursuing to rid the Korean peninsula of nuclear
weapons, I want to finish on a positive note. We are
well into a diplomatic process and we hope - indeed,
we want i to see this through to a successful end. I
am pleased that, based upon recent exchanges between
