Mr. Williamson (United States of America): Our
congratulations go to our Colombian President on
assuming his position. I would like to thank World
Food Programme (WFP) Executive Director Jim
Morris, both for his presentation and for his good
efforts over these last months to avert famine and
starvation in Africa.

The situation in Southern Africa and the Horn of
Africa is grave, with some 30 million people at risk of
starvation. Drought is one cause of the crisis, but poor
Government policies are as much to blame. Indeed,
there is scholarship that concludes that the vast
majority of all famines in recorded history have
resulted from Government policies, not natural causes.
Famine is not a natural occurrence and is not
inevitable. Where famines take hold we must look for
the failures of governance, of development and of
assistance.

Clearly, productive investment in agricultural and
rural development to boost agricultural productivity is
essential. Science and technology, including
biotechnology, have great promise for allowing African
agriculture to keep pace with gains in the rest of the
world and to contribute to Africa's development.
However, if widespread famine is to be averted in
Africa, the international community must act
immediately to mobilize adequate levels of assistance.
The United States began to react to the crisis in
Southern Africa earlier this year and to the crisis in the
Horn in September.

In Southern Africa we have tried to provide
sufficient food assistance early on in order to prevent a
famine, not respond to one. The United States
Government has provided or pledged half a million
metric tons of food to the Southern African region at a
total value of approximately $266 million. In addition
to food assistance, the United States Government has
provided more than $10 million in non-food assistance
to the affected countries for regional management and
logistics, agriculture, supplementary and therapeutic
feeding, emergency health care and cholera response
and prevention.

In the Horn of Africa, food aid requirements are
projected to range between 1.5 and 2.5 million metric
tons to meet the needs of 11 to 15 million people.
Experts fear a repetition of the horrendous events of
the 1980s. The United States Government has often
been able to meet up to half of food aid requirements
for the Horn of Africa during times of crisis. However,
drought in the United States and a corresponding rise
in food grain prices will reduce the availability of
United States food assistance worldwide this year. At
best, we will be able to supply only about one third of
what countries in the Horn of Africa will need during
this crisis.

Despite our efforts, much more needs to be done.
We strongly encourage other donors to find the
resources to respond to this urgent situation in Africa.
We urge others as well to help settle unwarranted fears
about available food supplies and to keep the focus on
getting safe, nutritious food to the hungry.
In Southern Africa, the crisis is most dire in
Zimbabwe and Zambia. Even with 100 per cent
funding of the World Food Programme appeal, and
even if Governments and commercial import
predictions are fully realized, there will be a significant
cereal deficit. Commercial markets, however, have not
functioned well due to centralized marketing and
foreign exchange issues.

Government policies on genetically modified
food aid have also hindered the food aid distribution
process. The United States is deeply concerned that our
efforts to provide desperately needed assistance could
be delayed if not derailed by the confusion that prevails
over biotechnology food issues. The whole-kernel
maize being provided by the United States Government
as part of our relief assistance is the same as that eaten
by millions of Americans daily. It is safe and
wholesome and can make the difference between life
and death for millions of Southern Africans. Many
Governments in the region already recognize this and
are distributing United States Government-provided
maize or maize flour to their people.

The United States Government is firmly
committed to materially aiding the nations of Southern
Africa and has been first among international donors to
recognize the scale of the problem and has dedicated
resources toward meeting the needs. However, some
recipient and/or transit countries continue to have
concerns about accepting whole-kernel biotech maize.
We respect those Governments' decisions, and our goal
is to work with those countries in an effort to help them
better understand the facts and science of biotech foods
so that their concerns do not lead to delays that risk
endangering the well-being of millions of people.

We are consulting with the affected States to
adopt an agreement to allow the unrestricted import
and distribution of local aid, including biotech produce,
on an emergency basis for the duration of this crisis. At
the same time the United States Government is
concerned that food aid in the crisis in Southern Africa
is being used as a tool to inflame the debate about
biotechnology. It is important that decisions about food
aid that may contain biotech products be based on
sound science. Given the urgency of the circumstances
and the availability of safe United States food, we urge
those countries with concerns to reconsider their
restrictions on United States maize. The United States
Government remains concerned about starvation
among the people in the region and continues to stand
ready to provide our food assistance. We do not believe
there are food safety problems with biotech food. The
United States Government does not segregate maize by
seed origin, and we buy the commodities on the open
market. This food is the same as the food eaten by
Americans and has passed the regulatory process of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency, the
Food and Drug Administration and the United States
Department of Agriculture. Commissioner Burn, from
the European Union, also has issued a statement that
recognized biotech varieties of maize to be safe for
human consumption. We also believe that potential
environmental problems such as cross-pollination with
local varieties are not significant.

A number of countries have approved biotech
maize varieties - including South Africa, Argentina
and several European States - following economic,
environmental and health-safety reviews. The United
States Government has a seven-year track record of
consuming biotech commodities that speaks to their
food safety and environmental benefits for producers
and consumers. Biotech food is safe, wholesome and
nutritious.

Severe food shortages have resulted in
abnormally high prices, making food unaffordable for
many rural and urban families, particularly in
Zimbabwe, Mali and Zambia. The high prevalence of
HIV/AIDS in the region has left large portions of the
population increasingly vulnerable to health problems
associated with the lack of food.

Detrimental policies, particularly in Zimbabwe,
have aggravated the effects of lower than average
rainfall. Since January 2002 the United States, through
the World Food Programme (WFP) and World Vision,
have programmed 210,000 metric tons of food
assistance for Zimbabwe. Of that total, nearly 150,000
metric tons have arrived in the region. Much of it is
currently stored in the region due to delays caused by
Zimbabwe's recent decision to insist that all biotech
corn be milled prior to importation. That requirement
substantially raises costs, hastens storage losses and
reduces the amount of food available for emergency
relief. Zimbabwe has traditionally been a food
exporter, supplying much of the food imports taken in
by other countries in the region. The Government of
Zimbabwe's violent and chaotic seizure of land from
commercial farmers has decimated the most productive
component of Zimbabwe's agricultural sector, reducing
agricultural production by nearly 70 per cent in the last
two years and crippling its ability to feed not only its
own population but also neighbouring countries.

Furthermore, Zimbabwe's economic policies have
exacerbated agricultural conditions. Zimbabwe's
economic disruption is typical of an economy in the
midst of a devastating war. In 2001 and 2002
Zimbabwe's has been the poorest-performing economy
in Africa, with negative growth rates of 8.5 per cent
and 10.6 per cent, respectively. But in Zimbabwe there
is no invading militia or domestic rebellion. But as a
result of the current drought and, to a more significant
extent, due to its own policies, the food crisis has
gotten worse. The threat of calamitous famine is, in
large part, a consequence of misguided Government
policies. Price controls inhibit production and the trade
in food staples. The continuing monopoly of the
Government of Zimbabwe's grain marketing board on
commercial imports of grain, combined with foreign
exchange restrictions, make agricultural inputs such as
tractors and fertilizers unavailable or prohibitively
expensive. Production estimates in the agricultural
industry indicate 26 per cent negative growth this year.

There have also been numerous reports of the
Government of Zimbabwe using food as a political tool
and denying it to opposition areas. For example, in the
Insiza district, WFP suspended food distribution after
activists and officials of the ruling party, the Zimbabwe
African National Union-Patriotic Front, intimidated its
implementing partner and distributed three metric tons
of food commodities to party supporters. To date, the
issue has been unresolved. Personnel of the United
States embassy and the United Nations looking into the
hunger issue among displaced farm workers have been
attacked by war veterans. The United States cannot
accept any act of politicization of food aid. Those
actions must be investigated, and we believe that the
Secretary-General and the international community
should consider how best to ensure that food is not
used as a weapon or a political instrument in the
region.

Southern Africa and the Horn of Africa face the
real possibility of mass starvation. Hunger is already
severe in many areas. Averting a catastrophe requires
broad and urgent international support, increased
resources, new tools and better use of existing ones,
resolution of concerns over biotech food and real
reform in crisis countries. We will do our part and will
work with the World Food Programme to support it in
this vital task. Famine should not be happening in the
twenty-first century. If we can avert disaster this time,
we should look much harder at how to help create
conditions that will make the chance of it happening
again - especially on this scale - much smaller.

In summary I have three questions. What is the
role of food-import policies in terms of the threat of
famine? What is the role of Government food-
distribution mechanisms in terms of the threat of
famine? What is the impact of theft and corruption in
terms of the threat of famine?

