Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this important debate.
The choice of today's theme came quite naturally
for Pakistan as a top contributor of troops to United
Nations operations. I should like to join previous
speakers in commending the extraordinary role of your
country in this sphere and in praising your delegation
for its comprehensive and thought-provoking concept
note (S/2013/4, annex). Our appreciation also goes to
the Secretary-General for his insight into today's topic.

While Ukraine aligns itselfwith the statement made
by observer of the European Union, I find it pertinent to
make a few brief points in my national capacity.

From its inception 65 years ago, United Nations
peacekeeping has come a long way, evolving and
adapting to the ever-changing environment at every
juncture on this road. What we have now is an
increasingly complex enterprise embracing multiple
dimensions, with peacekeeping missions greatly
varying in nature, scope and size. At the time of the
first United Nations deployment, it could have hardly
been envisaged that peacekeeping would now cover all
five recurring peacebuilding priorities, ranging from
security to economic revitalization.

It is therefore of the utmost importance that
peacebuilding challenges be factored by all stakeholders
intointegratedstrategicassessmentandmissionplanning
processes in order to ensure a coherence of mutually
reinforcing activities. Equally, peacebuilding mandates
assigned to complex peacekeeping operations 4 such
as support for security sector reform; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; national political
processes, electoral assistance and others 4 have to
be as detailed, credible and achievable as possible, and
must tailor relevant peacekeeping operations to unique
local realities and needs.

In this light, we fully support resolution 2086
(2013), adopted by the Security Council today. It
broadly incorporates Ukraine's vision of how further to
clarify the evolving nexus between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. We particularly welcome the Council's
commitment to better integrating early peacebuilding
tasks into the mandates of peacekeeping operations;
to making sure that these mandates are matched by
appropriate resources; to further enhancing cooperation
and consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries; and to strengthening United Nations field
security arrangements so as to improve the safety and
security of Blue Helmets. Ukraine believes that the
implementation of today's resolution will contribute to
progress on taking forward a comprehensive strategy
for durable peace and security.

A concept at the heart of today's debate - that
of multiple dimensions 4 fully applies to Ukraine's
contribution to United Nations efforts to maintain
international peace and security. Our share in the
global partnership called United Nations peacekeeping
encompasses military, police, civilian and political
dimensions. The past 20 years have witnessed the
active military, police and civilian engagement of
Ukraine in more than 20 missions under the United
Nations mandate. As of today, my country has
contributed more than 34,000 Blue Helmets to United
Nations peacekeeping efforts in every region of their
deployment throughout the world.

Ukraine is committed to further supporting the
United Nations in its peacekeeping endeavour. This
year, at the Secretariat's request, we are considering
doubling our military aviation unit in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Recognizing the added value
of inter-mission cooperation in terms of military
advantages, cost-effectiveness and the promotion of
regional approaches to regional issues, Ukraine will
further pioneer this innovative form of peacekeeping.

Earlier this month the Ukrainian Parliament
granted approval for the permanent transfer of our
armed helicopters from Liberia to Cote d'Ivoire, to be
used in both countries along and across their border,
in accordance with resolution 2062 (2012). Being also
an active police-contributing country and a committed
actor in the area of peacebuilding, Ukraine plans
to send a formed police unit to the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. This step will be a practical follow-
up to Ukraine's membership in the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission and the steering group of
its Liberia configuration.

As was pointed out by the President of Ukraine
in his address to the General Assembly in September
2012, our country is

"truly proud of the contribution of the sons
and daughters of Ukraine 4 servicemen, law
enforcement officers and civilian personnel who
have served and continue to serve the noble ideals
of peace under the United Nations flag" (A/67/PV9, p. 15).

We are resolved to maintain and advance our

multidimensional engagement in United Nations

peacekeeping operations in the years to come.

