Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We join in thanking Ambassador Chowdhury
for introducing the report of the Panel of Experts, and I
take this opportunity to express our great appreciation
for the work he is doing as Chairman of the sanctions
Committee concerning Sierra Leone.

The Russian delegation notes the considerable
progress made in implementing the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1306 (2000), on
prohibiting the import from Sierra Leone of all
diamonds except those having a certificate of origin
issued by the Government of that country. The
launching of the national certification system provided
for in resolution 1306 (2000) has not only made it
possible to resume diamond exports from Sierra Leone;
it has also made possible an almost threefold increase
in the volume of rough diamonds exported through
official channels. Much remains to be done in order to
enhance the effectiveness of the sanctions regime.
Moreover, time will be needed for these measures to
have an impact on the ability of the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) to continue the armed conflict.

The report of the Panel of Experts on sanctions
against Sierra Leone contains much useful, detailed
information, and it should be helpful. The Experts have
done a lot of useful work, compiling an unprecedented
volume of material.

At the same time, however, we regret that some
conclusions and recommendations in the report are too
radical in nature and go beyond the mandate of the
Panel as decided by the Security Council. It is also
regrettable that the report contains no fully developed
provisions on ways to work with certain States in
enhancing the effectiveness of the sanctions regime
against Sierra Leone, including within the context of
the Organization of African Unity and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

I wish to state that the Russian delegation fully
shares the concern about the role being played by the
illegal diamond mining in and export of diamonds from
Sierra Leone in financing ongoing conflict in that
country. In this connection, we think it would be
advisable to introduce certification systems for rough
diamonds in a number of African countries, as
recommended in the report of the Panel of Experts.
Moreover, we advocate that the rough diamonds regime
be based on national control mechanisms.

At the same time, we have doubts about how
realistic this six-month period proposed in the report is
for establishing and introducing such certification
regimes. The question also arises on how to pay for
such a measure, since it is obvious that the States
named in the report are hardly likely to be able to do
so. Obviously, foreign donors would have to be
involved. We find it totally unacceptable that the report
attempts to raise the question of establishing what has
been called an international certification system for
rough diamonds. This question is being discussed in
the intergovernmental negotiating process. So far, a
broad consensus has not emerged.

The process of resolving the problem of conflict
diamonds in Sierra Leone and other conflict areas in
Africa must be focused primarily on specific measures
to break the linkage between the illicit traffic in rough
diamonds and the financing of rebel movements, and it
should not involve the interest of legal participants in
the international diamond business, which account for
over 96 per cent of diamonds on the international
markets.

However, the main point is that the Security
Council did not authorize the Panel of Experts to get
involved in the complex intergovernmental negotiating
process, which involves very serious economic and
financial interests of States and companies, and they
are not always the same interests and views. The Panel
is certainly not authorized to recommend to the
Security Council to come out in favour of the position
of any one ofthe parties in that dialogue.

Very careful further work and analysis of all the
factors involved are necessary with regard to the
package of sanctions against Liberia recommended in
the report. We believe that it is vital to consider in
particular the ECOWAS view on this matter.

