Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Bolivian delegation, Mr. President,
for convening today's important meeting to exchange
views on global efforts to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction through non-State actors,
as well as for the concept note on the topic.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their means of delivery continues to pose
a serious threat to international peace and security.
Azerbaijan shares the international community's
concern about the growing dangers and risks of that
threat, and our strategic documents on national security
and defence cite the proliferation of WMDs as a key
security challenge.

For many parts of the world, including the South
Caucasus, the direct relevance ofresolution 1540 (2004)
is obvious. The work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) is still vitally
important. Azerbaijan greatly appreciates its activities,
particularly its close interaction with Member States
and increased cooperation with relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations. As the 2016
comprehensive review of the status of the resolution's
implementation noted, the rate of progress shows that
achieving its full implementation is a long-term task that
will require continued effort at the national, regional
and international levels. In its resolution 2325 (2016),
the Security Council re-emphasized the importance
of ensuring that all States implement resolution 1540
(2004) fully and effectively.

Azerbaijan has consistently contributed to global
efforts to promote peace and security, including in
non-proliferation. Countering that menace is a priority
area for our bilateral relations and international
cooperation. Azerbaijan has always been a staunch
supporter of the quest for a world free from weapons of
mass destruction, including through the universalization
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the establishment of WMD-free zones.

Trans-border threats such as international terrorism
and the proliferation of WMDs demand that States pay
special attention to the security of their borders. Both
at the national level and through close cooperation
with neighbouring countries and international partners
within its bilateral security programmes, as well as
with international organizations, Azerbaijan is doing
its utmost to maintain comprehensive national border
controls and management, along with export control
systems. Its relevant State agencies are constantly
working to enhance their counter-proliferation
capacities and physical protection measures and to
improve inter-agency coordination and cooperation.

Areas where there is armed conflict, and especially
those under foreign military occupation, often create
conditions conducive to exploitation by terrorists,
separatists and other criminal groups and increase the
risk ofillicit cross-border activities. It is critical to ensure
that all States comply strictly with their international
obligations, particularly those relating to respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and the
inviolability of their international borders. However,
that can hardly be achieved if those obligations are
misinterpreted, made conditional or implemented
with reservations, if not ignored altogether. When
discussing efforts to prevent non-State actors from
acquiring, developing, manufacturing, trafficking or
using WMDs, therefore, attention should also be given
to countering the policies and practices of States that
instigate, support and direct such actors.

At a time when challenges to international peace
and security continue unabated, more concerted action
and synergy are required at all levels. By striving to
implement resolution 1540 (2004) fully and effectively,
Member States can contribute significantly to global
non-proliferation efforts. Beyond that, there is still
an acute need for international assistance to help
individual Member States implement their obligations
under the resolution, as well as for sustained support to
cooperation and capacity-building.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that in order
to ensure the effectiveness of strategies that have been
collectively agreed on, we should first and foremost
uphold fundamental principles and adhere to the
uniform application of international law. Azerbaijan
will continue to contribute to international efforts to
counter the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and to support the work of the 1540 Committee.

