Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Madam President, on your country's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I wish you every success. Allow me to congratulate
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
South Africa, on the efforts made during that country's
presidency of the Council in October.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Security
Council for the spirit of cooperation and consensus that
today allowed members to adopt resolution 2497 (2019)
on extending the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) for an additional six
months. I would also like to thank the delegation of the
United States of America, as penholder, for its efforts
to facilitate the negotiations on the draft resolution.
I take this opportunity to reiterate my country's
commitment to cooperating with UNISFA to enable it
to implement its mandate pursuant to resolution 1990
(2011) and other subsequent resolutions. I would also
like to reiterate our commitment to cooperating with
the Security Council and the penholder, the United
States of America, to achieve our common objective
of maintaining and promoting peace in Abyei and to
establishing the joint mechanisms that would lead to an
agreement on the final status of Abyei, as stipulated in
agreements signed by the two countries.

Allow me to emphasize the position of my
country regarding the importance of the Agreement
on Temporary Arrangements for the Administration
and Security of the Abyei Area of 2011. It is the basis
for all relevant arrangements with regard to Abyei,
including the deployment of UNISFA. Both parties
to the Agreement - the Government of the Sudan
and the Sudanese People's Liberation Movement, the
predecessor of the Government of South Sudan - have
agreed since 9 July 2011 that the Agreement would
remain in force until the final status of the Abyei Area
is resolved as stipulated in resolution 1990 (2011). Both
parties also agreed that no amendment to the mandate
of UNISFA would be made without the approval of all
three parties - the Sudan, South Sudan and Ethiopia,
the only troop-contributing country of UNISFA.
My country will therefore continue to cooperate and
coordinate with UNISFA and all other relevant parties.

We call on the Security Council and the
international community to work with and support
both parties, that is, the Government of the Sudan and
the Government of South Sudan, to establish the three
joint institutions - the police, the legislative body and
the Executive Council 4 as the only means to achieve
security, stability and well-being for our fellow citizens
in Abyei. It is also the only way to reach an agreement
on the final status of Abyei as stipulated in the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Agreement
on Temporary Arrangements for the Administration
and Security of the Abyei Area of 2011.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our thanks

and appreciation to all members of the Security Council
who worked with us and patiently listened to the views
of my country with regard to the matters covered by
the resolution just adopted. We thank all those who are
helping to facilitate the work of UNISFA, particularly
the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, the United
Nations, the African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council, the AU Commission and the AU High-level
Implementation Panel for the Sudan and South Sudan
as well as all those working in UNISFA. I would be
remiss if I did not reiterate the Sudan's commitment to
cooperating with UNISFA so that it can implement its
mandate smoothly.

The meeting rose at 3.15 pm.
