Mr. Babaa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Permit me at the outset to extend to you, Sir,
our warm congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I wish to
express my gratitude to Ambassador Ouane of Mali for
his skill and experience in conducting the Council's
work during the past eventful month.
You, Sir, come from a country that suffered
greatly under colonialism, occupation, settlement-
building, racism and trusteeship. Your country fought
for its independence, freedom and dignity and you are
therefore in the best position to appreciate the reality of
the issue before us today. We are confident that, guided
by your experience and wisdom, the proceedings and
work of the Council this month will be crowned with
success.

The occupation of Palestine by settlers from all
over the world is a problem that has been before the
United Nations since its inception. All organs of the
United Nations have addressed this question,
particularly the Security Council, without reaching a
drastic solution thereto because the principal cause of
the problem - the uprooting of an entire people and its
exile, displacement and loss - has been ignored.
Moreover, those who remained behind have been
subject to the most horrendous practices - including
imprisonment, torture, murder, the destruction of their
homes, collective punishment and the confiscation of
their land - and to daily offences by the Zionist
occupation authorities and racist settlers aimed at
forcing them to follow in the footsteps of their
forebears.

The emerging revolution of that people
demonstrates to those who would deny the existence of
the Palestinian people that it is a living and extant
people. It continues to struggle and fight, even with
stones, for its survival and a dignified, free life and to
maintain its rights over its land, on which it has lived
for thousands of years and from which the Zionist
settlers are trying to uproot it.

In recent days, the entire world has watched on
television the images of dozens of defenceless
youngsters and children being killed in cold blood and
hundreds being wounded by the bullets of snipers,
grenades, cluster bombs, tank shells and helicopter
rockets. The killing of a Palestinian child, Mohammed
Al-Durra, shook the conscience of the world and
aroused international feeling. Many other atrocious
scenes and images have not been caught on the
correspondents' cameras. All this indicates one thing:
there has been a premeditated design to kill, to
massacre and to carry out a true holocaust ever since
the Zionists planted their strange identity at the heart of
the Arab world five decades ago. They have done so in
order to create and perpetuate new faits accomplis.

This bloody scenario recurs day in and day out in
occupied Palestine. There are settlements that are
heavily armed with lethal weapons. There are racist
settlers who provoke the defenceless indigenous
population and kill them. Massacres occur that recall
Hollywood films portraying the brutal wild west. Land
is confiscated. An army of occupation protects the
Zionists. A super-Power is providing the deadly
weapons and is defending these practices and blocking
world condemnation of them by all available means
within and outside the United Nations.

We have said before and we reiterate today that
there can be no solution to the occupation of Palestine
without the return of the Palestinian people to its land
and the establishment of its independent State on the
entire territory of Palestine, in which peoples of all
religions will coexist. What is occurring in the so-
called "peace process" is merely palliative. We all
aspire to peace with justice; there can be no peace
without justice. The events in Palestine are links in the
chain of that people's revolt against occupation,
expansion and annexation for the sake of its own
independence, dignity and freedom.

Today, we can only salute the Palestinian people's
struggle, pray for its martyrs and condemn Israel's
genocidal practices. Israel has succeeded in usurping
Palestine, displacing its people and controlling its
farms, lands and waters. Today, it is seeking to deprive
the Palestinian people of its mosques, churches and
other places of worship. The massacre raging in the
occupied territories is not the first and will not be the
last so long as the international community remains
unable to protect the Palestinian people and to help it
recover its legitimate and inalienable rights and so long
as the United Nations continues to be hamstrung by the
considerable pressures exerted by a super-Power in an
attempt to prevent the Organization from exerting its
authority. Blinded by its bias in favour of the criminal,
that super-Power justifies the brutal crimes any way it
can and accords equal treatment to the executioner and
to the victim so as to funnel more benefits to the
criminal and satisfy the Zionist lobby for electoral
purposes.

We call upon the Security Council to be honest
with itself and to exercise its authority by taking
deterrent measures under its Charter mandate. The
Council must stop this brutal and barbaric Israeli
aggression against the Palestinian people. Is it possible
for the Council to do this? Where is the humanitarian
intervention we constantly hear about in this building?
Where is the defence of human rights? Where is
respect for the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War? If
this matter concerned Iraq, Libya or the Sudan, even by
way of mere allegations, the Council would not have
taken all this time to adopt resolutions and to
implement sanctions.

In conclusion, we call upon the Council, first, to
take necessary and effective measures to provide full
protection to the Palestinian people and its property in
accordance with the principles of international law and
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949; secondly, to
condemn the Nazi-like practices perpetrated daily by
the Zionists in the occupied territories, which have
been perfected by those who call themselves the
victims of a holocaust at the hands of Nazi
executioners and who now apply them perfectly against
the Palestinians; thirdly, to condemn the use of lethal
weapons and cluster bombs that are internationally
prohibited against defenceless Palestinian
demonstrators; and fourthly, to punish the criminals
who have caused the bloodshed and perpetrated the
crimes by ensuring that they are tried before an
international court for their crimes of war and
genocide.

