Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me start by conveying
Poland's deepest sympathy following further senseless
killing of innocent civilians in the recent attacks. It
simply demonstrates the kind of enormous challenges
that lie ahead on the path to lasting peace in Afghanistan.

I would like to thank all our briefers - Special
Representative Yamamoto, Executive Director Fedotov
and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov - for their
insightful and thorough briefings. Let me also take
this opportunity to pay tribute to the courageous
and dedicated team of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan for its daily efforts to advance
peace and stability in Afghanistan.

Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later today by the observer of the European
Union.

Poland reiterates the significance of the peace
process, which should be continued through constructive
dialogue. In that regard, we recognize President Ghani's
comprehensive and unprecedented proposal, which was
made during the second Kabul process conference in
February, as an important step forward. We hope that
that offer will be given a chance and eventually lead to a
genuine peace process. We count on the representatives
of Taliban groups to respond positively to the offer of
peace talks without conditions and to take part in an
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.

Goodgovernanceandsuccessfulinstitution-building
require adherence to rules and procedures that enable
all citizens to participate in the democratic process.
Poland welcomes the announcement of 20 October as
the date on which parliamentary elections will be held.
We regard as a key political commitment the holding
of parliamentary elections in 2018 and presidential
elections in 2019 in a transparent, inclusive and credible
manner. We note that the process faces challenges at the
outset, such as recruiting personnel for electoral bodies
and providing security for polling stations. However,
such challenges must be overcome by the authorities.

Poland hopes that the new Parliament will create
a strong legislative foundation for the sustainable
development and protection of human rights in the
country. With regard to technical support, we encourage
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
to provide necessary assistance at the request of the
Afghan authorities. Broad participation by women, both
as candidates and voters, remans a high priority for us.
We see it as an important precondition for enhancing
peace and security.

The development of a prosperous and peaceful
future must be founded on wide and equal access to
education for both boys and girls. Unfortunately, the
report published this month by UNICEF, entitled
Global Initiative on Out-of-School Children:
Afghanistan Country Study, indicates that almost half
of Afghan children are denied education - a very
basic human right - due to a lack of security, poverty
and discrimination. We think that the current situation
needs to be addressed by the Afghan Government,
with strong assistance provided by the international
community and civil society organizations.

The security situation in the country continues to
negatively impact civilians, particularly those who are
most vulnerable, such as women and children. In that
respect, I wish to echo the words of the representatives
of France and Sweden to the effect that more needs
to be done to protect those members of society,
particularly children.

The continued violent acts of terrorist groups remind
us of the fundamental importance of strengthening
Afghanistan's institutions, specifically those tasked
with ensuring the security and defence of the country and
its people. Poland supports and encourages the Afghan
Government to continue its efforts to improve the
capability of the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces. Those undertakings require determination and
engagement, which we will continue to support through
training and advisory activities, within the framework
of the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission.

Finally, let me refer to the briefing of Special
Representative Yamamoto, who said that there are
currently unprecedented opportunities to make progress
in seeking peace, and that it is up to the people and
Government ofAfghanistan to seize those opportunities
and strengthen their resolve to achieve lasting peace
and development. He also noted that it is up to us, the
Security Council, and the international community to
provide the Government and the people of Afghanistan
with the necessary assistance in that regard.

