Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): The
situation in the Middle East, and particularly in
Palestine - the reason why we are meeting here once
again - remains serious and tragic and continues to
challenge us. My delegation shares the concerns
expressed by all ofthose who spoke earlier.

The suicide bombings have resumed following a
brief respite. Hardly a day goes by without another
attack here or there. On the other hand, the police
operations carried out by Israel are becoming
increasingly systematic. We deplore the deaths that
have occurred on both sides; this kind of routinization
is unacceptable to the human conscience.

The fragile achievements registered by the peace
process have been seriously undermined. The
structures of the Palestinian Authority, put in place
with great effort, have been reduced to almost nothing,
because those responsible have either disappeared or
have been arrested.

The head of the Authority has been
disempowered by the other side, which has taken away
his capacity to act. The socio-economic infrastructures
has been damaged or destroyed. The Palestinian people
are helpless. The Israeli people are deeply concerned,
and their daily existence is overshadowed by the
attacks.

But where have all the peace initiatives gone?
What has come of all of the United Nations resolutions
calling for the settlement of this crisis? Formal peace
plans have been proposed, and new ideas, not yet in the
form of a plan, have also been suggested. But what are
their chances of success?

First of all, the Abdullah plan; as the Council is
well aware, that plan is based on the land-for-peace
formula. Endorsed by the Beirut Summit in March, the
plan proposed that Israel withdraw to the lines of 4
June 1967; that Syria recover the Golan Heights; and
that a Palestinian State be created in Gaza, West Bank
and East Jerusalem. In exchange, the 22 States of the
Arab League would establish full diplomatic and trade
relations with Israel, whose security they would ensure.
Need I remind the Council that the principle of land for
peace is enshrined in Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973)?

Then there is the Mubarak plan. That plan
proposes that a Palestinian State be declared, even
theoretically, by next year. Specific questions such as
those relating to borders, refugees and the status of
Jerusalem could be discussed afterwards. The
distinguished proponent of the plan believes that this
option would give fresh hope to the Palestinians and
also reassure Israel.

Finally, concerning the attitude of the sponsors of
the peace process, we have noted with interest the path
that is being explored by the United States, in
particular through the Tenet mission, the William
Burns mission and the personal involvement of the
Secretary of State, Colin Powell, and of President
Bush. The efforts of the "quartet" have given us much
hope, and they deserve our full support. They must
continue. The proposed international conference, in
order to succeed, must be prepared in a very careful
and clear-sighted manner.

All of these commendable initiatives should, we
believe, help us achieve genuine mutual recognition -
the effective recognition of the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, and the
effective recognition of the right of the people of Israel
to live in a State with secure and recognized borders.

Let me once again appeal to the international
community to find a just and lasting solution in order
to put an end to this conflict. The Security Council
must shoulder its responsibilities and strengthen the
initiatives that are under way, thereby helping to
restore confidence between the parties and enhance the
prospects for peace. This would also have the
advantage of allowing us to take action, thereby giving
the lie to the opinion of some that the Council lets
itself be acted upon by events.

I believe that we can allow ourselves to hope that,
if both parties agree to engage in mutual negotiations,
and if there is an end to the violence, the way to the
broad political viewpoint that the representative of the
Republic of Guinea spoke of earlier would be then be
open.

The global conscience is tired of these macabre
statistics. It wants peace to flourish as olive branches
flourish.

