Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing the Netherlands to take the
floor in this debate. The Netherlands fully supports the
statement made earlier by the representative of France
on behalf of the European Union. Because of our
substantial contributions, both military and in the field
of development, we would like to make a few
additional remarks.

We can look back on a successful Paris
Conference in Support of Afghanistan, which saw
frank discussions on priority issues and nearly
$21 billion pledged. We now have to speed up work on
our mutual obligations. I share the assessment of
Special Representative Eide.

The international community has shown a long-
term commitment to Afghanistan and has agreed to
coordinate more closely and to work through Afghan
structures as much as possible. With our collective
support, the Afghan Government will have to take the
lead in tackling the most urgent issues. I should like to
mention five of those.

First, governance at the provincial and local
levels must be a high priority. More qualified people
are needed, especially at the local level. Secondly,
justice and human rights are equally important.
Substantial progress is needed to end the culture of
impunity and corruption.

Furthermore, reconciliation is a key element of
Afghanistan's long-term sustainability. The Afghan
Government should reach out to those groups and
communities that disagree with the extremist ideology
of the Taliban. Another core issue is the upcoming
elections. The Afghan Government should make every
effort to ensure that the elections will be a success and
that every Afghan, woman or man, can vote. Finally,
Afghan leadership is urgently needed to tackle
narcotics. In that respect, we wish to stress the
importance of interdiction and of social, economic and
rural development as prerequisites for a poppy-free
society.

On our part, we will continue to support
Afghanistan and its people. Over the period 2009-2011,
we will contribute €775 million in combined military
assistance and development cooperation, depending on
further progress in the areas I have just mentioned.

Let me now turn briefly to relations between
Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries, especially
Pakistan. We very much welcome the Foreign
Ministers' participation in this important debate. Good
relations and strengthened cooperation between
Afghanistan and Pakistan are essential elements in
tackling the insurgency in the border region. In that
respect, I would like to encourage the Government of
Pakistan, as the Minister mentioned in his contribution
to this discussion, to follow an integrated approach in
the border region. Besides military means, socio-
economic development and a reconciliation process for
all those who do not support terrorism and extremism
are needed.

Finally, let me say a few words about the United
Nations. For many of the priorities I have mentioned,
we believe that a strong United Nations footprint in
Afghanistan is essential. We are particularly
appreciative of the work of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Kai Eide and all United Nations
staff in Afghanistan. We warmly welcome the
announcement made last week of plans to open an
office of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in Uruzgan. We strongly
believe that the physical presence of UNAMA in
Uruzgan will be a catalyst for the deployment there of
other members of the United Nations Family and
non-governmental organizations. We stand ready to
facilitate that process where needed.

For UNAMA to be able to put its Security
Council mandate into practice, we agree with the
observation of the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2008/434) that it is now a matter of urgency that
UNAMA be provided with the necessary means and
staff. We should not allow bureaucratic obstacles to
delay that. In that respect, we call not only on the
United Nations family but on all of us to support
UNAMA in establishing a more effective framework
with the required funds and trained staff.

