My delegation commends the President for convening today's timely open video-teleconference of the Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The Republic of Korea expresses its deep appreciation to Mrs. Kersti Kaljulaid, President of Estonia, for her participation today. My delegation also thanks Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, member of The Elders, for their enlightening briefings. Over the past 20 years since the inclusion, in 1999, of the protection of civilians as an item on the Security Council's agenda, we have witnessed steady progress on this very important issue. However, the reality on the ground is still far from ideal. We continue to witness the horrific suffering of innocent people in many parts of the world. Scores of civilians are being killed, maimed, starved and displaced on a daily basis. Hospitals and schools are being targeted. Economic and social infrastructure is being ravaged. Such tragic events have lingering impacts beyond the current generation, thereby hampering the normal trajectory of societal progress. Furthermore, as the report of the Secretary-General this month (S/2020/366) rightly points out, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic could exacerbate untold suffering for the most vulnerable populations already in difficult situations. Against this troubling backdrop, my delegation would like to emphasize the following five points with a view to enhancing the protection of civilians in armed conflict. First, the Republic of Korea urges all parties to conflict to support the Secretary-General's timely appeal for an immediate global ceasefire to collectively tackle the COVID-19 crisis. The entire global population is now facing a common threat, and we must work together to minimize the pandemic's impact on all. In this regard, my delegation very much hopes that the Security Council can unite to come up with substantive measures to support the Secretary-General's urgent appeal for an immediate global ceasefire. Secondly, in protecting civilians in armed conflict we must pay greater attention to the disproportionate impact conflict has on vulnerable groups. Sadly, in so many conflicts around the world, time and again we witness rampant sexual and gender-based violence, the systemic marginalization of ethnic and religious minorities and other deplorably hateful targeting. The Council has been steadily expanding protection for such groups, including women, children, people with disabilities and others, through a series of resolutions. We should continue to work harder to strengthen the requisite protection Thirdly, in order to achieve sustainable peace and security, more must be done to address the root causes of conflict through a comprehensive approach to the peace-development-human rights nexus. While Governments bear the primary responsibility for protecting their own citizens, greater support from the international community to ensure the safety and human rights of those affected by conflict should go hand in hand. Prevention and sustaining peace were at the heart of the Republic of Korea's efforts as Chair and Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission in 2017 and 2018, and we are consistently increasing our financial contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the United Nations Development Programme to realize this vision. Fourthly, my delegation urges all parties to respect and fully comply with the guiding rules and principles of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. In that connection, it is important that we all strive to reduce the continued and troubling gap between the existing normative framework that we have accomplished on the one hand and the stark reality of undercompliance and, in some cases, impunity on the ground on the other. The international criminal tribunals have been playing a critical role in reducing that gap by ensuring that there is no safe haven for perpetrators of major crimes under international law. The precedents of accountability must be accumulated in order to secure viable and critical pathways to truth and justice for appalling crimes against civilians in armed conflict, thereby stamping out impunity. Fifthly, we would like to highlight the importance of incorporating the latest technological developments into the work of the United Nations to improve engagement with the vulnerable populations in the post-COVID-19 era, to enhance the effectiveness of peace operations and to protect civilians in armed conflict as we look forward to hosting the 2021 Peacekeeping Ministerial meeting. Peacekeeping operations should be equipped with the best available resources and equipment to facilitate the effective implementation of their respective mandates, including the protection of civilians. For example, new technologies in data collection, digital early warning, and information and communications can be leveraged to help protect civilians, expedite humanitarian assistance and secure accountability. In that regard, we welcome and support the United Nations initiative to establish the Expert Panel on Technology and Innovation in United Nations Peacekeeping. Bearing in mind the double-edged characteristics of technology, we must maximize the many positive aspects of new technology while minimizing its negative impacts. The Republic of Korea would like to reaffirm its driving commitment to working with the United Nations as well as all Member States with a view to better protecting civilians in armed conflict today, tomorrow and beyond.
