Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): We fully
associate ourselves with the congratulations addressed to
you, Mr. President, particularly those so eloquently
expressed by the representatives of Sierra Leone, the United
Kingdom and France.

I would first like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Francis Okelo,
for his important contribution, and to the men and women
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) for the essential work that they are carrying
out in conditions that are difficult and still dangerous, as
the representative of Malaysia has stressed. I should also
like to pay tribute to the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)
for its tireless efforts, and recall the sacrifices made by the
countries members of ECOMOG that are providing troops
to protect the people and the Government of Sierra Leone.

Canada welcomes the decision that will be taken today
to authorize the expansion of the United Nations Military
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone. This decision is proof of
the commitment of the international community to the
implementation of the Lorne Agreement and to the
consolidation of peace and security in Sierra Leone. We are
particularly pleased that this draft resolution takes up
several of the themes developed during the open Security
Council debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, which took place last February: the safety, security
and freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel, the
importance of access to humanitarian assistance, the special
needs of children and the importance of human rights and
humanitarian law. Like so many other modern conflicts, the
war in Sierra Leone has had a devastating impact on
innocent civilians.

The effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the rebel forces will be essential in
guaranteeing future peace and stability in Sierra Leone. Ex-
combatants must be disarmed and properly reintegrated into
society if Sierra Leone is to avoid the high crime rates and
social unrest that are so frequent in countries emerging
from conflicts in which there is an abundance of small
arms. The success of disarmament, demobilization and the
reintegration of child soldiers, as well as the resumption of
normal life for all children affected by war, will also be
decisive if they are to be able to take an active part in the
reconstruction of their country. This task will not be easy,
but it must be undertaken as quickly as possible with the
full support of the Security Council.

(spoke in English)

The challenge facing the people of Sierra Leone is
a daunting one. Unimaginable atrocities have been
inflicted upon innocent civilians, the most appalling
committed against women and children. Gross human
rights abuses - torture, amputation, rape, mutilation and
the forcible recruitment of children as combatants - have
torn apart the social fabric of that country. The first task,
the rebuilding and reconciliation process, will be difficult.
The continued commitment and engagement of the
international community and the mobilization of
significant resources will be critical if peace is to take
hold in Sierra Leone. We are confident that with the
commitment of all the parties involved, the people of
Sierra Leone will enjoy a bright future.

