Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate,
which gives us an excellent opportunity to review the
progress made in the fight against terrorism and to
determine priorities for the subsequent work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

My delegation would like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Arias for the effective leadership he has
displayed in steering the work of the CTC. I would also
like to thank him for his informative briefing and his
presentation of the Committee's comprehensive 90-day
work programme.

The unprecedented attack against United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad last August was the cruellest
and largest-scale terrorist act in the entire history of
our Organization. General Assembly resolution 57/338,
which was adopted by the Assembly soon after that
tragic event, strongly condemned that atrocious attack
and called for intensified cooperation to prevent and
eradicate such acts of terrorism. It is a timely
resolution, given the threats faced by United Nations
personnel in war zones all over the world.

We believe that the issue of combating terrorism
should remain a top priority on the agenda of the
international community. Security Council resolution
1373 (2001) is a landmark in the global fight against
terrorism. Under the leadership of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, we continue to move forward
towards full implementation of that resolution.

Since its inception, the Committee has been at the
forefront of the fight against major threats to
international peace and security and has been involved
in a wide range of activities. My delegation encourages
the CTC to intensify its cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations. The second
meeting of the CTC with international organizations,
which was held in Washington on 7 October, has given
further impetus to our joint actions against terrorism.

We support the Committee in attaching great
importance to that cooperation, which enables us to
broaden the dialogue that is so essential to combating
terrorism. We commend the CTC for its efforts to
pursue an open dialogue with Member States in a spirit
of transparency, as well as its assistance to countries to
enhance their capacity to combat terrorism.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has a broad
mandate encompassing international cooperation,
internal executive machinery and domestic legislation.
My delegation is pleased with the Committee's focus
on enhancing legislation and national mechanisms for a
more effective fight against terrorism. Since the
establishment of the CTC, we have witnessed a steady
increase in the number of countries acceding to
international instruments on terrorism. For its own part,
Kazakhstan has ratified the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and
the International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings. In the near future, our country
intends to complete the process of accession to all 12
international instruments on terrorism.

Kazakhstan supports the tireless efforts of the
United Nations to combat international terrorism.
Pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), my country has
taken effective measures against terrorism by
establishing a comprehensive national mechanism to
suppress the financing of terrorism and money
laundering.

Kazakhstan is also working to enhance
cooperation in that area at the regional level. The
process represented by the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, which was
initiated by President Nazarbaev, serves that purpose
by encouraging active cooperation among regional
States in the fight against terrorism. We believe that the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization can make a
significant contribution to counterterrorism efforts in
the Eurasian region. Kazakhstan has contributed to the
establishment of an anti-terrorist centre by the
Commonwealth of Independent States. We are taking
further steps to develop cooperation in that area with
other Central Asian States.

In order to ensure a systematic and progressive
approach, the CTC has continued to review reports by
Member States on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). According to information provided by the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, every
State has submitted its initial report, 150 States have
submitted their second reports and 71 States have
presented their third reports.

I am pleased to note that Kazakhstan, having
submitted its third report within the established time
frame, has fully complied with the requirements of
resolution 1373 (2001) and is engaged in a meaningful
dialogue with the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

Finally, my delegation believes that it is
imperative for the CTC to continue to rely on the
support of Member States and of the entire
international community. As I mentioned earlier,
Kazakhstan has been fully cooperating with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee since its establishment
and will continue to provide to this important body all
necessary support by making every effort to oppose
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

