Mr. McNee (Canada): The Council meets today
to discuss the situation in Afghanistan and the role of
the international community in helping it to become
more stable and secure. Strong leadership by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is crucial in this regard. Canada salutes the
continuing, committed and very effective leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Staffan de Mistura. We thank him for his very good
briefing today, and we note with appreciation the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2011/120*) and his
recommendations for the Mission for the coming year.

In its deliberations, the Council should continue
to ensure that the renewed mandate reflects the
evolving situation in Afghanistan. The international
community's efforts over the next years should focus
on the process towards greater Afghan leadership in
order to ensure that Afghanistan has the best chance for
success and that the progress that has been achieved in
development, governance and security will be
consolidated.

Over the past year, the Afghan Government has
demonstrated leadership in coordinating the
international community around a focused series of
national priority programmes that prioritize the
development objectives outlined in the Afghan
National Development Strategy. While they began with
a great deal of promise, we are concerned by recent
developments that threaten the progress of these
programmes. Critical to this is finding a satisfactory
way of implementing the President's decree on private
security companies and resolving critical issues at
Kabul Bank. UNAMA should be at the forefront of
these discussions and continue to fulfil its critical role
in coordinating donors and ensuring that the
international community is responding adequately to
Afghanistan's needs. Canada remains committed to
working with international partners and the
Government of Afghanistan in supporting the Kabul
process and realizing the objectives of these
programmes.

The transition of security responsibility to Afghan
authorities by 2014 is a goal shared by Afghanistan and
the international community. The increasing
capabilities of Afghan institutions, notably the Afghan
National Security Forces, will allow the process of
transition to begin in the coming months. At the same
time, it will be important to build up the civilian
governance institutions that will need to oversee the
Afghan National Security Forces.

As others have noted today, the security situation
remains a serious concern. The most recent UNAMA
report highlights the growing human cost of the
conflict in Afghanistan. Every step possible must be
taken to avoid civilian casualties due to International
Security Assistance Force operations. But it is very
important to stress that over three-quarters of all
civilian casualties last year were caused by insurgents.
Canada strongly condemns continuing attacks on
civilians and humanitarian personnel and calls for
respect for key principles to allow the full, safe and
unhindered access of humanitarian actors to people in
need.

Reconciliation between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban is critical to our efforts in
bringing the conflict in Afghanistan to a successful
conclusion. This reconciliation process should be
Afghan-led, but the international community should
support a process that respects "red lines" requiring the
insurgents to renounce violence, recognize and respect
the Constitution of Afghanistan, and sever ties with Al-
Qaida and other terrorist organizations. Within the
international community, support from Afghanistan's
neighbours, in particular Pakistan, will be critical.

This is the first open debate on Afghanistan since
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security.
Progress has been made, but the continued efforts of
the Afghan Government, civil society, the United
Nations and the international community as a whole
are required to prevent backsliding and to secure a
brighter, more stable future for the women of
Afghanistan. In 2010, we welcomed the commitment
by the Government at the Kabul Conference to
identifying and prioritizing benchmarks for the
National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan, as
well as its commitment to developing a strategy to
implement the law on the elimination of violence
against women. Canada does remain concerned,
though, about the potential implications for women's
rights in the original draft regulation on women's
shelters. We urge the Government of Afghanistan to
ensure that the regulation respects its national and
international human rights obligations to women and
girls.

(spoke in French)

Afghanistan's relationship with its neighbours is
also central to its development. The States of the
region are the most affected by the situation in
Afghanistan and play a primary role in helping it to
become more stable and secure. It is important that
these States play a positive role, allowing Afghanistan
to develop its own institutions and structures free from
outside influences. Additionally, we note with
appreciation the positive dialogue that has been taken
up by regional organizations and individual countries,
and encourage Afghanistan and its neighbours to
ensure that it continues. By maintaining such links,
Afghanistan can continue to foster greater
understanding with its neighbours and develop the
links crucial to its long-term prosperity and security.

We note that the 2010 parliamentary elections
were not held under ideal circumstances and were
marred by many irregularities. However, the
Government of Afghanistan and UNAMA are in a
unique position to work together in order to distil the
lessons learned from this event and to further
strengthen Afghanistan's electoral institutions.
Afghanistan's democratic process has three key
components: ensuring the sustainability of electoral
reforms, strengthening democratic institutions and
allowing Afghans to be heard.

UNAMA's mandate will come to an end later this
month, and the Security Council will deliberate and
decide on the best way forward for the Mission. In so
doing, it will take into account the clear progress
achieved within the country and the many challenges
that remain.

In conclusion, Canada will remain a devoted
partner of the Afghan Government in order to ensure
that Afghanistan becomes a country where all its
citizens can live in freedom and security.

