Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura (Brazil): At the outset,
permit me to congratulate you, Sir, on your work as
President of the Security Council for the month of
August and to express the satisfaction of my delegation
at the decision to hold a meeting on Timor-Leste. I
would also like, through you, to welcome Foreign
Minister Zacarias Albano da Costa and to reaffirm to
him Brazil's commitment to Timor-Leste, its stability,
its prosperity and our common future. By the same
token, I thank the Special Representative, Mr. Atul
Khare, for his presentation and his tireless efforts for
the benefit of Timor-Leste.

A little more than a month ago, President Lula
visited our fellow Portuguese-speaking country and
had the opportunity to strengthen our historic bonds
with the people of Timor-Leste. On that occasion, he
said:

"Timor-Leste expects peace, stability and
development. It is necessary to create conditions
that will enable the Timorese to fully realize their
potential. They can count on Brazil in that
regard."

President Lula's statement highlights the Brazilian
efforts in Timor-Leste. Having been engaged with the
country since the beginning of its process of
independence, Brazil was active on the diplomatic
front in New York and made concrete contributions to
the United Nations missions on the ground since 1999:
the United Nations Mission in East Timor; the
International Force, East Timor; the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor; the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor; and the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). Although he did so in his international
capacity, it was a Brazilian, the late Sergio Vieira de
Mello, who supported the country on its path towards
independence and democracy. Today marks exactly
five years since the lives of Sergio and 20 other
colleagues were taken in an act of terror, and we pay
tribute to them.

At present, Brazil's bilateral cooperation with
Timor-Leste is significant, running the gamut of
subjects: judiciary training and legal development,
education, agriculture, professional capacity-building,
military cooperation, the fight against hunger and
poverty, the training of diplomats, and sports. An
executive cooperation group is already in operation to
identify priority areas and to formulate projects of
mutual interest to our countries. The sum of those
efforts epitomizes two of the principles guiding our
engagement: first, action should promote the long-term
sustainability of the country; and secondly, the
international presence should encompass not only the
military and police aspects, but also the promotion of
development.

By the same token, Brazil is confident that the
leadership of Timor-Leste will be able to use oil
revenues to promote general welfare and long-term
prosperity. We congratulate the Timorese Government
and the United Nations on the signing of a five-year
plan to reduce poverty, consolidate democracy and
provide basic social services. We are encouraged by the
finalization of a second national development plan,
which should be adopted soon.

Brazil holds a view close to that of the Secretary-
General regarding the heinous act of violence against
President Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Xanana
Gusmao early this year: it demonstrated the ability of
the Timorese institutions to respond to crises while
exposing some fragilities in its security sector. In that
sense, we support the recommendations to maintain the

08-4651]
police component of UNMIT. We also reiterate our
understanding that the United Nations must stay in
Timor-Leste as long as required lest a new precipitous
withdrawal cost the international community all the
investment it has made in that country. We agree with
the Secretariat that a brief postponement of the
medium-term strategy is a wise move in order to make
it more attuned with the goals that will be set for
Timor-Leste by the Timorese themselves.

The assistance provided by the United Nations is
not equalled by any other organization or individual
country. The multilateral framework is the correct one
to direct the international presence in Timor-Leste and
to maximize cooperation. United Nations support will
continue to be needed in the ongoing reform and
strengthening of the security sector.

Brazil also welcomes the conclusions of the Truth
and Friendship Commission and expresses its
expectation that matters will be treated in accordance
with the will of the Timorese people and its
Government towards reconciliation and justice.

To conclude, I would like to make another
reference to the words of President Lula:

"Timor-Leste is a symbol, an example, of
our struggle for a just and solidary international
order. It expresses a collective aspiration to a
world where peoples share the benefits of
material progress and live in peace and
harmony".

