The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
August 2008, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Le Luong Minh, Permanent Representative of Viet
Nam, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of July 2008. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Minh for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Sierra Leone

Sixth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra
Leone (S/2008/281)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pemagbi
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/512, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations. Members also have before them
document S/2008/281, which contains the sixth report
2
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1829 (2008).

I now give the floor to the representative of
Sierra Leone.


