Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): The adoption of
resolution 2044 (2012) comes at a time of uncertainty
and turmoil in the Sahel, North and West Africa and the
Middle East, when the peoples of those regions are
2

demanding the full enjoyment of their human, socio-
economic and political rights. It also comes at a time
when the States of the Mahgreb are moving towards
closer cooperation. It should be borne in mind that,
despite such transitions within the region, the issue of
Western Sahara still remains unchanged.

We appreciate the sustained efforts of the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara, Mr. Christopher Ross, towards finding a
negotiated and peaceful solution to the question of
Western Sahara. We welcome the fact that the parties
have made some progress during the negotiations,
especially on confidence-building measures. However,
I regret that the parties have not yet moved on the core
issue of realizing the objective of a just, lasting and
mutually acceptable political solution that provides for
the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara,
as required by Security Council resolutions.

We welcome the parties' stated commitment to
hold the next rounds of informal talks in June and July.
We ask them to focus on the core issues in order to
bring finality to that intractable dispute. We are also
pleased at the intention of the Personal Envoy to visit
the region, including an extensive visit to Western
Sahara for the first time.

We welcome the efforts of the Kingdom of
Morocco to advance the promotion and protection of
human rights in Morocco itself, including the
establishment of the National Council on Human
Rights. The visit of the Special Rapporteur on cultural
rights in September last year is welcome, and we
encourage Morocco to ensure unqualified and
unimpeded access to all special procedures of the
United Nations Human Rights Council.

The Council has taken bold steps in the past
18 months to protect the human rights of peoples,
particularly in North Africa and the Middle East. We
must ensure that those rights of the people of Western
Sahara are not ignored and that they too are defended
with the same zeal and commitment. We are thus
disappointed that, once again, the Security Council has
been unable to find agreement on establishing an
international, credible, legal and permanent human
rights mechanism within the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO).

It is an anomaly that MINURSO is one of the few
United Nations missions that does not have a human
rights mandate. Such a double standard creates the
12-30982
impression that the Security Council does not give
priority to the human rights of the people of Western
Sahara. The continuation of that trend has the potential
to erode the credibility of this important body. We see
no reason why the people of Western Sahara should be
treated any differently. The selective approach to
human rights by the Council calls into question the
motivation of those who have conveniently looked the
other way while human rights abuses are committed in
the territory of Western Sahara. The special procedures
of the Human Rights Council are an important element
in ensuring the protection of human rights. However,
they are not a substitute for a more permanent
mechanism.

We are concerned at the restriction placed on
MINURSO, particularly those measures that threaten to
compromise its neutrality. We call on all parties to
ensure that MINURSO is able to operate under
generally accepted peacekeeping principles, norms and
practices. We look forward to receiving a briefing and
report from the Secretary-General on the challenges to
MINURSO's operations and steps taken to address
them.

South Africa reiterates the indisputable fact that
Western Sahara remains the last colony on the African
continent, listed as a Non-Self-Governing Territory by
the United Nations. South Africa will continue to
support efforts to achieve a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution that will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara. It
is for this reason that my delegation supported the
adoption of resolution 2044 (2012), extending the
mandate of MINURSO for another year.

The Security Council should continue to support
this process in an unbiased manner and ensure that
MINURSO is able to complete its mandate for three
critical purposes for which it was intended: first, as an
instrument of stability in the event that the political
stalemate should continue; secondly, as a mechanism to
implement a referendum on self-determination in the
event that political negotiations should be successful;
and thirdly, to provide independent information on
conditions in the Territory to the Secretariat, the
Security Council and the international community.

In concluding, I wish to raise my delegation's
concern at the manner in which the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/197) was prepared and finalized. Due
consideration should be given to Article 100 of the
12-30982
Charter of the United Nations in the preparation of
these reports.

