Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for Mexico's continuing leadership
on this critical matter.

Australia appreciates this opportunity to reaffirm
its commitment to what must be a robust international
framework to address the situation of children in armed
conflict. As a member of the Group of Friends for
children and armed conflict, we are pleased to
associate ourselves with statement delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group.

Australia welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/ 181). For the first time, as we know,
the report lists parties to conflict on the basis of sexual
violence and killing and maiming. In the four months
of the reporting period in which those triggers for
listing were activated, 10 parties were listed on those
grounds. That figure, and the fact that the numbers for
listing on those bases could be higher in future
reporting periods, is obviously of very serious concern.

All parties to conflict must take urgent action to
address those and other grave violations against
children. For that reason, the names of persistent
violators should continue to be published. The Council
should utilize the full range of tools available to it and
take vigilant measures in response to these grave and
ongoing violations. Those who abuse children in times
of conflict simply must not go unpunished. We support
the Secretary-General's call for improved synergies
between the Council's Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and its sanctions committees. The
Secretary-General's recommendation to include the
issue of children in armed conflict in the mandates of
all relevant sanctions committees is also welcome, as is
his proposal to include child protection advisers in the
expert groups that inform them. Ms. Coomaraswamy's
briefing on 21 May to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo set a very positive
precedent in that regard.

Positive signs of progress in the Secretary-
General's report are a testament to the real change that
the Council mechanism can effect, in particular the
recent release of children in Nepal and the signing by
parties in Nepal and the Philippines of time-bound
action plans. We express our hope that those and other
such action plans will be translated into genuine action
on the ground. We reaffirm our own readiness to
support national efforts to do so.

Australia is pleased to assist the United Nations
and other partners to address the situation of children
in armed conflict in very practical ways - particularly
in Asia, where a significant portion of the work of the
Council mechanism is focused. The value of
identifying best practices and developing field manuals
and training toolkits must be recognized, particularly to
help identify tangible ways United Nations country
teams can address children's welfare. UNICEF's June
2009 all-African workshop was an excellent initiative
in that regard, and we were pleased to support it.

We value our continued partnership with
UNICEF in this area, including in Sri Lanka,
Afghanistan and the Philippines. The news of the
recent release of the last Sri Lankan former child
soldiers from rehabilitation centres demonstrates the
capabilities of the Council mechanism. That those
former child soldiers will be provided with the skills
and opportunities that they will need to forge a
sustainable future is particularly pleasing. With Sri
Lanka now looking towards a more hopeful future, we
trust that those children represent a new beginning for
their country.

In the Philippines, Australia supports UNICEF in
providing education for children in areas affected by
armed conflict. We are encouraged by the Secretary-
General's finding that the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front has taken measures to operationalize its action
plan within its ranks, thereby translating words into
action.

Measures taken by Thailand to protect the safety
and enhance the development of children in its
southern border provinces are to be commended,
including its efforts to significantly reduce attacks on
schools, which is a grave violation against children.
Effective information on the prevalence of this
violation and strategies for prevention are clearly
crucial.

Of course, the gains that have been made must
not obscure the fact that there is much more work to be
done. The continued inability of the United Nations to
gain access to non-State groups in Myanmar in order to
make progress in discussions on action plans remains
of particular concern. That being said, we recognize
that the International Labour Organization continues to
have a positive and effective presence on ground in
Myanmar. We are pleased to see in the Secretary-
General's report that continued operation of the
supplemental understanding complaints mechanism has
produced some results for the protection of children in
Myanmar's conflict areas.

In conclusion, Australia welcomes the
improvements reported by the Secretary-General. But,
along with many other Council members, we caution
that further robust efforts and commitments by all
Member States are essential. The failure to protect and
rehabilitate children from harm and exploitation in
situations of armed conflict simply condemns us all.
