Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Allow me to first of all
welcome the presence among us of the Secretary-
General at this debate and to thank him for his
statement.

The Security Council today is, by general
account, a remarkably more robust and intensive body
than was the case a decade or more ago. Nowadays, the
United Nations is becoming involved in an ever-
increasing number of conflicts. There is an ever-
increasing demand for United Nations peacekeepers
and monitors. Sanctions and other effective measures
are being applied to more and more cases worldwide.
In addition, there is the modern scourge of terrorism
and new threats such as the potential spread of
weapons of mass destruction, all of which require
special and detailed attention by the United Nations, its
subsidiary bodies, in particular the Security Council,
and Member States.

When all of that is taken into consideration, the
question remains: how can we comprehensively,
adequately and effectively address those issues while at
the same time not detrimentally affecting the work of
this unique international body in the implementation of
its mandate?

As we have just mentioned, the agenda of the
Security Council has become increasingly active in
recent years. It is only natural that the interest of the
general membership in its working methods has also
increased. Questions have already been put forward on
issues such as the transparency of the Council's work,
the Council's effectiveness and efficiency, as well as

interaction, cooperation and the general participation in
the work of the Security Council by members and
non-members alike, including troop-contributing
countries, and the evolving role of regional
organizations vis-a-Vis the United Nations. Moreover,
as was emphasized in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1), achieving
greater transparency and better and more effective
implementation of sanctions regimes imposed by the
Security Council is another issue that merits continued
debate.

Croatia welcomes the good work and progress
achieved so far in approaching those issues by both
elected and non-elected members of the Council. We
especially thank the delegations of Japan, Slovakia and
Panama for their excellent stewardship of the Council's
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, as well as the so-called group of
the Small Five, an important group whose efforts have
gone a long way in stimulating those debates. We
would especially like to offer our appreciation to
Ambassador Kenzo Oshima of Japan, whose efforts
while chairing the Working Group led to the Council
approving the note contained in document S/2006/507,
which is the subject of today's debate.

Croatia supports the recommendation contained
in the note, while at the same time believing that
implementation of certain points contained therein
needs to strike a balance between desirability and
expeditiousness. We welcome the achievement of
greater transparency in the Council's work through
briefings by the presidency to non-Council members,
including regular meetings with troop-contributing
countries, and an increasing number of open meetings
of the Council.

Even though my delegation supports having more
open meetings, that idea should be tempered with a
sense of what Council members wish to achieve in
those meetings. While some may recall that prior to the
1990s, the Council conducted more of its business in
open rather than closed meetings, one needs to keep in
mind that the Council's agenda at the time was far less
ordered and indeed less full.

We must not lose sight of the fact that the
Security Council's primary mandate is maintaining
international peace and security, and that, and only
that, should be the driving force in deciding the format
of its meetings. Any reflections on or possible reform
of working methods must be conducted in that light so
as to help facilitate the more efficient and effective
functioning of the Security Council as a whole.

Conversely, the Council may wish to make better
use of the wish for consultations and participation in its
deliberations by countries particularly affected,
including possibly countries host to peacekeeping
operations, neighbouring States or even countries that
are targeted for sanctions or that have sanctions
implemented against them. My delegation has long
believed that including or consulting with a country
host to a peacekeeping operation during discussions
among Council members on the future of that country
can be beneficial to the Council's decision-making
process.

Included in that are regional and subregional
organizations. Such organizations are often ideally
placed to help or advise the Security Council on
overcoming crises erupting on a local or regional level.
Using their expertise or having them pronounce on
various crises not only should become common
practice during open meetings, but also should be taken
up during consultations among Council members,
possibly by having them brief one or more interested
Council members upon request.

The President's note and its recommendations
were designed to improve the efficiency of the work of
the Council. We believe that, through its practical
implementation, that goal will be largely achieved. At
the same time, we believe that the question of
reforming or improving the working methods is not a
static process and that further modifications to the
aforementioned note through the Council's Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions may be appropriate at some time
in the future.

