The Secretary-General: The report I present
today is my ninth on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2012/376). Its essential thrust is
clear - too many people are dying in too many places.
Sometimes they are caught in crossfire; frequently they
are targeted. They are the innocent victims of attacks
on their communities and, often, on places that rightly
should be sanctuaries - hospitals, schools and places of
worship. More and more, we are witness to an appalling
catalogue of sexual violence, forced disappearances,
torture and other acts that Violate - often
egregiously - international humanitarian and human
rights law.

Let us consider some of the most recent developments.
Last year in Afghanistan, our Mission there reported a
rise in civilian deaths. Anti-Government forces were
responsible for more than 75 per cent of those killings.
In Somalia, attacks by Al-Shabaab take place most
frequently against unarmed civilians. Ongoing clashes
between the Sudan, South Sudan and their proxies
have caused many deaths, injuries and large-scale
displacements of people. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, civilians are routinely caught up in ferocious
fighting between Government forces and various armed
groups; too often, they are the targets of reprisals by
all sides. In Cote d'Ivoire, seven peacekeepers recently
lost their lives defending villagers from armed attacks
from across the border with Liberia.

And in Syria, Government forces and armed groups
are fighting with no apparent concern for civilian
populations. Attacks are growing in frequency and
brutality. As we speak, the city of Homs and other areas
are being shelled. United Nations observers have risked
their lives to report to the world on what they have
seen. They have reported armed assaults on civilians,
execution-style killings and opposition forces firing
from inside hospitals.

Across that geography of conflict, we simply
must do more. We must do more to protect women and
children, in particular; more to prevent attacks against
journalists; and more to save innocent lives.

The Security Council has made important progress
over the past year and a half. We saw the power of
unity in the Council in halting violence and upholding
democracy in Cote d'Ivoire. In Libya, international
forces intervened to prevent a clear threat to civilians
in the east after the former regime had demonstrated its
readiness to carry out large-scale killings. The Council
has also shown greater willingness to use targeted
sanctions against those who violate international
humanitarian and human rights law.

In recent months, landmark verdicts against Charles
Taylor and Thomas Lubanga marked important steps for
international justice and accountability. Commissions
of inquiry by the Human Rights Council also found
serious violations of international law in Cote d'Ivoire,
Libya and Syria. I welcome the continuing role of the
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians.

And, of course, every day, tens of thousands of
civilians continue to depend on our peacekeepers for
protection. Our peacekeeping missions have made
important advances in tackling this most challenging part
of their mandate. They are identifying and addressing
threats through political efforts to prevent Violence and
resolve conflict, immediate physical protection and
building a broader protective environment for civilians.
This includes assistance for State and local institutions
to better fulfil their fundamental responsibility to
protect their citizens. Drawing lessons from our
experiences, we have developed new tools to improve
peacekeeping efforts to carry out missions" protection
mandates, including guidance on strategic planning and
training.

My report highlights five continuing core challenges
for civilian protection. First, parties to conflict must do
more to comply with international humanitarian and
human rights law. All violations require our attention
and action, but some demand particular scrutiny.
Among them is the growing use of explosive weapons
in populated areas.

This year, my report also spotlights attacks against
health-care services. According to the International
Committee of the Red Cross, that has become one of
the biggest yet least recognized humanitarian issues of
our time.

Secondly, there is an urgent need for a more
systematic engagement with non-State armed groups.
That does not presume recognition, but it does require
understanding on the part of the groups and their
leaders of their responsibilities and the consequences of
violating international humanitarian and human rights
law.

Thirdly, when United Nations peacekeeping
missions are mandated to protect civilians, they must
have the resources and forces to do the job. Their work
to directly protect civilians must be accompanied by
effective political efforts to secure lasting peace and
assistance to build State institutions so the peacekeepers
can ultimately withdraw.

Fourthly, for civilians trapped in conflict, survival
often depends on international aid. We need to do
more - much more - to ensure safe, timely and
unhindered humanitarian access.

Fifth is accountability. When national authorities
fail to take the steps necessary to protect civilians or
bring the perpetrators of war crimes and gross human
rights violations to justice, I urge the Security Council
to exercise strong leadership in guiding the international
response.

Meeting these challenges requires political
will - the will of the parties to conduct hostilities
within the parameters of international law, to refrain
from using explosive weapons in populated areas,
to allow engagement with armed groups and open
access to those in need of assistance, and to enforce
discipline and hold accountable those who perpetrate
violations. It also implies the will on the part of the
Council to deliver on its long-standing commitment
to the protection of civilians by consistently using the
tools at its disposal, including the imposition of arms
embargoes, targeted sanctions and referral of situations
to the International Criminal Court. Beyond that, I also
urge the Council and Member States to consider new
approaches to preventing and responding to violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law,
and to ensure that the protection of civilians receives
the attention it demands.

