Mr. Hill (Australia): I am grateful for the
opportunity to participate in this debate. Australia is a
strong supporter of United Nations efforts to combat
terrorism. The United Nations has played a key role in
creating a climate and framework for enhanced
bilateral, regional and global cooperation to combat
terrorism, partially through the Security Council
committees we are discussing today and also through
the General Assembly's adoption of counter-terrorism
conventions and, more recently, the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288). In the context of the Security
Council, we thank the members and staffs of the
committees; we particularly recognize the work of
Mr. Javier Ruperez,

Resolution 1267 (1999), which established the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee, plays a
vital role. The arms embargo, assets freeze and travel
ban against all individuals and entities on the 1267
consolidated list, if consistently applied, constitute a
powerful counter-terrorism measure.

Australia also encourages States to supplement
the efforts of the 1267 Committee by designating
terrorists domestically. Resolution 1373 (2001) is
significant in this respect, as it obliges all States to
criminalize assistance for terrorist activities, to deny
financial support and safe haven to terrorists and to
share information about groups planning attacks.

We have been assiduous in meeting our
obligations under the 1267 and 1373 sanctions regimes.
But in our region and elsewhere the threat from Al-
Qaida and related terrorism remains as serious as ever.
The heinous bombings in Algiers earlier this year,
which killed dozens of people and wounded hundreds
more and which were believed to have been carried out
by the Al-Qaida-linked Salafist Group for Preaching
and Combat, demonstrate the continuing threat posed
by Al-Qaida and its poisonous ideology. Other terrorist
groups that may have few obvious links to Al-Qaida's
leadership or to other listed groups or individuals
nonetheless operate according to Al-Qaida's extremist
ideology and continue to pose a threat to our collective
security.

Al-Jama'a al-Islamiya remains the most
immediate terrorist threat in South-East Asia. Australia
supported its listing under resolution 1267 because of
its well-known links to Al-Qaida. In turn, Al-Jama'a al-
Islamiya's links to other terrorist groups operating in
the Philippines, such as the Abu Sayyaf Group and the
Rajah Solaiman group, underline the importance of
States, along with the 1267 Committee, continuing to
examine whether new entities meet the requirements
for listing.

Australia endorses the view expressed in the
latest report of the 1267 Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2007/ 132, enclosure) of
the need to maintain the list's quality and relevance
and to make the sanctions more effective. We also
endorse the steps that the 1267 Committee is taking to
update the Taliban list, which has been neglected in
recent years. We note in this context that the senior
Taliban leader, Mullah Dadullah, who was recently
killed by coalition forces in Helmand, had not been
listed. States should contribute to efforts to maintain
the list's currency.

Australia also strongly supports Security Council
efforts to prevent the spread of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD), primarily through implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Regrettably, we still do not
have a complete picture of the progress made since that
resolution was adopted. It is only when all States
comply with their 1540 reporting requirements that we

can determine what gaps still exist in their domestic
export controls and where they may need assistance to
respond better to the changing security environment.

Australia stands ready to assist States, particularly
in our region, to put in place the legal and regulatory
infrastructure and develop the capability and experience
to fulfil their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).
We have worked with our Asia-Pacific neighbours,
including through the Pacific Islands Forum, to deliver
targeted training and technical assistance. We look to the
1540 Committee to supplement such regional efforts.

We are active internationally in support of
resolution 1540 (2004). As Chair of the Australia
Group, we are working with 39 other individual States
and the European Union to incorporate brokering
controls into the Australia Group guidelines. This will
be discussed at the Australia Group plenary session in
June, following an international seminar on brokering
controls which we co-hosted with the Republic of
Korea in March.

Australia also supports the Proliferation Security
Initiative (PSI), which reinforces resolution 1540
(2004) through practical counter-proliferation efforts.
The PSI provides another layer in our defences against
the illicit trade in WMD-related items and their
delivery systems, in conformity with national and
international law. Over 80 States have now endorsed
the PSI. We would encourage all other States to do
likewise, to give the PSI global coverage.

Australia is deeply engaged in efforts to counter
the terrorist threat to our region and has adopted a
comprehensive range of measures to build counter-
terrorism capacity in South-East Asia and the Pacific.
We have allocated over 400 million Australian dollars
to new initiatives in the past three years, working with
regional partners in key counter-terrorism areas,
including law enforcement, defence, border and
transport security, financial monitoring, intelligence
and legal affairs.

An important initiative was the Sub-Regional
Ministerial Conference on Counter-Terrorism, hosted
together with Indonesia in March this year. The
meeting advanced cooperation among the six States
most immediately affected by the threat from regional
terrorist groups: Australia, Indonesia, the Philippines,
Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand. Outcomes of the
meeting are already being implemented to counter
extremism and radicalism, to strengthen law
enforcement and intelligence cooperation, to counter
the illegal movement of small arms and light weapons,
to improve regional legal frameworks and to prepare
for mass casualty attacks.

Australia is also an active member of the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, which was
established in July 2006 to enhance cooperation among
its members to address this threat.

In conclusion, allow me to say that countering
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction requires a comprehensive and multifaceted
response that is targeted at the national, regional and
global levels. Australia will continue to work at all
those levels and in close cooperation with other States
to overcome the grave threat to our security posed by
terrorism. Appropriate and effective action within the
United Nations system will underpin those efforts and
help to ensure that our initiatives are focused on
priority areas where they can make the most difference.

