Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the presidency
of Uruguay for drawing attention to the growing crisis
in South Sudan and express my appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer for his
comprehensive briefing.

Kazakhstan is of the view that the rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian and security conditions as
well as the escalating number of internally displaced
people should compel us to take immediate action
on various fronts: political, security, humanitarian
and development.

We are alarmed by the increase in the number of
humanitarian incidents, the highest recorded in a single
month in 2017. Both the Government and all non-State
actors, given the gravity of the prevailing food
insecurity, should ensure unhindered humanitarian
access, especially to famine-affected locations.

We are also witnessing unprecedented levels of
violence against aid workers, with an alarmingly
high death toll, which makes South Sudan one of the
most perilous countries in the world. We urge the
Government and all non- State actors to ensure the safety
of humanitarian workers and bring the perpetrators of
such acts to justice.

Kazakhstan is alarmed at the fact that UNMISS is
encountering bureaucratic impediments to its operations
and freedom of movement. Any peacekeeping mission
must, in order to be effective, have its host country
comply with the obligations set out in the status-of-
forces agreement. We welcome the initial deployment
of the Regional Protection Force, as seen in the setting
up of the tactical helicopter unit, the engineering
company and the high-readiness company. At the same
time, we urge that the final tax exemptions be granted
for the equipment of the Rwandan forces, together with
the finalization of other remaining procedural issues.

Kazakhstan's position is that there can be no
military solution to any conflict, and South Sudan is
no exception. Only inclusive and transparent dialogue,
as well as implementation of the peace agreement,
can result in genuine reconciliation. In this regard,
Kazakhstan welcomes the declaration of unilateral
ceasefire made by President Salva Kiir, as well as his
promise to release political prisoners. Even though
tensions are high, we need to demand a cessation of
hostilities from all parties to the conflict and introduce
security-sector reforms in the Sudan People's Liberation
Army law-enforcement, judiciary and correction
systems. This is necessary to ensure the rule of law and
put an end to all impunity.

The involvement of women and youth must be
important components of the conflict-prevention
and resolution process, together with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. In addition, vigilance
and checking the flow of illicit weapons is fundamental
to ending armed conflict.

Let me say in concluding that Kazakhstan will lend
its full support to the concerted efforts of the United
Nations, IGAD and the African Union's Peace and
Security Council in the pursuit of national dialogue in
South Sudan.
