Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Egeland for his sobering briefing and for his
tireless efforts to keep the problems of Darfur and the
problems associated with our desire to promote
responsibility to protect at the forefront of the Security
Council's business.

What he described was a very impressive amount
of work on relief in the teeth of opposition on the
ground. As he says, the crisis in Darfur has gone on far
too long. Listening to him, I found myself horrified by
the description of events in the camps and the attacks
on civilians, but also mystified by the connection
between the events he described on the ground and the
political process that has been going on in Addis
Ababa.

We were ready to welcome the agreement reached
with the Government of the Sudan at last week's
meeting in Addis and congratulate the Secretary-
General and African Union Commission Chairperson
Konare for their efforts. But I would look forward this
afternoon to hearing a little bit more about why, when
the political process seems to be moving forward,
events on the ground seem to be moving backwards.
There is a linkage there that we have not fully got to
the bottom of.

What it shows, I think, is that Thursday's
breakthrough is fragile and that we need more
elaboration on certain aspects from the Government of
the Sudan. For the British Government's part, we will
play whatever role we can in turning the Addis Ababa
agreement into action. We look forward to the African
Union leaders meeting later this month, and we hope
that it will be able to endorse a concrete packet of
measures that will contribute decisively to peace in
Darfur. But as the Under-Secretary-General said today,
unless they result in a change on the ground for the
people who are suffering at the moment, those efforts
will obviously be dissipated.

As I said, the situation that Mr. Egeland
described, and its deterioration, are deeply worrying. It
is hard to comprehend, given that everybody around
this table and in the African Union has a desire to see
the conflict ended and to have the humanitarian needs
of the Sudanese people addressed, why fighting should
be continuing in North Darfur, reportedly involving
Government of the Sudan troops and air force. The fact
that the attacks apparently disrupted a meeting of non-
signatory rebel commanders discussing the Darfur
Peace Agreement only makes it even more
incomprehensible. We call on all sides to abide by the
ceasefire.

Under-Secretary-General Egeland, you referred to
the restrictions imposed by the Government of the
Sudan on humanitarian agencies, which you
experienced first-hand during your visit. We note the
assurances that were obtained from the Government of
the Sudan to extend the non-governmental organization
visa moratorium to 2007. We urge the Government of
the Sudan to deliver on those promises.
We also share your concern, Mr. Egeland, about
the impact that the conflict in Darfur has on the wider
region, specifically on Chad and the Central African
Republic. We hope that recommendations from the
technical assessment mission currently on the ground
will be made available to the Security Council as soon
as possible.

I would like to turn briefly to northern Uganda.
We are very grateful, again, to the Under-Secretary-
General for his briefing and for the extraordinary
efforts that he has made over the years to bring the
humanitarian crisis there to world attention. The living
conditions for the hundreds of thousands of people
caught up in that humanitarian crisis remain dire. But
the situation is improving, in large part because of the
prospects for peace talks between the Government of
Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). It is
all the more important therefore that those extra efforts
to unblock the problems on the ground that the Under-
Secretary-General described be pursued.

The presidential statement (S/PRST/2006/45) that
we issued last week in support of the cessation of
hostilities between the two parties needs to be followed
up. We encourage all parties to work for a negotiated
and peaceful outcome that is compatible with the
wishes and needs of the local communities, but also
compatible with the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. We welcome the support that the
Secretariat and other parts of the United Nations family
have been able to provide to the process. We would
also like to note the work done by the Government of
Uganda recently to seek to address the humanitarian
situation in the north of the country, such as the
development of the emergency humanitarian action
plan and the draft peace, recovery and development
plan now under discussion.

I would like to reserve comments about the peace
process and Darfur and the African Union/United
Nations force plans for our consultations this
afternoon.

