Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania): I
shall try to be very brief. At the outset I should like to
associate my delegation with all the positive statements
that have been made. At this juncture I will just make a
few comments and a few suggestions.
Let me start with the stark reality of Africa. Of the
48 least developed countries of the world, 33 are in
Africa. I say this because there are many calls for Africa
to take action, but it must be remembered that the
objective conditions will determine what action Africa can
take. The reality is that 33 of the 48 least developed
countries are in Africa. That is point number one.

Secondly, there is a lot of emphasis on foreign direct
investment. Only 1 per cent of foreign direct investment
goes to Africa, and the majority of that goes to a handful
of countries. That is another point that needs to be
underscored.

Thirdly, Africa has the largest number of refugees.
As I am speaking to the Council now, my own country
has 800,000 refugees, and many more are coming in.

Finally, on the reality of Africa, aid is declining and
there is much more rhetoric for helping Africa than there
is substance.

Now, as to the suggestions, we are asking for action,
as the representative of Uganda has said, but that action
has to be focused. So I am suggesting that the Council
has to have a plan to address the conflicts. Since we had
the first debate on Africa - the ministerial debate under
the presidency of the United States - there have been

 

many resolutions adopted, and many more will be adopted.
Where is the implementation schedule? There is a need to
have an implementation schedule, an accountability; there
should be reports as to what measures have been taken. We
should not be satisfied with adopting resolutions and saying
that this is action for Africa. This is inadequate; very, very
inadequate.

The other point I would like to underscore is the
commendation that has been voiced for the Fowler
Committee on the good work they are doing. But the
Committee and the work it is doing needs to be backed up
by the Council. Without doing that, we will have the
Council on one side, the Committee on the other, and
Fowler at the top. That would be tragic.

Finally, Africa is listening very attentively to this
debate, as it has listened to others for the last couple of
years. Expectations are raised each time a debate takes
place in the Council. You cannot blame the Africans.

I think that what the Council needs to do is to put its
acts together so that, working with the Economic and Social
Council, it could draft an economic blueprint - what I
would call a Marshall Plan. Some people are allergic to
this. When you talk about a Marshal Plan for Africa, they
say "No, no, no". We need a Marshall Plan for Africa
because, otherwise, we will just continue to have conflicts.
Africans are not unique human beings. They need
development like anybody else, as well as housing, food
and schooling. There is need.

Your own Government, Mr. President, has taken some
initiative in this regard. We need a bigger initiative, because
the problems are greater. One of the fallacies about Africa
is that it is seen as one country. It is a huge continent with
53 countries; but from the way in which it is reported in
the media one gets the impression that Africa is a very
small country. It is a huge continent.

That is my last point, Mr. President. We thank you for
organizing this open debate. We hope there will be many
more. But we hope also that the Council will sit down and
see to what extent it can tap the reservoir of expertise and
knowledge of the other non-members. I say this because the
members themselves speak first when open debates are
held, and then they bring us in after they have spoken and
disappeared from the Council Chamber. The credibility of
the Council is not very good in that respect.

