Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): Madam
President, we, like other speakers, are very grateful to
you for convening this important discussion and for the
preparatory work that your delegation has carried out.
We welcome you here, and thank you for taking the
time to chair this debate. It is also most welcome that
you have arranged for us to benefit from the thoughts
of the President of the Economic and Social Council,
which remind us here in the Security Council of the
Economic and Social Council's rich interaction with
civil society. I would also particularly welcome the
presence here today of Denis Caillaux and Ian Martin
of CARE International and the International Center for
Transitional Justice for the expert insights and
proposals that they have given us. Finally, I associate
my delegation with the statement to be delivered later
today by the Irish Presidency on behalf of the
European Union.

Today's debate gives us an opportunity to explore
these issues in more detail, but it should not - and I
am sure it will not - be our last opportunity to do so.
The subject is too important. The United Kingdom
believes that civil society in its broadest sense has an
essential role to play in all phases of the conflict cycle,
not just peace-building but conflict-prevention and
post-conflict reconstruction as well. At the
international level, civil society organizations play a
key role in holding Governments and international
organizations to account. In the Council, our work has
often benefited from the expert knowledge of civil
society organizations. We have benefited today and we
can do more. Their efforts have helped and are helping
us to develop new policy and legal frameworks and to
better define best practice.

Civil society's contribution at the regional level is
also increasingly important, as our Angolan colleague
has reminded us. As regional organizations such as the
African Union develop their capacities for conflict
management and peace-building, civil society
organizations are going to need to plug into these new
streams of work. Provision of grass-roots information,
provision of early warning, sharing of best practice and
acting as implementing partners - these are just a few
of the areas in which civil society organizations can
help regional organizations fulfil their potential for
peace-building. At the national and local levels, as both
our non-governmental organization representatives
have reminded the Council today, local people and the
groups that represent them have a fundamental role to
play in the reconciliation and rehabilitation process.
Re-establishing legal structures and bodies for
transitional justice and the rule of law is one area of the
post-conflict peace-building phase towards which civil
society, and, in particular, religious and community
leaders can contribute.

Underlying all these peace-building issues is the
need to build new relationships between government
service providers and communities. In that context,
civil society needs to be involved in the planning,
implementation and monitoring of community-based
programmes. As the Secretary-General has reminded
the Council this morning, that is a two-way process.
United Nations peace-building should promote civil
society, just as civil society can assist United Nations
peace-building. Countries with a strong civil society
tend to be more resilient in the face of the stresses and
strains of our globalizing world.

This morning, the Secretary-General challenged
the Council to respond to the recommendations of the
Cardoso Panel on civil society and United Nations
relations. The report (A/58/817), issued only yesterday
morning, contains some far-reaching recommendations.
We hope they will enhance exchanges with civil
society both in New York and in the field, and we look
forward to considering them in detail over the coming
weeks. But I wanted to respond in preliminary way to
the report's paragraphs 95 to 100 and its proposal 12
on how civil society can strengthen the Security
Council.

One can address this question under many
different headings - and the French Ambassador has
offered us several thoughtful ones this morning. I
would myself suggest three. The first is the question of
sustained communication and coordination between
civil society organizations and the United Nations
system at the field level. This is important in the
context of monitoring and evaluation: to identify what
works well and what does not and to highlight specific
issues of concern to the Security Council, including
early warning, which we discussed in an earlier, recent
debate.

Thus, effective communication and coordination
mechanisms need to be considered in the planning and
implementation phases of United Nations operations.
In that context, the Panel recommends that Security
Council field missions should meet regularly with the
appropriate local civil society leaders and other
representatives of civil society. This morning,
Mr. Denis Caillaux urged the Council to consider an
"Arria-plus" formula on the ground. That seems to me
entirely welcome, and to some extent, we are pursuing
that in the Council's mission to West Africa this week,
engaging with a range of civil society actors and
hearing their views.

I would just observe that the West Africa mission
is trying to cover some eight countries in nine days.
That limits the amount of time for interaction with civil
society. It seems to me that this points inevitably
towards a redesign of Security Council missions to the
field. I think they need to be smaller so that they can be
more frequent.

Another proposal from the Panel that is relevant
to this question of communication and coordination at
the field level is the idea of convening independent
commissions of inquiry following United Nations
operations mandated by the Council. The suggestion is
that perhaps a global public policy committee,
connecting national foreign affairs committees, could
serve as such as a commission. I certainly think this
deserves careful consideration because we believe it is
important that lessons should be learned from each
United Nations operation. At the same time - and I
am looking at Mr. Ian Martin here - I am not sure that
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on
the ground want to spend each waking minute thinking
about what the independent commission is going to say
on their performance when it is all over. So, we need to
find a happy medium.
My second heading is the role that civil society
organizations have to play in the direct exchange of
information with the Council here in New York on
countries under the Council's consideration. We are
already benefiting from the Arria-formula meetings
and using them to receive accurate, reliable and
independent information from the field, which is
crucial to sharpen the focus of Security Council
resolutions and peacekeeping mandates in order to help
ensure that they have the maximum impact where they
count, which is in the field. So, I am sure that we will
look positively - but as the French Ambassador has
pointed out, on a case-by-case basis - at improving
the planning and effectiveness of the Arria-formula
meetings, which is the first proposal of the Cardoso
Panel. This morning, Mr. Caillaux offered the Council
the suggestion - if I understood him correctly - that
New York delegations and country experts should
spend some time in the field. I can report to him that
my delegation will enthusiastically accept the next
invitation of CARE International.

Finally, my last heading - and it is an important
one - is the role that we believe civil society must
play as the Council develops the international legal
framework on key security and protection issues, such
as gender, children, HIV/AIDS, mine action and
refugees, to name but a few. Over recent years, the
Council has adopted a catalogue of resolutions that
have helped establish best practices on key issues
relevant for post-conflict peace-building. We think we
need to, and can, push this agenda further by including
agreed best practices in the Council's resolutions and
asking the right questions of reports.

In that context, the Cardoso Panel's suggestion
for an experimental series of Security Council seminars
to discuss issues of emerging importance to the
Council, which the Panel suggests would be
particularly relevant in the context of the Council's
consideration of generic peace-building issues, looks to
us to be an attractive one.

