Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational States of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the briefing
given by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to whom we reiterate
our support in the discharge of his duties.

As on previous occasions, my delegation wishes
to express its support for the various meetings held in
different contexts and at different levels, which have
allowed for the creation of de-escalation zones, the
cessation of hostilities and humanitarian access. At
the same time, we remain converned over the urgent
need to advance in a political process that will help
to resolve the conflict in Syria so that the people can
return to peace.

That is why we again highlight the commitments
made at the Syrian National Dialogue Congress, held
in Sochi on 30 January. It focused on strengthening
the political process led by the United Nations within
the framework of resolution 2254 (2015), particularly
through the drafting of a new constitution by a
constitutional committee, which we believe should be
representative and neutral. We underscore in particular
that the mandate, terms of reference, powers, rules of
procedure and selection criteria for the composition of
the committee must be agreed in the United Nations-
supported talks held in Geneva.

In that regard, we firmly believe that the principles
agreed at the Sochi Congress will lead to a strong
commitment on the part of the parties to respecting
the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria,
in the context of its right to choose its own political,
economic and social systems, without pressure or
foreign interference. We are certain that the political
process will resume as a result of those dialogues.

However, and despite the advances in the political
arena, we remain concerned over the critical situation
of the Syrian people. In that regard, we welcome the
holding of the Astana meeting and its outcome, and we
hope that those political agreements will be reflected
on the ground. We also express our greatest hopes for
the success of the summit to be held shortly among
high-level representatives of Turkey, Iran and Russia.
We hope that it will serve to reaffirm the Astana
agreements and de-escalation zones with a view to
reducing violence and addressing the needs of families
of detained, kidnapped and disappeared persons.

Once again, the Council has the challenge of
remaining united and calling on the parties involved to
join forces and maintain the impetus of the Astana talks
and the political process in Sochi, among others, the
outcomes of which, we reiterate, must strengthen the
political process in Geneva. We hope that those forums
for dialogue will promote points of convergence and
consensus in order to reduce violence and allow the
humanitarian access that is so necessary, not only for
the safe and dignified return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, but also to achieve sustainable peace
in Syria. To that end, it is crucial for the parties to
demonstrate their willingness to seek a settlement to
the conflict, which has persisted for more than 8 years.
We again call on all parties involved to effectively
implement resolution 2401 (2018) throughout the
entire Syrian territory in order to achieve unrestricted
humanitarian access and permit the necessary
urgent medical evacuations. We reject any attempt at
fragmentation or sectarianism in Syria, and believe that
the Syrian people must be able to freely decide their
future and political leadership within the framework of
their sovereignty and territorial integrity. In that regard,
we reiterate that the only way to resolve the conflict is
through an inclusive, negotiated and concerted political
process, led by the Syrian people for the Syrian
people, which will enable a peaceful solution for all
parties involved.

