Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): On behalf of the
delegation of Kazakhstan, I wish to express our deep
sympathies and condolences to the delegation of
the Russian Federation as well as the families of the
victims of the plane crash near Moscow on Sunday,
11 February, which resulted in the loss of lives of all 65
passengers and six crew members on board.

I would like to thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, and
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Miroslav Jenca, for their updates on the latest
developments in Myanmar and the plight of Rohingya
refugees who fled to Bangladesh. At the outset, my
delegation wishes to express its grave concern with
regard to the Myanmar Government's inhuman treatment
of the Rohingya population and its sluggishness in
addressing the root causes of the problem.

My delegation has noted the signing, on
23 November, of the memorandum of understanding
between Myanmar and Bangladesh on the voluntary
return of refugees to Myanmar. We also praise the
work done by joint working group of Myanmar and
Bangladesh on implementing the memorandum, with
the timeline for the return of refugees commencing
on 23 January and designed to run over a period of
two years. However, the repatriation process has been
postponed due to the difficulties in compiling and
verifying the list of people to be repatriated and the
absence ofnecessary safeguards for potential returnees.

We see the value in the request of Bangladesh that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) be involved in verifying the
resettlement process to guarantee that conditions
are met on the ground for the return of refugees. The
Rohingya refugees have no trust or confidence in the
sincerity of the Myanmar authorities' actions. Indeed,
there can be no durable or lasting solution for the return
of Rohingya refugees without addressing the questions
ofthe restoration of their rights and freedoms, including
access to education and employment, freedom of
movement and a path towards a just and sustainable
solution to the issue of citizenship.

I would like to reiterate that Kazakhstan is of the
firm view that unhindered access for humanitarian
assistance to the affected population is crucial in
Myanmar. We therefore call on the Government of
Myanmar to allow unfettered and safe access to United
Nations agencies that can help to provide emergency
assistance and alleviate the suffering of the victimized
population. Kazakhstan commends the efforts of
UNHCR, which has airlifted 1,500 metric tons of
emergency life-saving aid to Bangladesh to assist
250,000 refugees and helped to develop the Kutupalong
extension, a new site near Kutupalong refugee camp.

We laud the hospitality of the Government of
Bangladesh, which is helping refugees and providing
them with shelter, medical care, food and other forms
of assistance. We also find it very inspiring how other
States, international organizations and individuals
are giving a helping hand to those in need regardless
of distance, views or religion. The Government of
Kazakhstan has allocated a half a million dollars of
official humanitarian assistance for Rohingya refugees
from Myanmar in Bangladesh.

We note the efforts of the Myanmar Government to
stabilize the situation in northern Rakhine and organize
the visit for the diplomatic corps residing in Myanmar
to the reception centres at Taung Pyo Letwe and Nga
Khu Ya as well as a transit centre, which are all steps in
right direction. At the same time, Kazakhstan expresses
its deep concern about the revelation of mass graves
in the country. The journalists who reported on the
graves should be released and allowed to work freely.
We also take note of the statement by the spokesperson
of the Government of Myanmar that "actions according
to the law" would be taken against those members of
the security forces who killed 10 Rohingya men in the
northern Rakhine village of Inn Din.

My delegation believes that it is necessary for
the Government of Myanmar to conduct credible
investigations into gross human rights violations,
and a United Nations fact-finding mission should be
organized so that the perpetrators are brought to justice.
Only through full disclosure of the atrocities and by
taking action against those responsible can we expect
the Rohingyas to have the confidence they need to
return home and for trust among all communities to be
re-established at the national level, thereby deterring the
recurrence of these kinds of violence in future. Finally,
my delegation is of the view that the recommendations
of the Rakhine Advisory Commission are valuable
and that their full implementation will be necessary
to restore intercommunal harmony, sustainable peace,
stability and prosperity in Rakhine state.

