Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset I would like to express our
appreciation for the initiative you have taken in calling
this meeting at the end of your Council presidency. It
demonstrates your interest in transparency and your
desire to work efficiently with all members and non-
members of the Council in the discharge of the
Council's responsibilities for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Sir, your choice of "the African dimension in the
work of the Security Council" as a topic amply
demonstrates the need for an objective discussion of
the Council's performance when grappling with
African issues. This fact, in addition to the meetings
that you held with countries contributing troops to
peacekeeping operations, shows your keen interest and
that of the Council in following the rules of
transparency and accountability and in enhancing the
responsibility and representative character of the
Council, along with the other main organs of the
United Nations. This should improve their performance
within a framework that achieves the desired efficiency
and observes the requisite balance between their
mandates, in accordance with the provisions of the
United Nations Charter.
An in-depth look into the African issues that the
Council discussed this month, and the measures it
adopted in dealing with them, reveals a number of
essential dimensions that the delegation of Egypt
would like to focus on in this brief statement.

First, the Security Council should exert greater
efforts to absorb the complexities of conflicts in the
continent and accord more attention to dealing with the
root causes of these conflicts, avoiding the narrow
vision based on historic reasons or political relations. It
should take into account socio-economic, cultural and
ethnic dimensions as an integral part of efforts to
tackle the problems of the African continent.

Secondly, it is important for the Security Council
to support the role of regional and subregional
organizations in Africa as they grapple with the variety
of problems there. It should also strengthen the role of
regional gatherings as they seek to better understand
the complexities of the African positions. This is
particularly relevant, because since the establishment
of the African Union Africa has made strides in
fostering this role in an integrated endeavour that
incorporates all political, security and socio-economic
aspects.

Thirdly, the Council needs to perform its role in a
more integrated framework, one that includes the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Secretariat, the United Nations organs and
specialized agencies. It should take into account the
requisite phased approach, from preventive measures
through conflict management, to achieve peaceful
settlement of disputes and post-conflict peace-building
in a sequential and continuous framework. The Council
should enhance this approach by paying field visits and
holding decision-making meetings away from United
Nations Headquarters. This is particularly evident after
the success of the recent meetings held in Nairobi.

Fourthly, the Council should increase the chances
for the success of peacekeeping operations - in
accordance with agreed checks and balances - by
supporting the efforts to bring peace to the African
continent. In this connection, the Council's adoption of
a resolution to establish a peacekeeping force in the
Sudan is a good initiative to help that brotherly country
to overcome the present bitter stage of conflict. The
same applies to the Council's discussion of the security
challenges that Somalia faces, and supporting national
reconciliation there is another milestone upon which
the Council should build, given the progress made by
the Somalis themselves. This is in addition to the
Council's consideration of the conflicts in Cote
d'Ivoire and in Liberia in West Africa, and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi in
Central Africa - an inclusive view that corresponds to
the nature of these and other regional conflicts.

Egypt stresses its full support for the Security
Council's efforts in these regions, including through
the growing participation in peacekeeping operations
there, the most recent of which is that of peacekeeping
in Sudan.

Finally, I could not end my statement without
emphasizing the need - even the inevitability - for
the Council and the other main organs and specialized
agencies of the United Nations to foster the role that
the African Union could play in dealing with African
issues, including the settlement of African conflicts, in
an atmosphere of cooperation and partnership. We
should make use of this general debate to elaborate an
integrated vision that would enable us to overcome the
root causes of African conflicts in a framework that
offers a guarantee of benefit from all proposals and
visions designed to reinforce the Council's future
treatment of African issues.

