Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Welcoming the progress
reflected in the recent reports of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
(see S/2016/670) and International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals (see S/2016/669), my delegation
considers today's meeting and the forthcoming
adoption of a resolution reappointing the ICTY judges
and Prosecutor to be of utmost importance, in the light
of the planned closure of the Tribunal in 2017. In this
regard, I would like to commend the measures and
efforts undertaken by the President of the Tribunal
to ensure the timely conclusion of all cases before
the ICTY.

Today, as we are in the final stage of the ICTY's
work, we should pay special attention to existing
problems and challenges that the Tribunal continues to
face, while acknowledging its well-known achievements
in combating impunity and its contribution to
international criminal justice and the rule of law.

First, I would like to raise the issue of cooperation
with the Tribunal. According to article 29 of the ICTY
statute, cooperation and judicial assistance is one of
the preconditions for the successful fulfilment of the
Tribunal's mandate. Unfortunately, for over 22 months,
Serbia has failed to act to execute the Tribunal's
arrest warrants for three Serbian indictees. In this
regard, we would like to underline that there can be
no justification for refraining from cooperation and we
urge the Government of Serbia to return to the path of
full compliance with its obligations.

The ICTY, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and other international criminal courts,
including the International Criminal Court, were
created to ensure global justice and responsibility for
grave international crimes. With this in mind, we are
particularly concerned about the recent trend to suspend
or reduce cooperation with international criminal
tribunals. We are also seeing instances of States
deciding to withdraw from treaties they had previously
signed. We regret these decisions and consider them
to be a step back, undermining prevention efforts
and due prosecution of the most serious crimes. The
international community must come together in its
strong support for the work of the criminal tribunals
in order to protect the right to justice of all victims of
mass atrocities.

The second problematic issue noted by the
President of ICTY is staff attrition. We are concerned
about this problem and acknowledge the efforts the
Office of the President and the Registrar to address
it. Taking into consideration the potential exodus of
highly experienced experts while the ICTY's mandate
is approaching its end, we need lend our support to
the proposals to strengthen the Tribunal's resources in
order to address this administrative challenge.

On a different note, my delegation welcomes the
project of holding a series of legacy and closing events
under the rubric "ICTY legacy dialogues", which has
been developed by the Tribunal to summarize best
practices from over 20 years of its work and bolster
transitional justice efforts in the region. We would
also like to mention another positive effort aimed at
gathering the Tribunal's knowledge and expertise in a
single location by creating the first ICTY Information
Centre, to be located in the Sarajevo City Hall in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

With respect to the Mechanism, my delegation
commends its judicial activities and the issuance of more
than 800 orders and decisions since its establishment, as
well as the ongoing efforts of the Residual Mechanism
to reduce costs and improve procedures and operations.

We welcome the active work of the Mechanism with
respect to preparations to take over responsibilities for
all remaining aspects of the ICTY's functions after
its closure next year, including preservation of the
archives. We cannot afford the luxury of forgetting
the lessons of history that were learned at a staggering
cost in human lives. Otherwise, joint efforts to prevent
horrible crimes in future will be doomed to failure.

To conclude, I would like once again to stress the
necessity of cooperation with international criminal
tribunals to ensure their effective functioning.

We urge all States to cooperate with the ICTY and
the Mechanism and to respect their mandates in full
compliance with their obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

