Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. I would like to
say how much I appreciate the constructive positions of
Chile with regard to the situation in the Middle East.

Today we are discussing once again the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
The region as well as the world recently experienced a
number of very serious incidents, namely, the rise of
international terrorism, which afflicts Egypt as it does
many other countries. We condemn such terrorism in the
strongest terms and are determined to fight it together
with other countries. In that connection, I would like
to note that the continued occupation of the Palestinian
territories provides fertile ground for terrorists and
allows them to thrive. That increases the complexity
of the situation and has an adverse impact on the peace
process, which we would like to see resumed so that the
occupation may be brought to an end and a Palestinian
State may be realized, coexisting in peace with Israel.
We believe that this would contribute to comprehensive
development in the region as well as prosperity for all
of its people. It would also protect us from a range of
dangerous, including terrorism, which has just reared
its ugly head in the form of unjustifiable atrocities in
France.

The Security Council has been the venue for drawn-
out talks over recent weeks regarding the Palestinian
question. It seems clear that there is consensus
concerning the conditions for a definitive and fair
solution to the Palestinian question. There is consensus
on the need to put an end to the Israeli occupation.
There is also consensus regarding the need to establish
a sovereign Palestinian State extending throughout its
territory within the borders of June 1967. Furthermore,
there is consensus on the status of East Jerusalem
as the capital of such a Palestinian State. There was
further consensus on the need to reach a fair solution
for refugees.

Those points of consensus were reflected in
the Arab draft resolution (S/2014/916) presented
to the Security Council in December with a view to
establishing a timeline for the peace process. Those
points of consensus were also reflected in the French
proposal. However, unfortunately, the draft resolution
did not gain enough support within the Council, in spite
of the international consensus. We wonder, therefore,
why a solution seems so far off despite the existence
of such consensus. The answer to that question is
undoubtedly key to the resolution of the Palestinian
question, and it goes as follows.

First of all, there has to be a real willingness among
the major international actors to achieve a definitive
solution. Some of those countries, at the same time
as they ask the parties to the conflict to take difficult
decisions, do not exert pressure on those parties to
change position or try to dissuade them from certain
practices that are harmful and threaten the peace
process, such as the building of settlements. The
witholding of tax revenues by Israel undermines the
Palestinian Authority and prevents it from going about
its business.

Such genuine will must also be exhibited by the
parties to the conflict, instead of electoral calculations,
domestic considerations or internal infighting. The
parties must rise above such considerations and must
not sacrifice the interests oftheir own people who aspire
for peace. There is no doubt that the Israeli people want
peace just as much as the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples do. It is clear that the Arab Peace Initiative,
proposed into 2002, is undoubtedly the most eloquent
message of peace from the Arab peoples to the Israeli
people. The peace process must therefore not become
a mirage. The initiative must be met with a response.

The international community must also support
the Palestinian Authority to establish its authority in
Gaza in order to rebuild and restore hope to thousands
of Palestinians who are suffering under the weight of
destruction and war. That population must be allowed
to live like other populations around the world. That
is not only a moral duty, but it is crucial for protecting
the Palestinian people from extremism and despair. In
that context, we call on all countries to honour their
commitments to rebuild Gaza undertaken at the Cairo
Conference of last October.

Unfortunately, some members of the international
community approach this conflict without genuinely
trying to address its root causes. That is an unacceptable
approach. We all know that the current situation is so
volatile that it cannot continue. A definitive solution
to the conflict is more crucial than ever. The Security
Council must therefore assume its responsibilities.
What I have just set out is the only way to achieve a
just and comprehensive solution to the situation in
Palestine. If we do not take that into account, stability
will continue to elude the Middle East and the dangers
facing all parties will continue to grow.

I should now like to turn to the situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic, where the people are struggling
in the throes of a crisis that has now lasted for five
years with no hopes for a solution on the horizon. The
conditions for any solution include the preservation of
the territorial integrity of Syria and the need to respond

to the legitimate demands of the Syrian people for change
and reform. Terrorism in Syria must be eradicated so
that it does not spread to the neighbouring countries,
which are under unbearable pressure, hosting hundreds
of thousands of Syrian refugees. In that context, we
fully support the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura and hope that his efforts will lead to a political
process bringing together all the parties the conflict.

We also welcome the immense contribution made
by the United Nations and several countries to meet
the humanitarian needs on the Syrian people. We also
appreciate the efforts of the Russian Federation to
establish dialogue between the Syrian Government and
opposition through the conference to be held soon in
Moscow.

We will spare no effort no diplomatic effort to
achieve a political solution. In doing so, we will draw on
our good relationships with all of the parties concerned.
We hope that this will lead to a solution that brings an
end to this bloody conflict.

