Mr. Afande (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like first to thank you, Sir, for your briefing. I join
the 10 representatives who have spoken before me in
conrgatulating you on your admirable work chairing
the Committee.

We note the efforts towards communication and
cooperation made by the Islamic Republic of Iran
vis-a-vis the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) since our meeting in July (see S/P.6999).
That includes information supplied by Iran on its
enrichment activities at Natanz in the context of the
updated questionnaire on descriptive information
issued in late July. Similarly, the following month, the
descriptions provided by Iran of the installation of IR-
2m centrifuges were widely confirmed by the IAEA.
Some progress has also been made by Iran in terms of
information provided about uranium conversion and
the manufacture of fuels.

In view of all this, the IAEA was able to conclude
that the system worked as Iran had said, which Togo
welcomes. Furthermore, we welcome the exchanges
between Iran and the IAEA, the fundamental elements
of which will appear in the structured approach
document, which will allow the IAEA to conduct an
effective audit. We hope that the talks in Vienna on
27 September will record progress on the issue.

While these efforts should be highlighted, the list
of Iran's pending obligations remains long. Indeed,
in its latest report (GOV/2013/40), the IAEA notes
that some of the activities undertaken by Iran in
certain installations that are in principle subject to
the Safeguards Agreement are contrary to the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the Board of
Governors.

Similarly, the Agency's conclusions show that, in
spite of the efforts at communication to which I have
referred, enrichment-related activities have not ceased
at the declared installations of Natanz and Fordow. With
regard to the Fordow facility in particular, we urge Iran
to heed the Agency's requests for access and to provide
the information requested.

Answers are also expected with regard to the
IAEA's requests for explanations concerning the
announcements made by Iran about new enrichment
facilities.

My delegation calls once again on Iran to fully
cooperate in the various relevant areas and to allow
inspectors to verify and to report.

Iran's cooperation is also necessary with regard
to the pursuit of reprocessing activities and projects
related to heavy water in the uranium conversion and
fuel fabrication processes.

We hope that the willingness expressed recently
by Iran will extend also to pending requests. We have
already placed great hopes in the willingness expressed
by the new President, Mr. Hassan Rouhani, to resume
talks with the group made up of the five permanent
members of the Security Council plus Germany.

I should like to conclude with three brief comments.

First, we believe that cooperation between
INTERPOL and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) would be a good thing, provided
that modalities can be determined in order to dispel
reservations in various quarters.

With regard to the compilation arrived at by the
Group of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1929 (2010) concerning public statements made by
Iranian officials on the matter of military assistance
to non-State armed groups such as Palestinian Islamic
Jihad, Hamas and Hizbullah, Togo supports further
serious and impartial investigation. Togo believes that
there is some doubt as to whether statements made in
the press could be used as tangible proof of events. The
same requirement for transparency and impartiality in
investigations applies to the case of the ship seized in
Yemen.

Finally, we would emphasize the importance of the
Islamic Republic of Iran cooperating closely with the
1737 Committee.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my gratitude
not only to the 1737 Committee but also to the Group
of Experts, which we urge to continue its rigour and
impartiality in the investigations it carries out.

