Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, for
his briefing. We underscore our support and confidence
for his efforts. We also thank all the United Nations
personnel who are working on the ground in Yemen,
and we commend all their work and sacrifices.

We listened closely to the briefing by Mr. Griffiths
on the United Nations efforts to hold intra-Yemeni
consultations in Geneva, which regrettably have not
materialized owing to the absence ofthe Houthis, despite
conducive conditions being established for the holding
of those consultations and all the attempts to overcome
the impediments to their participation. The unrealized
consultations provided an opportunity to distinguish
between the party seeking a political solution, based
on relevant Security Council resolutions, and the
party that does not seek to achieve any progress in the
political process in Yemen and obstructs international
and regional efforts to reach a political solution,
while perpetuating the crisis and exacerbating the
humanitarian suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people,
who seek a peaceful and stable life.

The absence of Houthis in the consultations
demonstrates their indifference to the statements of
the Security Council calling for consultations and
urging all parties to participate constructively therein.
Therefore, the Security Council has to shoulder its
responsibilities and to insist on the full implementation
of its resolutions, leading to security and stability in
Yemen and giving priority to a political solution based
on the three agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its implementation
mechanism, the outcome of the national dialogue and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).

The States of the coalition to support legitimacy
in Yemen have proved once again their open support
for the efforts of the United Nations and the Special
Envoy through their announcements confirming their
support for a political solution and the presence of
their accredited ambassadors to Yemen at the Geneva
consultations in order to participate in the briefings
that were supposed to be given by Mr. Griffiths at
the margin of those consultations. The States of the
coalition also announced that they would grant flight
permission to the aircraft that was supposed to transport
the Houthi delegation to Geneva in order to participate
in the consultations. In addition, they stopped their
military operations in Al-Hudaydah in order to help
the international efforts to promote the peace operation
in Yemen.

In most of its outcomes, the Security Council has
been persistent in asserting that the optimal solution
to any dispute involves addressing its root causes. It is
evident to everybody that the root cause of the conflict
is the September 2014 coup by the Houthis against
the legitimate Government in Yemen. The Security
Council must therefore work to shoulder the collective
responsibility in fully implementing its resolutions and
translating its words into deeds.

We reaffirm our support for the efforts ofthe Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, who has reiterated the
wish of the international community to find a political
solution to the crisis based on the aforementioned three
terms of reference. That would end the humanitarian
suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people and the
threats to international and regional security posed by
the Houthis, who continue to target the territories of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with ballistic missiles
and to threaten the safety of the international maritime
navigation in Bab Al-Mandab and the Red Sea.

In conclusion, we welcome the United Kingdom's
intention to address the media.

