Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
As members will recall, Burkina Faso, since the
beginning of the Council's consideration of this matter,
has stated its reservations about considering a draft
resolution before the publication of the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on Iran's
nuclear programme, because, as a matter of principle,
my country, as a party to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), recognizes
every country's right to acquire nuclear technology for
civilian purposes. It follows that we cannot support any
activity of nuclear proliferation.

Having considered the report of the Director
General of the IAEA, we note that, in the absence of
full and complete cooperation by Iran, the Agency has
been unable to clearly determine the precise nature of
the Iranian nuclear programme. We deeply regret Iran's
position, because all States parties to the Non-
Proliferation Treaty are bound to fully disclose such
information. Our doubts are deepened by the fact that
the report describes activities linked to uranium
enrichment and the development of new-generation
centrifuges. Moreover, the Agency has noted Iran's
refusal to implement the provisions of its Additional
Protocol relating to the speedy provision of descriptive
information.

In view of all those facts, and with the sole
purpose of encouraging Tehran to make a greater effort
to cooperate fully with the IAEA, including by
providing specific information on its nuclear
programme, Burkina Faso voted in favour of the
resolution. For my delegation, the purpose of these
additional measures is not to choke or harm Iran -
much less to outlaw it - but simply to encourage it to
be more cooperative with the IAEA and to show
transparency in its nuclear programme.

In spite of having endorsed this option, we
remain convinced that dialogue with Iran must
continue in order to persuade it, through negotiations,
that its duty - and its interests - lie in full
compliance with the NPT safeguards system with a
view to regaining the trust of the international
community.

In that spirit, we endorse the statement of the six
countries, confirming their desire to promote further
dialogue and cooperation with Iran. We find that
initiative satisfactory and we fully support it, because
we remain convinced that only through negotiation can
the Iranian question be fully resolved.

