Ms. Ojiambo (Kenya): I thank the presidency of
the Council for the month of March for arranging this
debate and for according Kenya the opportunity to
share its views. I also wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Ambassador Augustine Mahiga, for his briefing.

This meeting on Somalia could not have come at
a better time. It follows closely on intense work
undertaken at the regional and international levels in
the past three months, which culminated in the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2036 (2012). At this
juncture, we wish to welcome and thank the United
Kingdom for convening the London conference on
Somalia, held on 23 February, at which Kenya was
represented at the highest level. The conference
demonstrated the United Kingdom's resolve and the
international community's commitment to rallying to
the cause of Somalia.

Although Kenya welcomes resolution 2036
(2012), which reviews recommendations by the African
Union for the future operations of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we note that the
resolution does not provide for a maritime component.
Yet that component is critical to the eventual success of
the campaign in Somalia, as well as to the fight against
piracy and international terrorism. It is our expectation
that this matter will be addressed by the Council when
reviewing the mandate of AMISOM. later on in the
year. In the meantime, the huge costs of sustaining the
maritime operation continue to weigh heavily on my
country, and it will be necessary to identify alternative
forms of assistance to enable Kenya to continue those
operations. It is our hope that our international partners
will support us in this crucial endeavour.

The Somalia crisis is a matter of which Kenya
has remained seized for years. While the crisis has
generated a number of challenges, our determination to
turn Somalia around has been unwavering. In this
context, I wish to pay special tribute to Uganda and
Burundi for their contribution to the search for lasting
peace in Somalia. We also recognize the commitment
of Ethiopia and its critical support to the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and allied forces; to
Djibouti for the deployment of its first contingent to
Somalia; and to my country Kenya, for its ongoing
operation, which has liberated parts of the country and
populations in southern and central Somalia. Kenya's
agreement to rehat its forces as part of AMISOM. will
strengthen the mission and give a boost to the fight to
eliminate the Al-Shabaab terrorist group, especially
after that group's recent declaration that they are part
and parcel of Al-Qaida.

The present discussion is taking place at a time of
unique opportunity for Somalia. The international
community finally has before it an unprecedented
window of opportunity to restore security, peace and
stability in Somalia. This has been occasioned by the
momentum created following the withdrawal of
Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu after its defeat by
AMISOM. and TFG forces in August 2011, by the
operations of Kenyan and TFG forces in south-central
Somalia, and through assistance from Ethiopia, all of
which have dealt a devastating blow to Al-Shabaab.

Kenya's operation in pursuit of Al-Shabaab and
other terrorist elements has so far liberated large areas
of Somalia and freed the inhabitants from Al-Shabaab
control. Additionally, Kenya's operation in Somalia has
significantly reduced the incidence of piracy off the
coast of Somalia.

As we pursue political and military strategies in
Somalia, it is also imperative that we focus attention on
the humanitarian situation in Somalia. As Council
members are aware, Kenya is host to more than
600,000 refugees in the Dadaab complex, who continue
to face threats that require humanitarian interventions.
In that regard, Kenya stands ready to work with the
international community to map out a firm and durable
solution, including the return of those people to their
home country. Indeed Somalia, now more than ever,
needs its displaced human resources to return home to
work together to speed up its recovery. The
humanitarian actors should now take advantage of the
areas secured from the Al-Shabaab to resettle those
people. This is a matter of utmost urgency, as Kenya
can no longer continue carrying the burden occasioned
by the situation.

Further, we must focus on restoring normalcy to
Somalia by, among other things, encouraging
socio-economic activities that will have an impact on
the livelihoods of ordinary Somalis, especially in areas
that have been liberated. Such efforts will form the
basis for extending TFG governance to those regions,
increase the legitimacy of the transitional process and
boost reconciliation activities.

In addition, we call on all concerned to seriously
reflect on the next steps for Somalia after the end of
the transitional period in August 2012. In that regard,
we commend the efforts of States like Turkey for
showing renewed interest in organizing further
meetings on Somalia and for undertaking infrastructure
development in Somalia, such as the reconstruction of
Mogadishu airport.

Finally, I call on the Council and the international
community at large to support the efforts currently
under way aimed at bringing lasting peace and stability
to a country that has suffered the effects of conflict for
over two decades. This time we must get it right and do
right by Somalia.
