Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I
should like to start by thanking Assistant Secretary-
General Annabi for his very specific and useful
briefing. I should like also to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this public debate on Kosovo this
month. I should like also to welcome the presence of
Deputy Prime Minister Mr. Nebojsa Covie at the
Council table today and to thank him for his important
statement.
Bulgaria associates itself with the statement to be
made later on by Spain on behalf of the European
Union. I should like simply to make a few comments in
my national capacity.

My country believes that the election of the
President of Kosovo, Mr. Ibrahim Rugova; of the Prime
Minister, Mr. Bajram Rexhepi; and of the other
members of the Government on 4 March 2002
represents an encouraging step that will create
favourable conditions for the reconstruction of the
province's economy and for the establishment of the
rule of law, and that will promote the combat against
violence and organized crime.

Bulgaria is grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Mr. Michael Steiner, for his contribution to
the conclusion of the agreement on the composition of
the Kosovo government. We would like to assure him
that he continue to count on Bulgaria's full support.

My country appeals to the newly elected Kosovo
leadership to act responsibly in exercising the
prerogatives they now enjoy under the Constitutional
Framework for Provisional Self-Government and
resolution 1244 (1999). It is important that these new
leaders respect international agreements on Kosovo, in
particular the border demarcation agreement signed by
the Republic of Macedonia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia on 23 February 2001, which was endorsed
by the Security Council in its presidential statement of
7 March 2001.

Bulgaria welcomes the cooperation between
UNMIK and the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, which is of great importance in improving
the security situation and in building confidence in the
entire region.

In this connection, I should like to welcome the
recent transfer of Albanian-speaking prisoners from
Belgrade to Pristina, and I should like to avail myself
of this opportunity to thank Deputy Prime Minister
Covie for his personal involvement in that important
decision.

My country welcomes the decision taken by
UNMIK and the Macedonian authorities to set up a
joint UNMIK-Republic of Macedonia commission
entrusted with resolving practical issues related to the
common border, under existing agreements. Bulgaria
supports the measures taken by UNMIK to concentrate
its efforts on combating organized crime in all of its
forms - traffic in human beings, in drugs and in
weapons. Additional resources will have to be
earmarked to enhance the effectiveness of these
activities. The socio-economic impact of these
phenomena could jeopardize nascent institutions as
well as inter-ethnic relations that are already very
fragile. Bulgaria will continue to demand that the
circumstances of the brutal murder in Kosovo of our
compatriot Valentin Krumov be brought to light fully,
and that those responsible are arrested as soon as
possible.

My country supports the international
community's efforts to respond appropriately to the
funding needs of projects of vital importance to
Kosovo. In this connection, we expect the donors'
conference to provide the necessary resources, in the
framework of concrete undertakings relating to
democratization programmes and to the return of
refugees.

My country wishes to emphasize the importance
ofthe strategy developed by the European Commission
and the World Bank, which will to make it possible to
reduce Kosovo's dependence on outside assistance and
which, we believe, should give priority to small and
medium-sized businesses.

Bulgaria will continue to allocate resources, to
the extent of its ability, for its continued participation
in collective instruments for the maintenance of peace
and stability in Kosovo. Let me recall that 207
Bulgarians are working in Civpol and in the KFOR
military contingent. Thirteen other Bulgarians are
working in Kosovo in the framework of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

My country intends to establish a permanent
diplomatic presence in Kosovo through a liaison office
in Pristina.

Over the last few months, we have seen budding
ethnic tolerance developing in the province. We
welcome this positive development, but we remain
aware that it is only the minimal beginning, perhaps
too minimal, of a process that is undoubtedly going to
be difficult. Deputy Prime Minister Covie spoke very
eloquently about this aspect. We will continue to
support the emergence of a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo, with respect for the rule of law and human
rights as primary considerations.
Only UNMIK's and KFOR's presence can make it
possible to guarantee security and normalcy for all of
the inhabitants of Kosovo, in close cooperation with
the local authorities. That presence is a decisive factor
for security in Kosovo, as it can serve to promote the
return to Kosovo of refugees and internally displaced
persons of all ethnic groups.

In this context, my delegation would like to
welcome the KFOR and UNMIK amnesty programme.
It is designed to promote the handover of illegally held
arms and ammunition over a one-month period. We
feel that this is a very important and positive step
aimed at enhancing security in the province.

We would like also to welcome the decision by
the Belgrade authorities to transfer prisoners of
Albanian origin to Pristina, as I mentioned earlier. This
is an important gesture of openness on the part of the
federal Government.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that
only a European perspective with respect to the entire
region can provide a response to the long-term
problems of Kosovo.

In that connection, I would like to say that, as a
neighbouring country, Bulgaria will continue to work,
within the Council and elsewhere, to help get these
aspirations translated into reality as soon as possible.

