Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to express our thanks to you, Sir,
and to salute you for convening this meeting dedicated
to the discussion of the situation in Somalia. I am very
pleased to see you presiding over the Council, in view
of my deep respect for you and my estimation of your
abilities. I also thank you for making this an open
meeting, held in the only natural and right forum. I am
not the only one who is pleased to see the Council in
session here. I would presume all Members of the
United Nations and the international community, on
whose behalf you are acting, are, as well. I can assure
you that the seats of this Chamber have lost the warmth
of living bodies and have become bored with that
artificial warmth of the lifeless heating system.

Let me pay tribute to the Prime Minister of the
brotherly country of Somalia. I would like to thank him
for his statement, which was extremely important and
useful for all of us, and for the Council in particular.
Also, I would like to commend the Secretary-General,
who was the one most interested in the question of
Somalia, and who has submitted many reports to the
Council, including the report under discussion in
today's meeting. I would also like to thank the
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
valuable statement.

It is common knowledge that my country was the
only one to maintain its embassy in Mogadishu. We
have never closed our diplomatic mission there for a
single day, other than on official holidays, from the
start of the crisis to this very day. My country has also
called for convening meetings on Libyan territory
among all factions involved in the conflict in Somalia
over the past decade. We have tried by all possible
means to enable those factions to reach a peaceful
solution that would ensure the stability and territorial
integrity of Somalia and the unity of its people.

We pay tribute to the efforts of Djibouti and its
President for their tireless efforts leading to the
convening of the Somalia National Peace Conference
in Arta, where, for the first time, a sound and correct
foundation was laid for achieving consensus among
5,000 Somalis representing all social, religious, ethnic
and regional factions throughout Somalia. The
approach resulting in that consensus and in the
adoption of the Transitional National Charter and
Government is the essential one if we wish to support
and strengthen that country and ensure the stability and
unity of the Somali people and homeland.

I believe that one of the most important functions
of the Security Council in this regard is to achieve the
objectives embodied in its name - the maintenance of
international peace and security - in considering such
questions. I believe that the fears arising from past
experiences in Somalia are no longer valid and that the
Council can therefore have no excuse to hesitate,
because the conditions that prevailed in those years
were very different from those prevailing today. In
those days, there were no Somalis with whom to
maintain cooperation. Today, however, there is a
Transitional National Government, an Assembly and
popular support among all Somalis for this new
beginning.

All sectors of the Somali population are fed up
with war and tired of living in such unstable
conditions. The most skilled workers of Somalia have
left the country and now live abroad. Only the warlords
want to abort the outcome of the Arta process, certainly
out of self-interest. If they felt that the Security
Council and the United Nations system were serious in
supporting the Transitional National Government, they
would have retreated from their current positions and
accepted the advice to join the Arta process. However,
their perception that the Council and the United
Nations were not serious led them to believe that the
former conditions in Somalia could be restored. War
and violence have become the sole profession of these
warlords and they know no other.

Will this Council allow those factions to achieve
their own selfish goals to the detriment of the interests
of Somalia? Let me cite one example. The
representative of France, Ambassador Levitte, raised a
very important point that should be given the Council's
full attention. Outlaws - be they terrorists, drug lords
or arms dealers - along with the forces of their
countries, may perceive Somalia as an ideal haven.
Should we allow Somalia to become a base for all these
outlaw forces and only then consider mounting a
campaign like that staged by the Security Council and
the United Nations a few years ago, with all its
potential dangers, sacrifices and loss of life?

The best option is to support the Transitional
National Government, but what role is there for the
Council in requesting that Government to establish
peace? What justification is there for the United
Nations to intervene if the Transitional National
Government can attain peace by itself? What party can
intervene if the Transitional National Government
alone has the power to achieve peace?

Furthermore, I have found in the Koran the
answer to the conundrum of the chicken-and-egg.
When Noah boarded the ark that God had ordered him
to build, he was told to bring a pair of animals of each
species. I believe that religion has a basis in reason.
The pair of chickens was composed of a hen and a
rooster, not two eggs. Eggs would have broken in the
tumult of the flood that later deluged the ark. I mean to
suggest that a peace-building mission could be
permanently deployed in Somalia in order to lay the
egg of peace, but calling upon the Transitional National
Government to establish peace, then having the
Security Council guarantee that peace, would be acting
like those who would place the cart before the horse.

Why do we set aside a budget for peacekeeping
and pay our annual contributions to the United Nations
budget? Do we do so in order to maintain peace in one
region and not in others? This is the subject of
discussion in the African Group and other forums. We
should like to see the Council act uniformly in all cases
that require peacekeeping or peace-building.

In brief, my country, which has made every
possible effort, remains willing to work, through the
Council and the African Union, to ensure that stability
is restored to Somalia. I call on the Council to do the
following. First, a Security Council mission, similar to
those sent to many other countries, should be
dispatched to Somalia and submit a report, on the basis
of which, I would hope, the Council would be able
later to deploy a peace-building mission.

Secondly, I hope that the Council would agree to
fund the National Commission for Reconciliation and
Property Settlement. The Government of Somalia
cannot convene that Commission, if I have understood
the Prime Minister, quite simply because it cannot
afford the travel costs of the participants, who live in
the United States, Europe, Arab countries, Africa and
some Asian countries. Sufficient funding should be
made available to enable the National Reconciliation
Commission to convene as soon as possible and to
meet any other relevant expenses that could facilitate
the work of the Commission.

I would ask the Council to support the
Transitional National Government of Somalia in
creating and operating vital infrastructure facilities that
are important to the work of the United Nations as
well, such as the airport and the seaport. Those
facilities could also be a source of income for the
Transitional National Government; moreover, the
United Nations and its missions could make use of
them in the event of any threat to the work of United
Nations staff members in Somalia.

Mr. President, I am in fact optimistic that, under
your stewardship, and thanks to the convening of
today's meeting, there will be follow-up to these
matters among members of the Council. This meeting
is giving us greater understanding and optimism with
respect to the Council's future work on the question of
Somalia.

