Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting us to participate
in this meeting. I would also like to sincerely thank all
of the members of the Security Council for the support
they have shown today for the Sudan by adopting
resolution 2495 (2019), which extends the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operations
in Darfur (UNAMID) for one year and maintains the
geographic presence and the troop ceiling for the first
six months. That was done at the request ofthe Sudanese
Government with the aim of creating the conditions
necessary to achieve comprehensive peace throughout
the Sudan and confidence-building measures with
armed groups.

Following the success of the December Revolution,
the transition to civil governance requires the
international community, and the Security Council
in particular, to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the
civilian Government in pursuing the priorities that
emerge during the transition period. At the top of the
priorities list will be achieving lasting peace throughout
the Sudan, mitigating the consequences of the conflict
and ensuring conditions conducive to democracy by the

end of the 39-month transition period.

The Government of the Sudan is aware of the
magnitude of its responsibilities and of the challenges
before it as it seeks to normalize life in conflict areas
and address the social and economic consequences
of the conflict. That requires concerted efforts to
overcome those challenges. To that end, the Government
has begun assessing the options for the appropriate
mechanism that will follow UNAMID in the Sudan and
choosing the most effective United Nations presence
to deal with the Sudan's issues, while working with
the United Nations and the African Union to agree on
such a mechanism. The upcoming period will witness
the beginning of creating the national commission for
peace, which will be entrusted with coordinating with
Government institutions to deal with the consequences
of the conflict and bring about lasting peace.

As Council members are well aware, resolving
the economic crisis represents the success of the
Government's plan to ensure peace. To that end, we
will not stop requesting the international community
to economically support the transitional Government,
including by removing the Sudan from the list of State
sponsors of terrorism. The inclusion of the Sudan on that
list is a major obstacle to resolving our economic crisis.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the two
co-penholders, the United Kingdom and Germany, and
all Council members for their support in adopting this
resolution. I would also like to thank the African Union
Peace and Security Council, which supported a request
from the Sudan to extend UNAMID's mandate. I would
like as well to thank UNAMID, its leadership and
peacekeepers for their efforts and sacrifices in order
to achieve peace and stability in Darfur. I assure the
Council that the Government of my country stands fully
ready to cooperate and coordinate with the mission and
United Nations organs to achieve the desired goals.

The meeting rose at 3.15 p.m.
