Miss Clarke (Barbados): My delegation
welcomes the opportunity to contribute to the debate
on children and armed conflict within the context of
efforts to promote a new international humanitarian
order. We are particularly gratified at this opportunity
to speak in this forum, and we look forward to more
debates on other issues of mutual concern within the
framework of the Security Council.

It is an honour for my delegation to address the
Security Council under the chairmanship of Jamaica, a
sister country of the Caribbean Community. This is not
the first time that Jamaica has carried the baton so
capably for the Caribbean and Latin American region,
and indeed the countries of the South, and it will
certainly not be the last.
Barbados has managed successfully to escape the
ravages of war and civil strife that have afflicted and
continue to destroy the societies of many of the States
Members of the United Nations. Barbadian children
have had the advantage of growing up in an
environment of peace, political stability and relative
prosperity. Our children have not had to endure the
horror of being forced into warfare, the physical
atrocities inflicted by landmines or the social and
psychological disaffection routinely experienced by
children in war-torn countries.

The question of children and armed conflict
extends beyond guaranteeing the physical safety and
human rights of the future citizens of the world. It
speaks to the irreparable damage to the psyche of these
children, to the point that they may also, in later life,
repeat the atrocities to which they have been subjected.
My delegation is determined that children around the
world, like the children of Barbados, should enjoy the
simplicity of childhood without the terror so many
have sadly come to know. For this very reason, the
Government of Barbados supported the establishment
of the International Criminal Court as a mechanism
through which children can be protected from armed
conflict.

As a small island developing State with few
natural resources other than its human resources,
Barbados is dependent on its reputation for political
stability, prudent economic management and social
integrity, and gives priority to questions of human
rights and social justice. We are cognizant of the
special vulnerability of children in times of conflict
and of the need for special measures taking their
peculiar concerns into consideration.

It is the firm belief of the Government of
Barbados that the United Nations should fulfil its role
to prevent conflicts and not only to seek to mitigate
them after they emerge. It is of grave concern to us that
increasingly resources must be diverted from
economic, social and infrastructural development to
deal with conflicts and other crises of a humanitarian
nature.

Out of respect for these very principles, the
Government of Barbados signed the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction in December 1997. Although the
Caribbean area is free from landmines, it is no comfort
to us that landmines kill or mutilate approximately
10,000 children yearly. Barbados, as a signatory to and
major actor in the elaboration of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, feels compelled to assist in halting
these tragic circumstances and the suffering and loss
they engender. My delegation notes with some sadness
the findings of the report of the April 2000 World
Education Forum that the number and extent of
conflicts in the last decade have constituted major
obstacles to the goal of providing education for all by
the year 2000.

Barbados wishes to place on record its
satisfaction at the fact that the General Assembly was
finally able to adopt, on 25 May of this year, the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict.

Similarly, we strenuously support the call made
by the Secretary-General in his report for the
international community to speak with one voice in
insisting that 18 be the minimum age for participation
in conflict whether in armed forces or armed groups.

As a contributing country to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, Barbados pledges its support
for the measures established by the United Nations to
enforce standards which will instil respect of and
adherence to international humanitarian law, in
particular the decision to investigate thoroughly and
prosecute any violations by its personnel, in violation
of international humanitarian and human rights law
while in the service of the United Nations. My
delegation also wishes to associate itself with the
proposals made by the Secretary-General for
integrating the protection of children into United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

Barbados wishes to recognize the efforts of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu.
Thanks to his efforts, the Ministerial Negotiating
Conference of the African, Caribbean and Pacific
Countries (ACP) incorporated his proposals for
protection of children into the European Union-ACP
Partnership Agreement, which was recently signed in
Benin. Barbados also wishes to express its commitment
to the resolution adopted by the General Assembly of
the Organization of American States last month on
children and armed conflict. That resolution calls on all
parties to armed conflict to respect international
humanitarian law relevant to children and urges
member States to support efforts to demobilize,
reintegrate and rehabilitate children affected by armed
conflict.

My delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate
our support for the efforts of the United Nations
Children's Fund, the Offices of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and civil
society - including such organizations as the
International Committee of the Red Cross - to
promote conflict prevention, to alleviate the suffering
of societies at war and to promote the reintegration and
rehabilitation of children involved in armed conflict.

As members are no doubt aware, the question of
protection for and attention to children who are the
victims of armed conflict will receive special attention
when the Government of Jamaica hosts the Ministerial
Meeting for the Americas later this year, in advance of
the special session of the General Assembly on the
achievement of the goals of the World Summit for
Children, to be held in September 2001.

Barbados will continue to play its part by
participating fully in all efforts of the United Nations to
promote respect for and adherence to international
humanitarian law and human rights, and the
recognition of the need to protect children and to
respect their rights and freedoms.

