Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Nigeria greatly appreciates
the special attention that you, Sir, are devoting to the
Sudan today. The contributions of your country to the
Sudanese process are well recognized, as is your
personal commitment.

I would like to welcome the participation of the
Vice-President of the Republic of South Sudan,
Mr. Rick Machar Teny-Dhurgon, and to thank him for
his inspiring comments. I also welcome my colleague,
Ambassador Osman, and thank him for his statement.

The Secretary-General has been unrelenting in his
quest for peace, as has Under-Secretary-General Le Roy in
his unremitting efforts in waging peace. Allow me, on
behalf of the Federal Government of Nigeria, to
congratulate President Salva Kiir and the people of the
Republic of South Sudan on finally achieving
statehood. Our President Goodluck Jonathan shared
this historic moment with the people of South Sudan in
Juba and conveyed Nigeria's solidarity and unflinching
support as the country begins the arduous process of
nation-building.

Let me also commend the leadership of the Sudan

for promptly recognizing South Sudan's independence.
The President and the people of the Sudan have
demonstrated courage and steadfast commitment to the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). We believe that this is an inspiring
lesson in international responsibility and peacemaking.

On 9 July, the international community joyfully
welcomed the historic birth of Africa's newest State,
South Sudan, following a protracted struggle. We must
acknowledge the inherent challenges facing the
newborn State, not least of which are insecurity,
institution-building, infrastructure and economic
development, political and social cohesion, the
integration of returnees, meeting international
obligations, and forging a strong and lasting
partnership with its neighbours, especially the Sudan.

Without a doubt, the primary responsibility for
setting priorities and identifying strategies for
addressing these post-conflict State-building
challenges lies with the Government of South Sudan.
First, the signing of a new interim constitution, the
granting of amnesty to former armed fighters, the move
to diversify the economy from oil dependency, and the
emphasis on unity based on cultural and ethnic
diversity are necessary steps in the right direction.

The new Republic of South Sudan will require
the support not only of its immediate neighbour, the
Sudan, but also of the international community. A
peaceful, stable, equitable and mutually beneficial
relationship between the Sudan and South Sudan is
critical to internal peace and regional stability. We
therefore welcome the recent statements of both
Presidents Kiir and Al-Bashir reaffirming their
commitment to resolving all remaining issues of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and to
bringing peace to the troubled areas of Abyei, Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile, as well as Darfur. That
commitment not only will serve as the bedrock of the
future relationship between the two countries, but also
should reinvigorate the momentum for the resolution of
all outstanding issues of the CPA under the auspices of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel.

Nigeria is encouraged by the successes of the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel under
the leadership of President Thabo Mbeki. The Panel
remains a valuable mechanism for the resolution of all
post-referendum and post-CPA issues, including the

demarcation of the North-South boundary. We
welcome the steps that the CPA parties have taken to
resolve outstanding issues, and look forward to the
fulfilment of the objectives outlined in the 20 June
Agreement, the 28 June Framework Agreement and the
29 June Agreement.

The parties have also utilized the Panel to explore
post-secession issues, including citizenship, freedoms,
the creation of a soft border, oil resources, trade issues
and debt relief. The coming months will pose the first
test of the respective Governments' ability to protect
their citizens from upheaval and unrest under the
framework of those agreements. We call upon both
Governments to work with United Nations
peacekeeping forces to leave no stone unturned in
seeking to guarantee the protection of civilians and to
allow humanitarian access in critical areas. We note the
need for cooperation with other relevant actors in the
region, namely, the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS), the United
Nations country team in South Sudan, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In supporting resolution 1996 (2011) establishing
UNMISS, Nigeria was confident that its broad mandate
typifies the quality of United Nations assistance that
we envisage as being most beneficial to the people of
South Sudan. As security and development are closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing, we believe that
they are key to attaining sustainable peace. It is highly
critical that the twin pillars of the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding mandate be fully operationalized.

Independence may have come at a great cost, but
the future of the Republic of South Sudan will bear out
that undertaking. We are convinced that it will prove to
have been a valuable investment if the human, cultural
and economic resources of the country are strategically
harnessed for the highest national benefit.

