Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of Ethiopia, Norway and my
own country, the Republic of Korea. Our three countries
are leading the group of friends of United Nations peace
operations, an informal cross-regional group dedicated
to making peace operations more fit-for-purpose. We
thank the Netherlands for convening this open debate
on such an important topic. We also join others in
thanking the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Director of Groupe
de recherche, d"etude et de formation femme-action for
their informative briefings.

The report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), together with other
recent reports, presents a clear set of recommendations
to enhance the effectiveness of United Nations peace
operations. It is high time that all relevant actors - the
SecurityCouncil,contributingcountries,regionalactors,
the Secretariat and host countries - come together and
implement them in a strategic and holistic manner. For
that reason, we fully support the Secretary-General's
action plan for peacekeeping, which mobilizes all
partners and stakeholders to support the effectiveness
of peace operations. Today, we would like to raise
five points.

First, United Nations peacekeeping operations
should better support political processes led by local
actors. Mandates should be more focused and realistic
based on an accurate and in-depth analysis by the
Secretariat of the specific context. Mandates should also
be designed as part of a broader political strategy that
considers the entire peace continuum from prevention
and peacekeeping to peacebuilding and long-term
development. The political strategy, in tandem with
the United Nations development assistance framework,
could guide efforts to determine the division of labour
among missions, United Nations country teams and
other relevant actors. The Peacebuilding Commission
is also well placed to advise the Security Council in
following up on peacebuilding components, especially
during transitions.

Secondly, we need to ensure that peacekeeping
missions operate more effectively in today's complex
and high-risk environments. As peacekeeping casualties
have hit a historic high level, both the Secretariat and
contributing countries need to prioritize the safety and
security of peacekeepers. In that regard, we welcome
the Secretary-General's plan of action to address
such concerns, while upholding the basic principles
of peacekeeping. The capabilities of peacekeeping
operations must also be an enhanced to better meet
their mandates. Intelligence, the introduction of
new technology and increased engagement with
local communities to ensure local ownership need to
be considered.

Thirdly, faced by multidimensional challenges,
effective peacekeeping requires the shared
responsibility of all actors, including regional
organizations, such as the African Union (AU), that
are leading many political processes. In that regard, we
welcome Secretary-General Guterres' commitment to
strengthening the strategic partnership, especially with
the African Union, by holding the first summit-level
United Nations-AU annual conference, among others.

Fourthly, the Secretary-General's initiative to
reform the peace and security architecture provides
a critical opportunity to strengthen peacekeeping
operations. We should ensure that ongoing reform
efforts, together with those of the management and
development system, result in a coherent holistic
approach of United Nations activities on the ground.

Lastly, the culture of dialogue should be promoted
for frank and constructive discussions on peacekeeping
among the relevant actors, including the Security
Council, contributing countries, the Secretariat and
host nations. For, when the stakes are high, walking
together becomes an imperative.

Ethiopia, Norway and the Republic of Korea
together, with other friends of United Nations peace
operations, remain committed to working closely with
the Secretariat and the wider membership to identifying
solutions and facilitating dialogue to improve peace
operations in the months to come.

