Mr. J a'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of my country, I would like to thank
the Security Council for the holding of this open debate
to discuss the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The entire international community understands
that this very important subject cannot be dealt with
selectively or subjected to one-sided interpretations.
We therefore believe that the protection of Palestinian,
Syrian and Lebanese civilians suffering under Israeli
occupation is part and parcel of this much-appreciated
international effort in the context of the impartial and
exact implementation of the mandate to protect
civilians in armed conflicts. I say this in particular
because the Security Council has long been involved in
debating this important matter, while Israel, rightly and
legally referred to as the occupying Power, has all the
while continued its gross violations against civilian
populations in occupied Arab territories.

Paragraph 3 of the guidelines annexed to General
Assembly resolution 46/182 - by which the Assembly
established the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs - states that

"The sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity of States must be fully respected in
accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. In this context, humanitarian assistance
should be provided with the consent of the
affected country and in principle on the basis of
an appeal by the affected country."

In addition, paragraph 4 of that resolution states
that

"Each State has the responsibility first and
foremost to take care of the victims of natural
disasters and other emergencies occurring on its
territory. Hence, the affected State has the
primary role in the initiation, organization,
coordination, and implementation of humanitarian
assistance within its territory."

Jurisprudence has concluded that international
efforts to protect civilians in cases of armed conflict
must be carried out in strict observance of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations -
which affirm the need to respect the sovereignty of
States, their political independence and their territorial
integrity - and be consistent with the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions and international humanitarian
law. Every international instrument has affirmed that
national Governments have the primary responsibility
in providing protection for their citizens and that such
responsibility is exclusive and cannot be substituted for
or influenced in the service of a given political agenda.

We must therefore not confuse the subject of the
protection of civilians, on the one hand, and threats to
international peace and security on the other, in
particular when such an important subject is discussed
in the Security Council. We must also avoid using
vague or loose interpretations of the subject of the
protection of civilians, as well as the use of
terminology outside United Nations documents and
materials that are controversial, such as the
responsibility to protect and humanitarian intervention.
Were that to happen, it would inevitably harm the
credibility and neutrality of the United Nations and
undermine the noble efforts carried out to protect
civilians in armed conflicts.

An old paradox for the international community
is the fact that, with the development of the concepts of
international law over past decades, in both the general
and humanitarian aspects, the suffering of civilians
during conflicts - and, indeed, the very number of
conflicts - have increased. The distinctive march of
the international community over many centuries
towards the codification of humanitarian law must not
be undermine through the selective implementation of
such law against the powerless - not the powerful -
and the violation of the sanctity of sovereignty and the
inviolability of the borders of Member States, while at
the same time absolving the authorities of foreign
occupation from the consequences of their violations,
in total disregard for the norms and principles of
international humanitarian law.

The crimes committed by Israel over several
decades in the occupied Arab territories, its violations
of the most basic principles of international
humanitarian law and the impunity it enjoys not only
prove the violations of law by the Israeli occupation
and its political and military leadership; they are also
evidence of how certain countries in the Security
Council have condoned and tolerated those violations
and have been reluctant to end them.

Israel continues to refuse to return the occupied
Syrian Golan to its motherland and to abide by the
resolutions of international legitimacy, especially
resolution 497 (1981), which was adopted by
consensus by the Council and resolved that Israel's
annexation of the occupied Syrian Golan was null and
void and without legal effect. We really do not know
how long we can continue to turn a blind eye to Israel's
occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan and East Jerusalem, and to Israel's inhuman acts
against civilians in the armed conflict that, in United
Nations terminology, is known as the Arab-Israeli
conflict and the question of Palestine.

We wonder why we fail to see, with regard to
Israeli aggression, the same enthusiasm exhibited today
by certain representatives in expressing the great
importance they attach to the protection of civilians in
certain parts of the world where the agenda item
"Protection of civilians in armed conflict" does not
apply. These representatives have gone to great lengths
to express their concern for civilians in the Chamber of

ll-33lll
the Security Council, whose mandate is the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
order to endorse a flawed reading and interpretation of
the concept of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict in order to justify their flagrant intervention in
the internal affairs of Member States.

