Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset to convey to you,
Mr. President, my sincerest thanks and gratitude for
your quick response to the request of the Arab Group

S/PV.4478

 

to convene this session of the Security Council to
consider the extremely dangerous situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and
to take the necessary action in that regard.

Allow me to reiterate our thanks to the Secretary-
General for the statement he delivered before the
previous open meeting, in which he set out his views
on the developments in the occupied territory.

The grave deterioration of the situation in the
occupied Arab territories as well as the alarming spiral
of Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people and
its infrastructure - particularly in the past few days -
constitute a blatant violation of international law and
international humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. These actions also violate
the relevant Security Council resolutions on the Arab-
Israeli conflict. Israeli occupation forces have
committed a series of criminal actions which daily
cause the death and injury of dozens of people and now
total around a thousand Palestinian martyrs and
thousands of injured Palestinians since the beginning
of the intifada. This is in addition to the imposition of
the policy of siege, starvation, destruction and the
killing of children, the elderly and women, as well as
what was mentioned by the representatives of
Mauritius and Palestine.

Israel has atrociously exploited the will of the
international community to combat terrorism after 11
September. With the pretext of combating terrorism -
as if others were not fighting terrorism - it has
attempted to classify resistance against occupation,
self-defence and the defence of land and dignity as
terrorism, thus violating the principles of international
law and world ethics. Israel is trying to cover up the
war of genocide it is waging against the Palestinian
people. It is natural that the wave of internal Israeli
criticism and external criticism against Mr. Sharon's
policy towards the Palestinian people is increasing:
that policy violates all laws. In particular, the Israeli
Government is committing daily massacres that
express the hysteria prevailing in the ruling institutions
of Israel.

Events have proved that the achievement of
security for Israel alone is a myth, because security
must be achieved for all. Security cannot be achieved
without laying its basic foundation: peace. Peace is
lacking.

Bitterness at this approach has been expressed in
the refusal of many Israeli regular and reserve officers
to do military service in the occupied Palestinian
territories. I quote from a statement by one Israeli
officer: "The occupation practices are war crimes
according to all international criteria. Atrocities are
carried out in the Palestinian areas. It is inconceivable
to control 3 million persons who are starving and
whose basic right to live is denied. This is
inconceivable."

If the Israeli officer who observed these events
has rebelled and expressed such indignation, what does
the international community, particularly the Security
Council, expect from the Palestinian people, who are
suffering from hunger, injustice, suppression and
occupation, with all their negative aspects? What does
it expect the Palestinian people to do? Does this people
not have the right to rebel against and resist occupation
in order to regain its rights and land? This is a
legitimate right enshrined in the Charter and Council
resolutions.

The main reason for what is transpiring in the
occupied Arab territories is the Israeli occupation of
territories in Palestine, Lebanon and Syria. In this
connection, it seems that Israel has not yet realized the
fact that killing begets only killing and violence begets
only Violence and destruction. Destruction will only
lead to destruction and the occupation will only
generate resistance. This is a legitimate resistance.
Security will not be brought about without the
achievement of a full, comprehensive and just peace
for everyone in the region.

In the light of this gloomy picture - the Israeli
Government's escalation of assassinations of
Palestinian citizens and leaders, destruction of
Palestinian infrastructure and institutions, daily
massacres by the Sharon Government - which I will
not enumerate here - its attempts to impose genocidal
war and ethnic cleansing, and the effects of these
practices on peace and security in the region - the
Security Council, which the Charter has entrusted with
the responsibility of maintaining international peace
and security, is called upon first to denounce and
condemn the persistent Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people.

Secondly, it must call upon Israel to cease
immediately its acts of aggression in the occupied
territories, to forgo its policy of siege, starvation and

S/PV.4478

 

assassination of Palestinian citizens and leaders and to
return to negotiations with a view to achieving a just
and comprehensive peace.

Thirdly, it must call upon Israel to implement all
relevant Security Council resolutions and not exempt it
from complying with United Nations resolutions.

Fourthly, the Council should emphasize that the
1949 Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War is
applicable to the occupied Arab territories.

Fifthly, it should hold the Sharon Government
fully accountable for the crimes perpetrated against the
Palestinians in the occupied territories. We should be
courageous in this regard.

Sixthly, it should reiterate its clear-cut stand on
the Israeli policy of settlement in the Arab territories
since 1967, including Jerusalem, particularly as put
forward in resolution 465 (1980).

Seventhly, the Council should emphasize the need
for Israel to abide by the Madrid peace process. That
process was approved by the international community;
it is based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) and on the principle of land for peace.
This is particularly important, since Israel is trying to
bide its time and thwart the achievement of a just and
comprehensive peace. It is also trying to avoid a
complete withdrawal from all occupied Palestinian
territories, including Jerusalem, the occupied Syrian
Golan to the 4 June 1967 line, and the remaining
occupied parts of the Lebanese territories.

There are numerous peace initiatives. Many
initiatives may also emerge. But we have a clear-cut
initiative. There is a peace process. That process
requires clear and explicit political will and not further
initiatives. So long as the process is based on the
resolutions of this august Council, the peace that we
aspire to is one that is just and comprehensive, in line
with the Madrid peace process and its terms of
reference, based on Security Council resolution 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), as I mentioned, and the
principle of land for peace. The emphasis by the
Security Council on such a peace is needed now more
than ever, so as not to waste time and to avoid an
increase in Violence in the region.

This is particularly necessary, since Israel has not
concealed in any way its intentions to evade the
requirements of a comprehensive peace by maintaining

its occupation of the Arab territories. Otherwise, what
is the justification for the continued occupation? While
Israel claims that it is seeking peace, it is conducting a
systematic political process to kill the peace process.

If Israel wishes to live in peace, it must weigh its
options. By renouncing occupation - and this is a
simple matter set out and approved by the Security
Council - it must respond to the requirements of a just
and comprehensive peace, chosen as a strategic goal by
the Arabs. Israel must realize that it cannot hold on to
the land of others and enjoy peace at the same time.

