Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU). The candidate country
Montenegro and Ukraine align themselves with this
statement.

I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Council and
would like to reassure him of our continued support.

Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to face
challenges that arise largely from the lack of political
will on the part of the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to look beyond their narrow ethnic and
party interests and to work out compromises necessary
to move the country forward in a number of areas of key
importance. The country is increasingly lagging behind
others in the western Balkans region, particularly as
regards domestic, political and economic reforms and
progress towards the European Union. The prolonged
political stalemate and the absence of positive
momentum in the domestic reform process lead to the
further weakening of an already fragile economy and
put a heavy burden on the socioeconomic standing of
the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In February 2014, disillusioned citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina engaged in public protests, expressing
their discontent with the deteriorating socioeconomic
situation and with the inability of the country's political
leaders to work out and implement relevant solutions.
The protests that spread across the country should be
seen as a wake-up call, rung by the Bosnians themselves
to their political leaders and to the international
community. We continue therefore to call on the leaders
and politicians of Bosnia and Herzegovina to engage in
dialogue with their citizens.

The lack of progress in implementing necessary
political and economic reforms, the continued use of
divisive rhetoric, and deeply rooted divisions among
political parties continue to cause considerable
headwinds for the efforts of those who want to see
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a united, stable, viable,
multi-ethnic and prosperous State, cooperating
peacefully with its neighbours and irreversibly on track
towards European Union membership. We therefore
urge the country's political leadership to overcome its
divisions and to undertake the reforms necessary to
move the country forward in its EU integration process.

In light of necessary socioeconomic reforms and
citizens' discontent, the European Union has now
broadened its political dialogue with Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to place more emphasis on the
socioeconomic and rule of law agenda. Over the past
six months, the European Union has continued its
strong engagement to anchor Bosnia and Herzegovina
on the EU path. We believe that it is important that
all of Bosnia and Herzegovina's obligations under the
Interim Agreement on trade and trade-related matters be
fulfilled as a matter of priority. The Seja'ic-Finci ruling
embodies the principle of ethnic non-discrimination,
which is at the core of the values promoted by both
the European Union and the United Nations. The
implementation of the ruling remains a requirement for
Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress towards the EU.

The EU Foreign Affairs Council discussed the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina on 10 February. It
expressed concern, but also noted that developments in
the country showed a need for Bosnia and Herzegovina
to keep the focus on the EU agenda, and for the
European Union to broaden its political dialogue with
the country. In April, the Foreign Affairs Council
adopted conclusions that supported the broadening of
the EU agenda and engagement towards the country.
The Council reaffirmed the messages delivered by
High Representative/Vice-President Ashton during her
visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina on 12 March, urging
political leaders to provide an immediate response to
the grievances of the public, particularly as regards the
socioeconomic agenda.

To facilitate this, the European Union, in
coordination with key international financial
institutions operating in Bosnia and Herzegovina, is
putting forward an initiative called the Compact for
Jobs and Growth, which aims at assisting the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to undertake key reforms in
this regard. The initiative will be launched at the Forum
for Prosperity and Jobs on 26 and 27 May in Sarajevo.
It is of key importance that the institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina engage constructively in these efforts.
Also, as announced by Commissioner Fiile during
his visit to Sarajevo on 17 February, the European
Commission will further strengthen its efforts to
assist Bosnia and Herzegovina to improve economic
governance, to facilitate the country's capacities in
absorbing EU pre-accession assistance, and to achieve
progress in the fight against corruption. Some of the
concrete initiatives in this regard were also further
elaborated at a conference of the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development on 24 February in
London.

Beyond these challenges, which require immediate
attention, it is becoming increasingly evident that the
efficiency and functionality of the institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in general need to be significantly
improved, not only in order to build the capacities
required in context of EU accession, particularly as
regards the coordination among various levels of
governance, but also to ensure the sustainability and
continuity of democratic and social reforms undertaken
since 1995. In this sense, the Council reaffirmed its
determination to actively and intensively engage in
support of this process, in close coordination and
cooperation with its main international partners.

It is our expectation that.the progress made by the
rest of the region, and in particular the progress towards
the normalization of relations between Serbia and
Kosovo, the accession negotiations with Montenegro
and the steps undertaken by other countries in their
EU accession processes, will stimulate renewed reform
efforts, generate a sense ofurgency among the country's
leaders, and offer reassurance to its citizens.
The recent entry of Croatia into the European Union
has made Bosnia and Herzegovina a direct neighbour of
the EU, with ajoint land border that is 1,000 kilometres
long. This provides both the European Union and Bosnia
and Herzegovina with the opportunity to additionally
strengthen our mutual relationship and enhance cross-
border cooperation. The role of neighbours cannot
be overestimated - living by example, showing
the positive effects of EU-related reforms, engaging
positively and sending the right messages.

Since September 2011, the European Union has
consolidated its presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and is fully engaged in supporting Bosnia and
Herzegovina in all EU-related matters. Our EU Special
Representative/Head of Delegation is also offering the
EU Force Commander local political guidance.

The European Union continues to accompany
Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress in the security
field. The February events exposed a number of
challenges in the area of law and order, particularly as
regards cooperation, coordination and interoperability
among various law enforcement agencies. The EU is
already engaging in this regard, with its international
partners, to assist the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in resolving these issues. EUFOR Althea
remains primarily focused on capacity-building and
training, while retaining the capability to contribute
to the deterrence capacity of the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina if the situation so requires. The
European Union will keep the operation under regular
review, including on the basis of the situation on the
ground, with a view to making progress in establishing
conditions conducive to the delivery of its mandate.

The European Union, in line with the Foreign
Affairs Council conclusions of April, reaffirms its
unequivocal commitment to the territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and united
country. The European Union also reiterates its
unequivocal commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
EU perspective. In this regard, it condemns as
unacceptable secessionist and divisive rhetoric and
ideas.

In the context of the overall EU strategy for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we look forward to continuing
discussions with the international community on the
reconfiguration of the international presence, in the
appropriate forum, and call on the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to meet the outstanding objectives
and conditions for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. In this regard, the European Union
reminds the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina of the
need to fully cooperate with the Office of the High
Representative and to provide the Office with the access
necessary to officials, institutions and documents to
carry out their mandate.

The European Union remains ready to provide the
necessary assistance to boost the. progress towards
Bosnia and Herzegovina's European integration. It is
this approach that will take the country forward on its
reform agenda, towards stability and development, on
its path to the European Union.

