Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
country would like to congratulate Bolivia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October and wish it every success in
the conduct of our work. My delegation would also like
to express its deepest appreciation to the United States
of America for the relevance of the issues discussed
during its presidency in September.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes this meeting to consider
the joint report of the three subsidiary bodies that
make up the Council's counter-terrorism framework.
We thank Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999); Ambassador Gustavo Meza-
Cuadra, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001); and you yourself, Ambassador
Sacha Llorentty Soliz, Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for the
quality of the respective briefings.

The reports ofthe subsidiary bodies provide us with
scope and extent of the evolving threat of terrorism,
the security risks associated with the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and the work done by the
various subsidiary bodies themselves. That analysis
compels my delegation to comment on the evolution of
the terrorism threat, the mandates of the Committees
and the challenges to overcome.
With regard to the evolution of the threat of
terrorism, my country remains concerned about new
forms of terrorist threats enhanced by globalization;
the resilience of Da'esh and its affiliated groups; and
the significant capabilities of the latter to adapt their
tactics and the ways in which their activities are
financed. In addition, the return and relocation of
terrorist fighters, attempts by non-State actors to gain
access to weapons of mass destruction and the use of
the Internet for terrorist purposes also remain areas of
concern for the Council.

With regard to the mandates of the various
Committees, my delegation welcomes the close
cooperation between them. That makes it possible to
face current challenges, which include the constant
evolution of types of terrorist threats and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We also
commend the progress made by the Committees and
their expert groups in their assessment of the threat
of terrorism and their assistance in enabling Member
States to fulfil their obligations under United Nations
resolutions and international legal instruments in the
fight against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
cooperation and coordination between the various
Committees in the planning and implementation
of their various activities, in accordance with their
respective mandates and Council resolutions. Regular
exchanges between the Committees and Member States
to raise their awareness of the threat of terrorism;
working visits to Afghanistan, Singapore, Malaysia,
the Philippines; and joint briefings in Africa and
Central Asia, are excellent examples of that coordinated
approach between the various Committees, which
should be strengthened.

My country also welcomes the efforts made by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
to rehabilitate and reintegrate former foreign terrorist
fighters, particularly those in the Lake Chad basin.
Given that information sharing is essential to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), my
country appreciates the regional training sessions
organized for national focal points. Those sessions
have enabled the creation of an active network aimed
at strengthening cooperation and coordination, both
with the 1540 Committee and between the respective
regions. Information-sharing further encourages
the strengthening of cooperation between the 1540
Committee and international organizations such
as the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the Implementation Support Unit of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL, My delegation also
welcomes the actions initiated by the Committees and
their expert groups to update the sanctions lists in order
to facilitate the implementation of sanctions regimes
against individuals, groups and entities associated with
terrorist groups.

With regard to the challenges ahead, Cote d'Ivoire
stresses the need for the United Nations to favour an
integrated approach in its response strategy in order
to better adapt to current challenges. We also believe
that more attention should be paid to measures to ban
biological, chemical and bacteriological weapons;
the financing networks that enable proliferation;
and national controls on the export and transport of
such weapons.

My country urges the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate to continue its awareness-raising
activities in order to combat extremist discourse and
all other actions leading to violent extremism and
terrorism. We also call for the updating of the Madrid
principles on foreign terrorist fighters. My delegation
believes that the root causes of radicalization must be
addressed and that particular attention must be paid
to risk factors, including psycho-pathological factors
that can lead to terrorism. In that regard, we commend
the work of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Sanctions Committee and
we recommend that non-proliferation and terrorism
sanctions procedures respect fundamental freedoms.
Finally, given that assistance to Member States is useful
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), my
delegation urges the 1540 Committee to do everything
in its power to settle pending requests for assistance.

