Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania): May
I first congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the
presidency of the Council for this month.

We make our appearance before the Council today on
an issue of considerable significance to the Organization of
African Unity and its membership. We therefore come with
great hope and expectation. We join those who have called
for the suspension of sanctions imposed upon Libya
pursuant to Security Council resolutions 748 (1992) and
883 (1993).
My Government continues to be highly sympathetic to
the plight of the families of the victims of the terrorist
bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over the town of Lockerbie
in Scotland on 21 December 1988. They deserve justice and
we have an obligation as members of the international
community to ensure that they obtain nothing less. It is
therefore a matter to be regretted that in almost a decade
since the tragic incident little progress, if any, has been
scored in that regard. This unfortunate state of affairs now
continues to be compounded by the negative impact of
the resolutions under review on the innocent civilian
population of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

The search for justice for that horrible incident does
not have to create unwarranted additional victims. My
Government and the Organization of African Unity, of
which the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is a member, have
sought a peaceful settlement of the dispute surrounding
the Lockerbie tragedy. It is our view that the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya deserves credit for agreeing to proposals
supported by the Organization of African Unity and the
League of Arab States which offer three options: one,
trial of the two Libyan suspects in a third and neutral
country to be determined by the Security Council; or,
two, trial of the two suspects at The Hague by Scottish
judges under Scottish law; or, third, the establishment of
a special tribunal at the International Court of Justice in
The Hague to try the two suspects.

These proposals, which have subsequently been
supported by the Non-Aligned Movement, surely present
a way of bringing to trial those suspected of being
involved in the Lockerbie bombing and therefore bringing
the dispute to a peaceful resolution. My Government
welcomes the recent ruling by the International Court of
Justice that it has competence over the petition submitted
by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. We urge the parties to
continue to support the Court's justifiable engagement in
the issue. My Government also continues in good faith to
urge the other parties to consider those options, plus the
new situation arising from the ruling of the International
Court, with utmost seriousness. The Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya has expressed concern that its two nationals
cannot receive an impartial trial in either the United
States or the United Kingdom. These concerns cannot be
dismissed lightly. In our view, the recommended
proposals offer a practical and suitable compromise.

There is nevertheless a very fundamental
consideration even as we appeal to the Security Council
to suspend its sanctions over Libya. Three of the
permanent members are parties to the dispute. The appeal
we make inevitably relates to their respective national
perspectives on the problem. And yet we must trust in the
ability to weigh that consideration against their
international obligations. We all have a stake in what
happened at Lockerbie. The cowardly act was an affront
not only to the safety of aviation, but to our efforts to
combat international terrorism. The sanctions imposed on
Libya can no longer be justified given the Libyan

 

willingness to release the suspects for trial at a neutral
venue.

In conclusion, our approach to the Council is rooted
in our respect for the Charter of the United Nations and the
legitimacy of the Council and its decisions under Chapters
VI and VII. We are nevertheless keenly aware that the
Council's legitimacy and the overall efficacy of its sanctions
could suffer a devastating blow if the larger members
whose common interest it is to represent perceive it as
acting unjustly.

The Organization of African Unity and the Non-
Aligned Movement have taken the position that continued
sanctions against Libya cannot be justified in light of the
compromise proposals for a settlement. Consequently,
concession by the Council in this matter will not weaken
but strengthen both its legitimacy and the respect for
international law.

