Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for giving me
this opportunity to speak before the Security Council
after the adoption of a new resolution on Libya,
resolution 2040 (2012). It gives me great pleasure to
congratulate the delegation of the United Kingdom on
presiding over the Security Council during the month
of March. I trust, Sir, that you and your delegation will
lead the Council's proceedings to the optimal results.

The Security Council's adoption today of
resolution 2040 (2012) is renewed evidence of the
Council's support for the people of Libya. It is also
evidence of the Council's keenness to maintain the
security and stability of Libya at a historic juncture in
its history as a nation. That is only natural because the
stability of Libya and its prosperity as a democratic
State will have a positive impact on security and peace
in the wider region and the entire world.

We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya for an
additional year, because the role of the Mission is
indispensable in offering technical assistance and
advice to Libya in the current critical transitional
phase, especially since the new Libyan authorities have
inherited a country that is almost devoid of State
institutions. The authorities have inherited a State that
has never experienced democracy in its contemporary
history; a State that for more than two generations
never witnessed elections; a State whose social fabric
was torn apart by the dictatorial regime; a State that
needs assistance in building its institutions and in
securing justice and respect for human rights and
national reconciliation; a State that needs its wounds
healed so that it can go forth towards democracy, the
rule of law, sustainable development and prosperity.

Since the inception of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and under the leadership of Mr. Ian
Martin, the Libyan authorities have been met with
understanding and responsiveness on the part of all
members of the Mission. It has established strong ties
with re-emerging civil society organizations. I take this
opportunity to express our gratitude and appreciation to
Mr. Ian Martin and his team. I affirm that the close
working relationship that has been formed between the
Mission and Libyan authorities will continue and grow
stronger in the coming period, which will witness the
12-2584]
first democratic elections in the country since the
1960s.

The Libyan transitional authorities have started
reconstituting the national army to take over the work
that the revolutionary brigades have been doing until
now. Those revolutionary factions have underscored
their desire to hand over their weapons to a party that
is reliable and capable of defending the homeland. All
members of the revolutionary factions look forward to
going back to their daily lives and to reintegrating the
unemployed among them into the various State
institutions. The latter is a measure that the transitional
Government has started to implement.

As Council members know, Libya is a large
country, with most of its borders in uninhabited areas
in the desert. That will require providing the army with
advanced equipment and weapons capable of
monitoring the borders and safeguarding the
homeland's security. Therefore, we have asked that the
sanctions and arms embargo imposed by Security
Council resolutions be lifted. Addressing the issue is
not a short-term matter; rather, we expect that it will be
dealt with through consultations between the Libyan
authorities and Council members over the next few
months.
12-2584]

I would like to confirm to Council members and
the entire United Nations that there is nothing to fear
from Libya - not in terms of national unity nor in
terms of security threats - because our people are
very aware of the critical nature of the current period
and because our revolutionaries are courageous and
can deflect any threat from the remnants of the former
regime, which we no longer believe could threaten our
security.

The Council has done a praiseworthy job in
defending civilians in Libya. We believe that the unity
of the Council, embodied in how it dealt with the
situation in Libya, is necessary in order to preserve its
credibility in addressing other, similar situations. We
believe that the Security Council must always stand by
peoples being subjected to killing and oppression by
their rulers.

