The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Austria, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Pakistan, Portugal, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Satoh (Japan),
Ms. Jarbussynova (Kazakhstan), Mr. Ahmad
(Pakistan), Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) and Mr. Vohidov
(Uzbekistan) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance with
the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of any objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure
to Mr. Ivo Petrov, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the Mission in Tajikistan.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Petrov to take a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting
in accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan,
document S/2000/387.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the Mission in Tajikistan, Mr. Ivo
Petrov, to whom I give the floor.


