Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Lithuanian delegation for convening today's
meeting. We welcome the presence of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, as well as her presentation of the ninth
report of the Court pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).

As we have stated on previous occasions, Chile is
aware of the multidimensional difficulties that remain
in Libya and which are detailed in the report. In the face
of these difficulties, we echo the call of the Court for all
parties involved in the conflict to refrain from attacking
civilians and committing serious crimes that continue to
be reported. We also call on the Libyan Government to
work with the Council and the international community
to develop effective cooperative strategies to prevent
war crimes from being committed and address the
problems of internally displaced persons.

We insist on the need to strengthen efforts
deployed to find an inclusive political solution aimed
at strengthening the institutions of Libya, the rule of
law and human rights, including the rights of women,
children and persons belonging to vulnerable groups. It
is also essential for the Government to fully cooperate
with the ICC and its Prosecutor. All of this should be
done in accordance with the provisions of resolution
1970 (2011) and the decisions of the Pre-Trial Chamber
dated 10 December 2014 and pursuant to resolution 2213
(2015), which urges the Libyan Government to fulfil the
obligations incumbent upon it under international law.

Once again, we acknowledge the work of the
Prosecutor in investigating the crimes committed since
February 2011 and urge her to continue in this noble
task. On this point, we view the ties of cooperation and
assistance that are being established between the ICC
and the Office of the Libyan Prosecutor-General as a
positive signal.

We think that, along the same lines, cooperation
between the Government and the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya with the International
Criminal Court is essential to putting an end to
impunity. It is in this spirit that - taking up the idea of
establishing an international contact group on judicial
issues mentioned here in the Council - we particularly
welcome the idea of including in the group prosecutors
of various nationalities who could provide material and
legal support to Libya. My country, Chile, is ready to
provide support and cooperate actively in this initiative,
bearing in mind the experience we have to share in the
area of transitional justice.

Chile will continue to work to establish a closer
relationship between the Security Council and the ICC,
especially with regard to the two cases that the Council
has referred to the Court and the challenges related
thereto. Clearly, the referrals do not close the matter
by themselves; rather, it is essential that the Council
ensure effective monitoring and support the Court's
judicial efforts in these cases in compliance with the
mandate it has been given.

The issues raised by the Prosecutor on insecurity
and lack of funding that affect the Court's work should
be duly addressed by the Council. We stress the
importance of ensuring objective accountability for
all crimes committed by the parties during the events
that occurred in Libya. I would like to reiterate the
support of my delegation for the work of the Court and
of the nationaljudicial bodies. Lastly, I express our full
readiness to work in support of initiatives that advance
the common goals of peace, security andjustice.

