Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): 1
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. I welcome Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, and thank him for his
assessment of the situation in his country. I would also
like to thank Mr. Warren Sach, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari
and the Permanent Representative of the United States
for their briefings on the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board (IAMB) of the Development Fund
for Iraq (DFI), the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the work of
the Multinational Force (MNF), respectively.

Like other members of the Council, Costa Rica
commends the efforts undertaken by the Iraqi
Government and by the international community to
promote the rule of law and economic prosperity in
that country. We encourage the Iraqi Government,
whose Minister for Foreign Affairs is with us today, to
strengthen its efforts to improve the living conditions
of its people as one of the priorities for normalization

of relations in that country as it looks towards a
democratic future. We support all efforts towards the
consolidation of the Iraqi State, a sovereign State that
is responsible and inclusive is a contribution to peace,
development and stability for the country as well as the
region.

My delegation continues to be extremely
concerned by outstanding issues, such as the protection
of human rights and the alleviation of the serious
humanitarian crisis facing Iraq. In that regard, we feel
that realistic and self-sustainable strategies to
strengthen economic and social cohesion internally and
to deal fairly with all ethnic and religious groups in the
political and economic landscape of Iraq will facilitate
the national reconciliation process that we all desire.

My country would like to stress once again the
importance of publishing written reports in all official
languages of the United Nations, under the
corresponding signature, before their presentation by
the Secretary-General or his representatives to the
Council. That would strengthen the transparency and
effective treatment of the issues that we are dealing
with.

Given the high relevance of the subjects that we
are discussing today, we would like to stress that all
States Members of this Organization recognize the
work of the International Advisory and Monitoring
Board and the Development Fund for Iraq, and also the
corrective measures that it draws up and applies when
there are any irregularities in the administration of that
Fund. We hope that that will also lead to the timely
issuance of the reports of the Secretary-General, such
as the briefing by Mr. Sach heard today, bearing in
mind that the United Nations has taken upon itself a
great responsibility and is playing a strategic role today
in alleviating the humanitarian situation in Iraq. It
would also be useful to have a copy of Mr. Sach's
speech. We share many of the concerns that have been
expressed by South Africa.

With regard to the fight against terrorism, Costa
Rica has categorically condemned the use of force and
violence to achieve political aims in all its forms and
manifestations, irrespective of who commits those acts,
where they are committed and how they are committed.
Once again, we condemn those acts and welcome
initiatives designed to eradicate such practices.

We greatly regret the reports of civilian deaths
due to the operations of the Multinational Force in
Iraq, according to the 15 March report on human rights
by UNAMI. It is unacceptable for civilians to be used
as human shields, just as it is unacceptable not to take
all possible measures to deal with terrorist groups.

We are sure that all of us present here in the
Chamber agree with and support the principle that the
protection of civilians is a central objective and one of
the main reasons why the United Nations is present on
the ground, in this particular case in Iraq.

Finally, we welcome the fact that Iraq has signed
the Convention against Torture. We again urge it to
ratify the Optional Protocol also and to ensure full
compliance with those two very important international
instruments as part of the efforts of that country to
restore peaceful and stable democracy.

