Mr. Winid (Poland): At the outset, let me join
other delegations in congratulating the delegation of
the United States on assuming the presidency of the
Council for September and to thank for it for organizing
this important open debate.

Poland aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.

We commend Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for her continuous work as
reflected in the reports on children and armed conflict.
Also, let me thank the organizers of the Children,
Not Soldiers campaign, which aims to eliminate child
recruitment by Government security forces by 2016.

It goes without saying that children are often the
ones to suffer most in the course of and after armed
conflicts. Growing up in an environment of hostility
has an immense impact on a child's development and
future adult life. It reflects on one's health, physical
integrity, education and social abilities, as well as the
advancement of one's talents.

Although a lot has already been done to prevent
the engagement of children in armed conflicts, there
is still concern about persisting threats. The recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/339), presented
by Ms. Zerrougui, rightly highlights the worsening
situation in a number of countries where children are
severely victimized - sexually assaulted, hurt or even
killed - in attacks against schools, hospitals and other
civilian facilities. Often orphaned, they are frequently
deprived of health care and medical attention and
suffer from the denial or lack of humanitarian help
and assistance. We must also not forget that, in some
parts of the world, children are abducted or recruited
as soldiers.

Under such tragic circumstances, they become
both the victims of and the actors in armed conflicts.
Their recruitment occurs in a number of ways that are
often violent and cruel. However, in some instances
and for various social and economic reasons, they enter
military service voluntarily, simply to escape poverty
or to protect their local communities. In that context,
let me recall that resolution 2143 (2014) underscores the
importance of mainstreaming child protection issues
when undertaking security-sector reform, including
through age-assessment mechanisms to prevent
underage recruitment and through the establishment of
child-protection units in national security forces.

Poland, as the prime mover of the Convention on the
Rights ofthe Child, adopted almost exactly 25 years ago,
does its utmost to raise awareness of children's rights
and to ensure that the rights of children are respected
in our own country and internationally. By way of
example, I will simply mention our co-sponsorship of
resolutions 2068 (2012) and 2143 (2014) on children and
armed conflict.

In our opinion, it is of utmost importance that all
countries sign, ratify and effectively implement the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict
in order to preserve children's dignity. Furthermore,
violators of those provisions should face international
accountability mechanisms, such as the International
Criminal Court. I hope that this open debate will
contribute to real action that will save children's lives.

