Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to express its appreciation for Malaysia's
leadership as Council President for the month of June.
I would like to thank you and your team, Mr. President,
for your effective work. I believe that under the
leadership of the incoming President, New Zealand, our
work will also have positive results.

With regard to the discussions this month, China
has stated its views, but I will now focus on three issues.

First, the situation in the Middle East at present
remains volatile. Peace talks remain the only viable way
to achieve reconciliation between Palestine and Israel.
We urge Israel and Palestine to adhere to their strategic
decision in opting for peace talks. We hope that the
new Government in Israel will take credible steps to
create favourable conditions for the start of peace talks,
which should include stopping the settlement activities,
releasing the Palestinian detainees and the full lifting
of the blockade on Gaza. The Council should, on that
point, assume the necessary responsibilities and take
concrete action to promote peace talks. China supports
all initiatives and efforts that could help the two sides
bridge their differences and resume peace talks as soon
as possible. We hope that the international community
will enhance coordination and rally all efforts for a
restart of peace talks between the two sides and promote
an improvement in the situation there. China is willing
to enhance its cooperation with the international
community and play a greater role in facilitating a
solution.

Secondly, with regard to the question of the Sudan
and Darfur, we appreciate the efforts of the Sudanese
Government to stabilize the situation in Darfur and
promote the political process and the economic and
social development of the region. The international
community should urge all parties in Darfur, especially
the rebel forces, to adhere to the agreed political solution
and to take part in the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, so as to pave the way for
a comprehensive and early solution of the question of
Darfur and the development and rebuilding of Darfur.
China values the work of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in
stabilizing the situation and promoting peace talks and
the protection of civilians. We support an extension of
the UNAMID mandate.

China has consistently stated that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned,
and take their opinions fully into consideration. We
should adjust the mandate and scale of peacekeeping
operations in the light of the developments and needs
on the ground. The Council should, in that regard, pay
attention to the request of the Sudanese Government
that the United Nations formulate an exit strategy for
UNAMID. We welcome and support the establishment of
a tripartite working group, composed ofthe Secretariat,
the Sudanese Government and the African Union, and
hope that all parties will step up consultations and
devise a reasonable proposal for a phased withdrawal
of UNAMID that is acceptable to all.

Thirdly, with regard to United Nations
peacebuilding, China believes that it should be owned,
led and driven by the countries concerned. It should
focus on supporting the countries' own institutions,
on capacity-building and on addressing the root causes
of the conflicts. On the one hand, the United Nations
should serve as a platform aimed at further promoting
coordination and cooperation in peacebuilding
among the parties in the countries concerned and the
stakeholders in the international community. We should
avoid monopolizing. We must tailor our work plan to
the actual needs of the countries concerned, optimize
the use of resources and improve the effectiveness of
our work. While ensuring the sustained stability and
development of those countries, we should also attend
to short-term returns that would allow people to enjoy
peacebuilding dividends through projects that do not
involve huge investments but bring a quick impact.
China will continue to play a positive and constructive
role in peacebuilding.

