Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
strong statement and all the members of the Security
Council, particularly the delegations of the United
States and China, for their collaboration, which has
enabled us to adopt resolution 2321 (2016), establishing
an unprecedented sanctions regime for the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

The two main reasons that Spain was a sponsor
of the resolution are, first, for the sake of consistency
and out of a sense of responsibility. It was also for
reasons of consistency that we supported resolution
2270 (2016), which responded to repeated violations
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Regrettably, however, those violations continued, and
on 9 September we witnessed a new nuclear test and
the launching of various ballistic missiles. Resolution
2270 (2016) was very clear in its intention to adopt
significant additional measures should the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea conduct a new nuclear test
or missile launch. That did indeed turn out to be the
case, and that is why we have been obliged to adopt
resolution 2321 (2016) today.

The second reason we sponsored the resolution is
our special sense of responsibility owing to the fact
that, as we know, Spain is Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006).
Because of that, it is our particular duty to ensure the
effectiveness, transparency and rigour of resolutions
having to do with the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. Since March, the Committee has worked
very hard to implement the sanctions while, I should
emphasize, striving not to worsen the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
but only to ensure that those who are responsible for
its nuclear programmes to bring them to a halt. I hope
that resolution 2321 (2016), which the United States
Ambassador has so clearly explained, achieves its aims.

Lastly, I would like to emphasize that Spain and the
Security Council have always affirmed the principle
that sanctions are not an end in themselves but rather
a means for achieving lasting peace and stability, as
the Ambassador of Japan made very clear. It is up to
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to respect
international law and work for its people's prosperity,
which is the ultimate goal of today's resolution. In the
few weeks remaining until the end of my mandate as
Chair of the 1718 Committee, nothing would give me
more satisfaction in what I hope is the near future than
to see the Committee disappear because the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has begun to comply with
its obligations under international law.

