Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): We are
pleased to welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), and would
like to thank her for her briefing on her sixth report
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).

The United States welcomes the commitment
and efforts of the Government and people of Libya
during their country's transition following 40 years
of dictatorship. We recognize that the process of
building a democratic and secure nation is a long-term
endeavour with many challenges. An important part
of that process is in the field of the rule of law, where
Libya will need to continue to build on ongoing efforts
to bolster accountability mechanisms that help support
and develop a more robust, fair and effective system of
justice.

In that regard, we welcome Libya's continued
commitment to fulfulling its international obligations,
including those related to the International Criminal
Court under resolution 1970 (2011), We also welcome
Libya's continuing cooperation in the ongoing
proceedings before the International Criminal Court.
We note with interest the recent memorandum of
understanding on burden-sharing between the Libyan
authorities and the International Criminal Court
regarding investigations and prosecutions.

Under the Rome Statute, the International Criminal
Court is complementary to national jurisdictions, The
Pre-Trial Chamber's October decision granting Libya's
admissibility challenge in the case against Abdullah
Al-Senussi, the first such decision by the International
Criminal Court, is a significant development in that
regard. We note that the Court found that the Libyan
authorities are taking concrete and progressive steps in
the domestic proceedings against Mr. Al-Senussi and
that Libya has demonstrated that it is willing and able
to genuinely investigate and prosecute the case.

In those proceedings, we see the principle of
complementarity applied in the context of a country
transitioning out of conflict. The Prosecutor's report
notes a number of efforts that Libya has undertaken to
develop its justice institutions and mechanisms. Those
include Libya's new transitional justice law, the Fact-
finding and Reconciliation Commission and a new
draft law on rape as a war crime. We welcome those and
other initiatives, including those that help build much
needed capacity in the justice system so that justice can
be delivered more effectively.

Finally, we would like to emphasize that the Libyan
Government must work to ensure that those in detention
centres are not held without due process and that they
are treated humanely, including in accordance with
Libya's law criminalizing torture, adopted in April.
In the end, much of the responsibility for ensuring
accountability for crimes in Libya will fall to the
domestic authorities. Even where it has jurisdiction,
the International Criminal Court cannot pursue every
case, nor is it charged with the general monitoring or
oversight of Libya's overall progress in implementing

justice and rule of law initiatives.

In the light of that mandate, we appreciate the
Prosecutor's briefing and how she intends to focus her
Office's work as the Court carries out its responsibility
to investigate and prosecute those who bear the greatest
responsibility for crimes. The United States stands
ready to assist Libya as it works to reform its justice
sector, strengthen the rule of law and advance human
rights. We strongly believe that those and other areas of
Libya's transition need to be fully addressed.

We look forward to working with the international
community, including the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, and other international partners in
a targeted and coordinated way to ensure adequate
support to Libya as it undertakes such critical efforts.
The United States also looks forward to continuing our
active engagement with the Office of the Prosecutor
and the International Criminal Court, consistent with
our law and our policy to advance accountability for
atrocities.

