Slovakia commends the initiative of the Niger to organize an open debate on humanitarian effects of environmental degradation and peace and security. My delegation associates itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex 21). Conflicts around the world are increasing in number, becoming more protracted and fragmented and pushing unprecedented numbers of people into humanitarian need. Factors such as environmental degradation contribute to humanitarian crises. The impact of climate change has become increasingly visible. It poses existential risks for future generations and is having real impact on more and more people around the world. Changes in climate have a multiplier effect, leading to other problems, with effects impacting areas ranging from ecosystem stability to food production and human conflict. Ecosystem and biodiversity loss, deforestation, water, air and soil pollution, the overuse of natural resources, as well as demographic pressure and urbanization, trigger a serious set of social and humanitarian consequences. Slovakia recognizes that the effects of environmental degradation increase the risk of humanitarian crises, displacement and conflict and have a severe impact on the most vulnerable populations. The integration of the environment into humanitarian action is critical to ensure the effectiveness, sustainability and accountability of humanitarian operations. The summary by the Chair of the World Humanitarian Summit recognized that humanitarian assistance alone will never adequately address or sustainably reduce the needs of the world's most vulnerable people; rather, a new coherent approach is required based on addressing root causes, increasing political diplomacy for prevention and conflict resolution and bringing humanitarian, development and peacebuilding efforts together. The humanitarian-development-peace nexus approach aims to address the root causes of disaster-related displacement and minimize its impact. We have a range of important tools at our disposal. We need to continue to prioritize the environmental care and sustainable management of natural resources for preventing conflict and building peace. Therefore, we believe that the Security Council should use its potential for conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding strategies. The United Nations, through the Joint Environment Unit of the United Nations Environment Programme and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, works at the interface of the environment and emergencies, liaising closely with humanitarian and environmental actors to strengthen the sustainability of humanitarian responses. The ways in which crises are caused by and affect people and the natural environment in which they live are increasingly complex. Action is needed now to prevent and mitigate foreseeable humanitarian crises, and in particular to avoid environmental damage, which can result in forced migration. We have to continue identifying ways of proactively addressing environmental issues in humanitarian action, seek necessary global policy responses and develop new approaches with the aim of being better prepared. Slovakia is committed to advocating for the protection of the natural environment in armed conflict through supporting compliance with international humanitarian law and by taking all appropriate measures to address the protection needs of civilians.
