Ms. Zahir (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
congratulate Poland on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and thank it for its efforts aimed
at peacefully resolving some of the long-standing
conflicts around the world. Let me also extend our
appreciation to all the delegations involved in bringing
the issue of children and armed conflict - and the
severity of the crisis in war-torn areas 4 to the forefront
of our attention. I also wish to thank the briefers for
their updates to the Council.

The Maldives is deeply concerned to learn that
over 24,000 violations were committed against children
across 20 countries, as documented in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/509). Furthermore,
attacks on schools and other educational facilities
severely hamper access to education and restrict the
development of children in affected areas. We concur
with the findings and the recommendations of the
Secretary-General's report and urge all Member States
to consider them recommendations carefully.

My country is committed to ensuring that the
rights of the child are protected and that every action
taken is in the best interests of the child. The Maldives
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child in
1991, and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflicts in 2004. We did so in the
belief that an international instrument to address the
grave issue of children in armed conflicts could be
holistically addressed through the various mechanisms,
responses and assistance programmes. However, it
is clear that more needs to be done, especially at the
international level.
While the Maldives has worked towards the
incorporation of the Convention into its own domestic
legislative framework, work remains ongoing to further
improve and amend the existing legislation to reflect
our human rights obligations with respect to the rights
of the child. The Maldives will strive to improve
stakeholder coordination in strengthening the child-
protection system. Despite much effort, we continue to
face mounting challenges on human-resources capacity,
technical expertise and childcare services. As we work
to promote and protect the rights of our children, we are
also committed to protecting the rights of children all
over the world. The dreams of a child in the Maldives
are the same of those of a child in Syria, Afghanistan,
Palestine or anywhere else in the world.

We as the international community must collectively
ensure that children caught up in the horrors of war are
not swept aside due to indifference, or allowed to be
caught up in diplomatic bureaucracy. We must decry
each and every abuse 4 of any magnitude 4 loudly
and clearly for all ears to hear and for all hearts to bleed
in sympathy. Sexual violence against children can never
be tolerated, and we need every country to implement
protection laws at the national level. The United Nations
must also keep enforcing its zero-tolerance policies.

We call for the full implementation of resolution
2427 (2018) and for assurances that accurate and
timely reports will be collected and promptly reported
to national, regional, subregional and international
governing bodies and institutions to protect
children's welfare. We must further accelerate our
efforts on providing resources and support to those
already victimized. Complex challenges such as the
denial of humanitarian aid as a tactic of war are exposing
millions of children to hunger, disease, homelessness
and sexual exploitation, leaving their dreams shattered.
Strength in the battle against evil can be achieved only
through the consolidation of our efforts.

The Council must ensure the implementation of
the agenda on children and armed conflict through
the appointment of dedicated child-protection advisers
in every peacekeeping mission and must engage in
conflict-resolution negotiations as a priority for the
protection of children in the process.

As outlined in resolution 1882 (2009), Member
States must protect and provide support for children
in armed conflict, including children with disabilities.
There is a worrisome tendency to overlook children
with disabilities, whose natural brilliance may be
less evident to our superficial sensitivities. Yet they
require a gentle hand to pull them away from malign
environments that may cause them permanent harm.
Member States must also provide children with
disabilities with the resources necessary to ensure their
health and safety while also providing a normative
lifestyle among their peers.

Let me conclude by expressing the full support
of the Maldives for the Secretary-General's efforts
in addressing this grave situation. We remain deeply
saddened by the reports of children caught up in war-
torn areas, in detention facilities and in other vulnerable
situations where they may be open to exploitation, sale
or prostitution. The Maldives will always defend the
innocence of the children of the world and the future
that they hold in their hands.

