Mr. Gambari: On behalf of the Secretariat, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for your initiative of
organizing this meeting and all the members of the
Council, as well as the delegations that took the floor
to speak on this important and timely topic, "Conflicts
in Africa: Security Council missions and United
Nations mechanisms to promote peace and security". In
particular, my new Office, which has responsibility for
preparing reports to the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council on critical issues
affecting Africa, especially the nexus between peace
and development, is grateful for those interventions.
All of us in the Secretariat will reflect on the views and
the proposals made today and will continue to offer our
support for Security Council missions to Africa and
other United Nations system-wide mechanisms to
promote peace and security, especially in Africa.

The recommendations made today relating to the
forthcoming missions to Central and West Africa can
only strengthen the terms of reference for the missions
and enhance a successful outcome. I hope that those
suggestions will be taken on board. In my view,
Security Council missions to Africa are not goals in
themselves. Of course, the missions demonstrate
solidarity with the millions of Africans in conflict
areas, in particular the millions of women and children
who suffer disproportionately from the multiplicity of
conflicts on the continent. Council missions also
represent valuable further education for those who
participate and for Council members who receive their
reports upon their return to Headquarters.

Beyond all that, however, it is essential that
missions add real value to existing concrete efforts in
support of conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.
In that regard, missions and the Security Council as a
whole will need to avoid situations where expectations
for peace and development in Africa are raised, only to
be subsequently disappointed. It is true, of course, that
a primary responsibility for resolving conflict in Africa
lies with Africans themselves. However, there is
growing evidence in Cote d'lvoire, Burundi and
elsewhere that Africans are serious in their
commitment to peace and security in their respective
subregions and in the region as a whole. Therefore, the
international community, led by the United Nations and
spearheaded by the Security Council, has a
responsibility under the Charter to support those
efforts.

Finally, our discussion today has pointed to a
number of key conclusions that, I believe, must guide
future action by the Security Council and by the United
Nations system as a whole.

First, priority must be accorded to conflict
prevention and to post-conflict peace-building in
Africa. In that regard, poverty eradication, encouraging
the politics of inclusion and addressing other root
causes of conflicts must be tackled as a matter of
urgency.

Secondly, helping Africans to build capacity for
peace operations is essential. In most cases, they have
the human resources and a tradition of peacekeeping,
but not the logistics or the financial resources to mount
large-scale peacekeeping operations on the continent.

Thirdly, the regional dimensions of conflicts in
Africa must be taken fully into account in United
Nations efforts to resolve conflicts there.

Fourthly, working with the African Union and
subregional organizations is a necessity, not a
privilege, in our efforts to prevent and resolve African
conflict.

Fifthly, it is essential to establish reliable and
sustained lines of communication with key actors and
parties to conflicts on the ground in Africa, and with
those outside Africa who have influence on those
parties, so that the Security Council's resolutions and
presidential statements are transmitted, received and
accepted by the parties on the ground. As we all know,
it is one thing to adopt resolutions and to issue
presidential statements here in New York and quite
another for those statements and resolutions to be
understood and respected by the parties to conflicts on
the ground in Africa.

Finally, periodic joint meetings between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council,
and even joint missions of both organs to conflict areas
in Africa, may be considered as useful tools, especially
for realizing the peace-building objectives that we all
share. Above all - as you said only a few minutes ago,
Mr. President - Council discussions on African
conflicts and Council missions to Africa need to be
followed by concrete actions, driven by the political
will to commit the necessary resources to conflict
prevention, management and resolution and to post-
conflict peace-building efforts in Africa.

