Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish you every success in your work. I would also like
to thank you for promptly agreeing to the request made
by Palestine and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to hold this important meeting. I also
cannot fail to take this opportunity to thank the
representative of China, Ambassador Wang Yingfan,
for his efficient and successful conduct of the Council's
meetings last month.

The Council is convened today, for the third time
in less than six months, to discuss the situation in
Palestine in the light of increased Zionist aggression
against the defenceless Palestinian people. The Council
is meeting at a time when the Zionist entity, the
occupying Power, is carrying out daily bombings of
Palestinian towns, villages and refugee camps using the
most sophisticated weapons of destruction supplied by
the United States, in particular F-16 fighter planes,
attack helicopters, depleted uranium shells and toxic
gas.

Against whom, exactly, is this merciless war
machine pitted? The answer is against unarmed
civilians, innocent women and children, throwing
stones at the occupier and getting killed or injured by
the hundreds and thousands. Civilian Palestinian
dwellings are being bombarded and public buildings
are being destroyed. The Palestinians are prevented
from going home. They are driven from their houses.
Evacuations and confiscations take place daily. Human
rights are trampled underfoot. Operations of
assassination and physical liquidation are committed
against them. Moreover, they must face collective
punishment, siege and isolation.

Despite the gravity of these crimes, which are
being committed against the people of Palestine day
after day and hour after hour, and despite the fact that
63 Palestinian letters of protest have been sent to the
Security Council in the course of recent months to
request prompt intervention to end Zionist terrorism,
the Security Council has remained silent and powerless
to intervene to end the suffering of the Palestinian
people. The Council will continue to be powerless
because its power is constrained by a tyrannical,
arrogant and imperialist Power. I am referring to the
United States of America, a country that provides
military, moral and material cover for the crimes that
the Zionist entity is committing against the people of
Palestine and their children.

Unfortunately, the Council's policy of double
standards in dealing with problems affecting the
Islamic world in general and the Arab world in
particular - and the Israeli occupation of Palestine
above all - is a flagrant example of the injustice and
ill-treatment suffered by the people of the third world,
and more particularly by Muslim people. The death of
Palestinian children and civilians and the death
machines used by Israel for physical elimination have
to date not been enough to wrest from the Council even
a single declaration, however timid, condemning
Zionist terrorism and deploring the acts committed by
that neo-Nazi entity.

The President of the United States misses no
opportunity to contact the criminal Zionists to offer
them his condolences when a single Israeli soldier is
killed by a hero of the Palestinian resistance. Yet,
Palestinian children are killed, besieged and starved
with the blessing of the United States, offered without
remorse or morality. The United States loves to give
others lessons in morality. It also claims to be devoted
to human rights, while shamelessly supporting the
criminal Zionist occupying forces and calling on both
parties, including the victims of aggression, to show
the same restraint and moderation in order to save the
peace process. But what peace are we talking about?
What kind of neutral sponsor of peace is the United
States speaking about? What we are saying here is that
the resistance of the people of Palestine is a right that
cannot be taken away. It is the legitimate right to self-
defence, which is enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and in principles of international law.
True peace cannot be established by cajoling the
occupier and imposing submissive solutions on
vulnerable, occupied people. Peace can be established
only at the cost of a bitter struggle; it must be torn out
of the hands of the occupier by all means available.
Such peace cannot be achieved through American
mediation, because the United States sides with the
occupier. It is armed struggle and the national intifada
of the Palestinian people that will be able to wrest
Palestinian rights from the aggressor. It is Palestinians
who are daily watering the land of Palestine with their
blood.

Allow me in this Chamber to hail the valiant,
courageous people of Palestine, who are fighting
Zionist and American imperialism every day and every
hour. I pay true and sincere tribute to the Palestinian
martyrs who without hesitation give their lives to
defend their country. I also wish to salute those who
resist in defence of their rights and their homeland.

The crimes committed by the Zionist occupation
forces against defenceless, innocent Palestinian citizens
have exceeded all the crimes previously committed by
occupiers, as the annals of history show. Even the
apartheid regime of South Africa, despite its brutality,
would never have dared to use fighter planes against
innocent, defenceless civilians, as the Israeli Zionists
do when they shell peaceful Palestinian villages and
towns.

The sadism of the Zionist occupiers and the
barbarity of the occupation have succeeded in driving
68 per cent of the inhabitants of occupied Palestine
from their homes since the beginning of the occupation
in 1948. That is why there are 4.5 million Palestinian
refugees waiting to return to their homes. The Zionist
occupier is uprooting more than 150,000 olive trees
from Palestinian land, in addition to confiscating all
water resources from the Palestinians, who own the
land and the water. The occupation forces, in plain
view and with the knowledge of everyone, delight in
detaining old people and sick people for many hours at
inspection and transit points. Media reports tell of sick
people dying at crossing points because of the severity
of the wait and the humiliation and insults to which
they are subjected during long waiting periods.

The international community, represented by
States and Governments and by the United Nations
itself, where we are meeting today, must work to
restore the right of the Palestinian people to the return
of all usurped territory, and the right of refugees to
return to their homes, from which they had been chased
by the Zionist usurpers. The Security Council today
must shoulder its responsibility. It must adopt
appropriate measures under the United Nations Charter
to put an end to Zionist aggression, to make the
occupation forces scrupulously respect the provisions
of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 1949.
We believe that the Security Council should respond on
an emergency basis to Iraq's offer to devote not 1
million but 1 billion euros of its oil revenues to
assisting its brothers in occupied Palestine, because
they are in urgent need of economic assistance.

If we all agree that the acts committed by
Zionism have led to the destruction of the economic
infrastructure of Palestine, why then would the Council
not allow Iraq to assist its Palestinian brothers in
rebuilding their economic infrastructure? That would
mean keeping silent in the face of suffering, accepting
it and contributing indirectly to the continuation of this
tragic situation.

In conclusion, I would like to say, so as not to
waste more time in making speeches, that what we
must do is to adopt specific, emergency measures to
protect the Palestinian people from the murders and
massacres that have been committed against it for more
than 50 years and to enable it to regain its due rights. If
that is not done, everyone - and I say everyone -
will bear the responsibility, and regrets will then serve
no purpose.

