Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Special Envoy
and Ambassador Bale for their remarks this morning.
I think that their briefings underlined very clearly
the interconnected nature of the challenges facing
the region and the need for an integrated approach
that addresses the root causes of conflict. We fully
support their efforts to strengthen regional dialogue in
order to advance peace and development efforts in the
Great Lakes.

Five years after its adoption, the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region continues to be
relevant for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, regional stability and the United Nations and
the international community's engagement for peace in
the region. Regional leadership and ownership of the
Framework are critical. Complementary efforts such
as the Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework are
more likely to be effective when accompanied by strong
national leadership.

We fully support the important regional efforts
under way to implement the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. These include the
revitalization of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
and the active engagement by the chairmanships of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region on
issues of regional stability, peaceful electoral processes
and transition. In addition, the use of the expanded
Joint Verification Mechanism, which helped defuse
tensions involving a February cross-border incident in
North Kivu, is welcome. Those examples illustrate how
further strengthening the region's forums for dialogue,
information-sharing and transparency, as well as
increased joint monitoring, will enhance mutual trust
and transparency. That could help the region resolve
key issues central to building sustainable peace.
The United Nations has an important role to play in
supporting those efforts, and we fully support the work
of the Special Envoy in that regard.

The current situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is the most pressing issue facing the region.
The severe humanitarianissue, the delicate political
situation and increased insecurity are of great concern,
and also potentially threaten regional stability. We
fully support regional efforts to resolve the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Close
cooperation with and among those actors continues
to be essential, however. For that reason, we welcome
the current cooperation among the guarantors of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We firmly support
the efforts of the Republic of the Congo, as ICGLR
Chair, together with Angola, for fostering dialogue
with the Democratic Republic of Congo. In partnership
with regional actors, we must all support the holding of
credible, transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections
on 23 December 2018, with the ensuing democratic
transfer of power in accordance with the Constitution
and the New Year's Eve agreement. That is necessary
to foster stability and peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

For there to be lasting peace and stability in the
region, it is essential that women's voices are heard. We
strongly endorse the call from the Women's Platform
for the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for greater support for women's participation in peace
and political processes, especially in the context of
elections. More needs to be done to implement the
Nairobi declarations and to take necessary actions
involving disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement. The Judicial
Cooperation Network could also help in the areas of
judicial cooperation and combating impunity.

The Great Lakes region is home to an estimated
130 million people spread across five countries. The
people of the region have suffered from decades of
instability and conflict. Successfully overcoming
challenges will require concerted action at the national,
regional and international levels that links peace
and security and economic and social development.
Continued leadership from the region, including the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, will be essential if the people of the
Great Lakes region are to finally have the peace and
sustainable development that they desire.

