Mr. Rabi (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to commend the Polish presidency for
convening this open debate, which addresses a subject
central to our multilateral work, particularly within the
Security Council.

Thanks to international law, which has been
established and strengthened over the years, peace,
security and stability prevail in the majority of countries
of our world today. To take stock of the importance of
international law, let us imagine, for a moment, that our
world existed without it. Chaos would reign supreme
everywhere. We would see wars everywhere. We would
would still be in the era ofthe law ofthe jungle, defined
by some philosophers as the survival of the fittest. We
must therefore welcome the success that international
law has guaranteed us.

Clearly, international law is not respected
everywhere. It is unfortunate to have to note that while
old conflicts continue, new ones are emerging in which
international law is constantly trampled. Accordingly,
the Charter of the United Nations must maintain its
primacy. Its purposes and principles must guide the
actions of States and the international community. It is
incumbent on us to respect and protect the sacrosanct
principles enshrined in the Charter, namely, the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity
of States.

Moreover, respect for international law is
predicated on the adoption of a comprehensive and
multidimensional approach based on the primacy of the
law in all aspects of international relations, particularly
through respect for the Charter. In that regard, particular
attention must be paid to the peaceful settlement of
disputes through dialogue, negotiation and mediation.
Furthermore, warring parties in conflicts are obligated
to respect international law, in particular international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
as they guarantee the protection of civilians.

For its part, the international community should
invest more in conflict prevention, particularly
by strengthening States' capacities in the areas of
democracy and the rule of law. To that end, it is essential
that States be provided with the national mechanisms
enabling them to promote and protect human rights
and establish democratic, transparent, legitimate and
credible institutions able to meet the needs of the people
in all aspects of daily life. The goal is to guarantee the
principles of accessible, effective and equitable justice,
ensure respect for the law based on equality, protect
individuals and allow them to exercise their political,
economic, social and political and cultural rights
effectively.

In conclusion, I reaffirm the Kingdom of Morocco's
strong commitment to a multilateralism that respects the
rules and principles of international law. In that regard,

Morocco remains engaged with the United Nations
as the legitimate and representative Organization and
the appropriate framework within which to pursue
collective efforts to establish an international society
that enjoys peace, security, sustainable development
and respect for human rights.

