Mr. Dunn (United States of America): Let me
also thank the Government of France for hosting this
important meeting on the stabilization of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his insightful statement, and
Minister Tshibanda for his candid remarks.

The United States is committed to working with
the Congolese Government and the international
community towards our shared objective, namely,
peace and security in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region, in which the country plays such
a substantial role. We support ongoing efforts to
increase stability, reduce the insecurity in which too
many civilians still live, and ensure legitimate
governance and a strong, credible democratic process
for the country's upcoming elections.

On behalf of the United States, let me again
express our deep sorrow for the tragic United Nations
air accident on 4 April, in which 32 individuals lost
their lives. We offer our condolences and our lasting
appreciation to Special Representative Meece, the men
and women of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and all United Nations
personnel who work with such dedication in
challenging environments.

I will focus on three points today. First, for long-
term stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to take root, the country's civilians need and deserve
greater security. We therefore commend MONUSCO
for its efforts to implement its mandate fully, especially
its innovative efforts to protect civilians. We applaud
the development of a Mission-wide strategy, including
the deployment of community alert networks and
community liaison assistants. These important
initiatives better connect peacekeepers with
communities at risk and enable MONUSCO, despite
the all too real risks, to work quickly and effectively to
respond to potential crises.

Important progress has been made. Much of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is relatively stable.
Although important challenges remain in the east,
security there has increased. The reduction of armed
groups continues. Important efforts towards
reintegration and disarmament have taken place.
Nonetheless, insecurity persists in the east and
northeast. State authority remains extremely weak and
violent militias continue to fuel conflict. To take two
troublesome examples, the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) and the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Rwanda continue to kill, rape, abduct and displace
civilians in shocking numbers. Armed entities,
including elements of the State security forces, also
illegally exploit the country's natural resources,
terrorizing innocent civilians as part of their efforts to
control communities that live near lucrative mining
areas. That can allow them reap ill-gotten mining-
related profits, which in turn sustain the conflict and
prolong its suffering and abuses.

Far more must be done to deal with these violent
armed groups. We remain committed to helping the
Democratic Republic of the Congo address this
scourge, in part through security-sector reform
assistance. We have trained a light infantry battalion in
Kisangani, which is now operating in areas victimized
by the LRA. We provided ongoing support to develop
more Congolese military-justice personnel and
strengthen the country's military-justice system. We
are also helping develop Congolese defence
institutions.

Armed groups often rely on the mineral trade to
sustain their operations. My Government is therefore
actively working to enact regulations that will require
companies publicly traded in the United States to
ensure that their mineral purchases do not help violent
groups. We call on all Member States to support
resolution 1952 (2010) and urge companies within their
jurisdictions to exercise due diligence over their supply
of minerals that stoke conflict in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are also
working with companies, civil society groups and
Governments in the region to ensure that the trade in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo's minerals does
not help armed groups. We continue to partner with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region on
these efforts, and we urge its Government to take steps
to demilitarize the mines and reduce armed actors in
the east of the country.

The second point I would like to address is the
upcoming national and legislative elections. These
could be historic. The Congolese will lead these
elections, which we hope will be credible and fair. The
Congolese can demonstrate their commitment as we
approach the 28 November presidential and legislative
elections.

Hurdles remain. A new electoral law has yet to be
passed. The recently released electoral calendar is
ambitious and it leaves scant room for error. The
logistical challenges are substantial. Security remains a
serious concern. In the past, members of the State
security forces have abused and threatened journalists.
Intimidation of domestic human rights defenders
continues. MONUSCO may lose key mobility and air
assets that could help the elections, just as they are
needed most.

We therefore call on the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to demonstrate the
highest regard for the democratic process and to
continue its work to ensure transparent, open and fair
elections, with freedom of movement for all candidates
and journalists. We will be closely monitoring
developments in urban and rural areas alike, as the
electoral process should be credible throughout the
country. We will also provide approximately
$11 million in electoral support, including election
monitoring and civic education, in coordination with
partners such as the International Foundation for
Electoral Systems and the Carter Center. We also
support MONUSCO's efforts to improve the elections'
technical and logistical aspects, as well as Radio
Okapi's work to help cover these elections.

While the international community plays an
important role supporting the electoral process,
ultimately it is the Congolese Government's
responsibility to provide the necessary support and
security. We look forward to working with the
Government in this regard.

Thirdly, let me underscore the importance of
longer-term stabilization for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its neighbours. True progress will
depend on tackling the underlying causes of insecurity
and impunity in order to build the institutions that can
support good governance.
The conviction of nine military personnel for
having ordered and carried out mass rapes in Fizi is a
milestone. By taking action, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has strengthened
the message to perpetrators of sexual violence: no one
is immune from prosecution.

The United States is deeply committed to ending
impunity and developing democracy in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including initiatives to support
free speech, governance, the rule of law, judicial
independence and accountability. For example, we
have helped build up the Congolese justice system's
forensic capacity to investigate mass killings and
sexual and gender-based violence. That has made it
easier to prosecute dozens of rapists and perpetrators of
sexual violence. We have also allocated more than
$2 million in new communications technologies to
better protect civilians in the Kivu provinces through
early-warning mechanisms and to support joint field
investigations in the east by United Nations and
Congolese military prosecutors.

The United States, working with the strategies of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo Government
and the United States, has developed a comprehensive
approach to help tackle sexual and gender-based
violence. That includes $42 million in the Kivus and in
Orientale and Maniema provinces to prevent future
violence and take better care of survivors, as well as a
three-year, $15 million initiative to scale up
programmes to fight HIV/AIDS.

We continue to strengthen the Congolese civilian
and military justice systems through long-term
capacity-building and efforts to reduce impunity.

In conclusion, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must continue to take concrete
steps to address the full spectrum of challenges the
country faces. As Council members, we must also
provide our political support to peace and stabilization.
The United States is committed to doing so and to
working with the Congolese Government and the
international community towards our common
objective of peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the region.

