Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of January, and to express my appreciation for your efforts. I would also like to align Egypt with the statements of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Group of Arab States and the Islamic Group. I express my thanks and appreciation to the United Nations briefers for their briefings at the beginning of this debate. I would also like to welcome the new members who joined the Security Council at the beginning of this year. The Middle East has started a new year and a new decade amid grave challenges and crises that loom over the region, undermining its security and stability, especially given that over the past few years the region has witnessed revolutions and radical changes that led to the collapse of some countries and the spread of terrorism. Such developments have increased the suffering that the Middle East has endured for decades as a result of protracted crises, most notably the lack of a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the Palestinian question. The Security Council has adopted numerous resolutions on the Palestinian question, the most recent of which was resolution 2334 (2016). Those resolutions provide the foundations for a just solution to that question, as do other terms of reference within the peace process, especially the Arab Peace Initiative and the principle of land for peace. Nevertheless, the Palestinian question remains unresolved, while the prospects of a just and fair solution for the Palestinian people have diminished amid the continuous deterioration due to the practices of the Israeli occupation authorities. Last year, the occupied Palestinian territories witnessed further deterioration of the conditions on the ground as the Israeli occupation authorities continued to confiscate more land, expel Palestinian citizens from their homes, demolish property and build settlement units in the West Bank - all of which runs counter to international agreements and all efforts to revive peace negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli parties. This meeting of the Security Council is one of tens - or even hundreds - of meetings held by the Council on the Palestinian question, but the Palestinian people are still struggling as they seek to achieve their legitimate rights. How long will the current situation continue and how long will the Palestinian people have to suffer without a solution? It is no longer any use to hold monthly Council meetings on the Palestinian question to review the situation without any clear or concrete steps towards achieving a solution.Egypt reaffirms that the Palestinian question is the core issue in terms of stability in the Middle East. There will be no stability in the region until the Palestinian people are granted their rights and all Arab lands occupied in 1967, including the occupied Syrian Golan, are liberated. The many crises that plague the Middle East should not divert our attention from the reality of which we are all aware. Certain regional actors are interfering in the affairs of countries of the region, undermining their security and stability in order to pursue their own national interests, in blatant disregard of commitments or rights under international law and the Charter of the United Nations. The region has witnessed a grave rise in violence and tension, including in the Gulf, while a number of regional and international actors have resorted to the use of force and the cross-targeting of interests, including repeated attacks on civilian targets. Such actions clearly indicate the need to take immediate measures, including by the Security Council, to prevent any further escalation. We urge all parties to fully comply with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and international law, particularly by refraining from the use of force, respecting the sovereignty of States and ceasing to interfere in their internal affairs under any pretext, as well as refraining immediately from supporting terrorist groups and illegitimate militias. Egypt underscores the importance of intensifying preventive diplomacy and confidence-building efforts in the Middle East in order to defuse tensions and spare the region the devastating consequences of further destructive military confrontations. In that context, Egypt expresses its deep concern regarding the deteriorating situation in sisterly Libya, including flagrant violations of the arms embargo and destructive external interference, rendering the achievement of peace and stability in Libya even more difficult. Such circumstances serve only the interests of armed militias, terrorist organizations and organized crime networks, including human traffickers, who seek to take advantage of the situation in the country. They exacerbate the suffering of the Libyan people, lead to further violations of human rights and international humanitarian law, and threaten stability in neighbouring countries, particularly in the African Sahel region, where the situation poses a grave threat to international peace and security. Egypt welcomes the outcome of the recent Berlin conference on Libya, in which Egypt was an active participant. We reiterate our full support for all efforts aimed at creating the conditions necessary for the resumption of the Libyan political process on the basis of the Libyan Political Agreement signed in Skhirat in 2015. We believe that there is no military solution to the crisis in Libya; rather, the solution must be Libyan- led and Libyan-owned. Egypt calls on all countries and stakeholders that participated in the recent Berlin conference to commit to implementing its outcomes, especially with regard to upholding the arms embargo and sincerely cooperating within the framework of the international follow-up committee established at the conference, in order to achieve the desired peace and stop the bloodshed of the fraternal Libyan people. In conclusion, Egypt hopes that the New Year will bring a glimmer of hope for the resolution of the Palestinian question, while the Palestinian people are granted their legitimate right to establish their independent State along the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We also hope to achieve security, stability and development throughout the Middle East as we work towards a better future for the peoples of the region and for the generations to come.
