Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman): Allow me, first, to extend
my congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Council and to
wish you well as you continue to lead the Council in
the coming weeks. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Belinga-Eboutou of Cameroon for the
excellent manner in which he guided the Council's
work last month.

We are meeting today to continue consideration
of the final report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2002/1146). My delegation has carefully read the
report and listened attentively to Ambassador
Mahmoud Kassem when he presented it to the Council
on 24 October. My delegation does not wish to enter
into the causes that led to the violent conflict and
suffering of the past years in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Suffice it to say that my delegation is
encouraged that, since the signing of the Pretoria and
Luanda Agreements, much progress has been made
towards achieving peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It is through peace that the Government of
that country will once again be able to exert its
authority over all of its territory, its natural resources
and its economic activities.
As I turn to the report of the Panel, I will restrict
my comments to those paragraphs pertaining to one
company and its chairman. I cannot but express my
delegation's strong concerns at the wrongful
allegations, factual errors, hearsay and uncorroborated
information propagated against Oryx Natural
Resources, the most negative of which is that it is a
front for the Zimbabwe Defence Forces.

Oryx Natural Resources (ONR) is a private
limited company and derives its capital from Arab Gulf
countries. Its chairman is an Omani national. ONR
established a joint-venture company called Sengamines
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to explore and exploit a 792 square
kilometre concession of land located within the
Government-controlled area of the country. ONR is a
49 per cent shareholder in Sengamines, while the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
holds the remaining 51 per cent. To date, ONR has
invested over $100 million in that joint venture. It
employs 1,200 nationals and affects the lives of
100,000 people living in the concession area. In an area
where there was no piped water, the nationals can now
get fresh water right at their doorstep. Where there
were no schools, their children can now attend well-
constructed schools, with books and uniforms supplied
by the company. Where there were no medical
facilities, the company has built clinics and is
undertaking the refurbishing of a local hospital. Where
there were no roads, more than 300 kilometres of roads
have been constructed.

In short, Sengamines has created an infrastructure
that has delivered significant benefits for the local
community and has even won an award for being the
pillar of the economy of Kasai Oriental. The benefits to
the population were echoed in the statement to the
Council on 24 October by Mr. She Okitundu, Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
who said, "My delegation believes that the natural
resources and other forms of wealth of the country
must first and foremost benefit its people" (S/PV.4634, pg. 6). By the end of 2003, ONR plans to be producing
a significant share of the world's supply of rough
diamonds from the Sengamines concession in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Unfortunately, its success has brought upon it
unfavourable, envious and malicious allegations from
its competitors, who have been willing to go to any
length to discredit and slander it. After 11 September,
the mere imputation of an association with Osama Bin
Laden and the Al Qaeda network has the effect of
pronouncing a death sentence on the accused. A very
reputable broadcasting company did just that. And after
it was threatened with a lawsuit, it made an apology on
its newscast. Other questionable sources have been the
suppliers of wrongful allegations, which, unfortunately,
made their way into the report now before the Council.

My delegation wishes to make the following
observations. First, having studied the report of the
Panel of Experts and its related documents, we could
not find any proof to substantiate the allegations made
against Oryx Natural Resources (ONR) and its
chairman. Secondly, ONR, funded by private Gulf
investors, and in joint venture with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, aims at
contributing towards the economic and social
development of that country.

Thirdly, we have not heard of any complaints
against ONR and its chairman from the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, neither in the
statement delivered by its Minister of Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation, nor in documents
submitted to this Council. Surely the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is more
competent than any body in determining whether a
company operating in its area of jurisdiction is
legitimate or not. In addition, ONR has received a
letter of support and appreciation from the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Fourthly, from what we were able to determine
from representatives of countries neighbouring the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, there were no
serious complaints against ONR that would warrant its
inclusion in this report. Fifthly, we fail to find any
credible reason why this matter is before the Council in
the first place. My delegation calls on the Council to
protect and uphold the reputations of the companies
and individuals mentioned in Annexes I and II of the
report and to close forthwith this file so as not to
undermine their legitimate achievements through these
false accusations.

It is my delegation's hope that the Council will
seriously take into consideration the grave concerns
expressed by the delegations that have spoken before
me and that the Council will take appropriate action to
rectify the damaging and incorrect information
contained in the report.

