Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tanin, for his briefing.
I also welcome the presence of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Ivica Dacie, and the Ambassador of Kosovo to the
United States, Ms. Vlora Citaku, for their statements.

At the outset, I would like to turn to recent
developments, which I regret to say have not been
conducive to creating a climate for the normalization
of relations between the two parties. We have taken
note of the adoption by the Kosovo Assembly of
laws strengthening the mandate and capacity of the
Kosovo Security Force. While we recognize Kosovo's
sovereign right to legislate in this area, Belgium regrets
the timing of this initiative and the lack of national
and international consultations. We also regret the
imposition of an import tax on goods from Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we call on the Kosovar
authorities to lift it immediately.

It should be noted that the two measures that I
have just mentioned are part of a broader context of
conflicting relations between the two parties. We
therefore call on Serbia and Kosovo to refrain from any
action or statement that may stoke tensions.

The conclusion of a comprehensive legally binding
agreement on the normalization of relations is the only
way to achieve regional stability. We call on the Serbian
and Kosovar Presidents to fully engage in the dialogue
conducted under the auspices of the European Union.
Both parties must uphold their commitments to creating
an environment conducive to dialogue. We stress
the importance of including civil society, including
women and young people, in this process. Belgium
fully supports the efforts of the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini, to that end.

We welcome the compromise reached in the Council
on reducing the cycle of meetings and reporting on this
subject. The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the United Nations
have undoubtedly contributed to an improvement of the
situation in comparison with the situation 20 years ago.
The challenges currently facing Kosovo are, however,
primarily addressed in the context of European
integration, in cooperation with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. Furthermore, as I
have already recalled, the dialogue between Serbia and
Kosovo is conducted under the auspices ofthe European
Union. Therefore, we join our European colleagues in
their call for the efforts of UNMIK to be refocused and
fully adapted to this development. Ultimately, we are
convinced that Serbia and Kosovo have a European
future, but achieving it remains to a large extent in
their hands.

