Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your
election to the presidency of the Security Council and to
express our joy at seeing you guide the work of this body
with your characteristic skill and talent. I also congratulate
your predecessor, Ambassador Owada of Japan, for his
excellent work last month. Lastly, I would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Higino Carneiro, Vice-Minister without
Portfolio of the Government of Angola, who has come here
especially to participate in this important debate.

The Security Council is considering the situation in
Angola at a time when the peace process in that country
has entered a critical phase in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol. While progress has indeed been made in
the quartering of UNITA troops and their incorporation into
the Angolan Armed Forces, delays nonetheless continue to
hinder the completion of this process. This has necessitated
additional expenditures, which could have been earmarked
for other activities, such as the demobilization and
integration of former armed elements into civilian life.
The situation has become even more disturbing
following the increase in the number of deserters from
quartering camps. Moreover, we are sorry to note that the
UNITA members called upon to sit in the Angolan National
Assembly have not yet arrived in Luanda as scheduled and
that the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation
has not yet been established. These delays only serve to
sow doubt and mistrust in people's minds and threaten to
further delay the peace process after so much sacrifice and
effort.

The Angolan parties must urgently demonstrate the
political will needed to move forward and that they
endeavour, through dialogue and consultation, to
overcome the obstacles to a definitive settlement. A
meeting between President Dos Santos and the leader of
UNITA would be most helpful for the consideration of all
those issues that are still prompting these delays,
including the question of the future status of Mr. Savimbi.

It is essential that UNITA honour its commitments
without further delay, notably that of dispatching its
representatives to Luanda, both to the National Assembly
and to the headquarters of the future Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation. It must also cooperate
fully, with an eye to facilitating the extension of State
administration throughout Angolan territory, so as to
preserve the unity of the country and to ensure that the
entire population enjoys public services. The procedures
and mechanisms approved by the Joint Commission last
month for the extension of State administration to the
entire territory must serve as a basis for this goal.

In this context, my delegation would like to pay a
resounding tribute to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, who has
made commendable efforts to smooth out difficulties and
reconcile the views of the parties. The good offices of the
three Observer States have also proven to be of great
assistance and deserve to be pursued with the sustained
support of the international community.

My delegation also commends the humanitarian
organizations for their activities, notably their contribution
to demobilization operations despite the security problems
inherent in this type of situation. My delegation must also
express its appreciation for the essential role that the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) has unflaggingly played since its
establishment. Thanks to the dedication and courage of its
staff, the United Nations Mission has discharged its
mandate in an exemplary fashion. It is essential that the
two Angolan parties cooperate fully to help UNAVEM. III
to carry out its activities and to build on its achievements
at a time when the Secretary-General is considering a
transition plan for the United Nations Mission in the light
of the progress made towards national reconciliation and
peace.

My delegation supports the extension of the mandate
of UNAVEM. III until 31 March 1997, as has just been
decided. It is now up to UNITA to comply,
unconditionally and without delay, with all the agreements

 

that it has entered into under the Lusaka Protocol, failing
which the Security Council would be compelled to consider
appropriate measures.

Lastly, I would highlight the importance of the
international community's support for efforts aimed at
restoring total peace in Angola. That country, devastated by
a long fratricidal war, today requires the assistance of the
international community for its economic recovery. My
delegation commends all those parties that have contributed
to the task of reconstruction and rehabilitation and
expresses the wish that this commitment be strengthened in
order to enable Angola once again to travel the path of
peace, stability and prosperity.

