Mr. Owada (Japan): Quite recently, the Security
Council issued two presidential statements in which it
strongly deplored the nuclear tests carried out by India on
11 and 13 May, and then by Pakistan on 28 and 30 May.
By those forceful and direct statements, the Security
Council has addressed the specific acts perpetrated by the
two countries concerned.

On top of that, we are adopting today a draft
resolution in order to address the new critical and
dangerous situation triggered by the acts of the two
countries. There is now a serious danger that the tensions
in South Asia could heighten further and escalate to a
nuclear confrontation.

Yet another danger which has been created is that
the nuclear non-proliferation regime itself is being
threatened and that the international community could
drift into an uncontrollable world of nuclear proliferation.
The situation is of critical importance to the security of
the entire international community and requires its urgent
attention. The Council, entrusted with the primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and security,
is duty-bound to take action to fulfil its responsibility
incumbent upon it under the Charter of the United
Nations.

 

I have to express, first of all, the grave concern of my
country at the serious negative effect of the nuclear tests
conducted by India and Pakistan on peace and stability in
South Asia. Furthermore, the deterioration of the
relationship and the risk of nuclear confrontation between
the two major countries on the sub-continent cannot fail to
produce serious implications for the maintenance of
international peace and security beyond that region. In order
to avoid any such negative effect, the Security Council
must address this situation with firm determination, with a
sense of urgency and with an awareness of its heavy
responsibility.

It is against this background that in the draft resolution
before us the Security Council urges India and Pakistan to
exercise the maximum restraint and to resume dialogue on
all the outstanding issues in order to remove the tensions
between them and to find mutually acceptable solutions that
address the root causes of these tensions, including
Kashmir.

As a fellow Asian nation, Japan strongly hopes that
India and Pakistan will move in the direction of a historical
reconciliation through strenuous efforts to build mutual
confidence and dialogue rather than confrontation and an
arms race.

Secondly, by embarking upon an attempt for the
development of nuclear weapons, India and Pakistan are
seriously jeopardizing the international regime of non-
proliferation, which is the indispensable cornerstone for
safeguarding the international community from the horrors
of nuclear holocaust.

Japan is particularly shocked by the recent nuclear
tests of India and Pakistan, inasmuch as we the Japanese
people know first-hand the unspeakable horrors of nuclear
weapons and are determined not to allow nuclear tragedies
such as Hiroshima and Nagasaki ever again to visit us on
our globe. It is precisely for this reason that Japan has been
placing supreme importance on the prevention of the
proliferation of nuclear weapons.

Japan has been making strenuous efforts in
encouraging countries in all parts of the world to join the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)
regimes. The international regime for nuclear non-
proliferation, with the NPT and the CTBT, should be
maintained at all costs, for this is the only guarantee that
can prevent nuclear weapons from spreading on the globe.

It is out of this conviction that Japan has lodged
strong protests with both India and Pakistan and has
frozen its economic assistance for new projects, which is
meant for the peaceful development of the country. Their
actions jeopardize the very international regime for
nuclear non-proliferation, for the protection and promotion
of which we have been working so tirelessly.
For all these reasons Japan is firmly convinced that
through this draft resolution the Security Council should
demonstrate in no ambiguous terms its grave concern
about the challenge that the nuclear tests conducted by
India and Pakistan constitute to international efforts aimed
at strengthening the global regime of the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons, and should urge them to become
parties to the NPT and the CTBT without delay and
without conditions.

In this connection, it should be made clear that there
is no way for India and Pakistan to claim a nuclear status.
The draft resolution declares that under the NPT regime
India and Pakistan cannot have a nuclear-weapon-State
status.

Before concluding, I should like to make a brief but
important reference to the question of nuclear
disarmament. It is the considered view of Japan that in
parallel with our efforts to promote the international
regime for non-proliferation, steady progress for nuclear
disarmament is essential for a safer world. Japan makes
it an article of faith to uphold its own three non-nuclear
principles - not to produce, not to possess and not to
introduce nuclear weapons - and seeks to achieve a
world free of nuclear weapons. On this basis it has
consistently appealed to the international community to
aim at steady progress in nuclear disarmament through
concrete and practical measures on a step-by-step basis.

In this context, my delegation notes with satisfaction
that in its preamble the draft resolution recalls the
successful outcome of the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and refers to the joint
communique issued by the Foreign Ministers of the five
nuclear States, in which they declared themselves to be
determined to fulfil their commitments relating to nuclear
disarmament under Article VI of that Treaty.

It was in the light of these considerations that on
30 May Japan took the initiative to call for an emergency
meeting of the Security Council to draw the attention of
the Council to the grave implications of the recent nuclear

 

testing by India and Pakistan for international peace and
security, and it has since been strenuously working for a
draft resolution on this critical issue, in cooperation with
Costa Rica, Slovenia and Sweden. We, the sponsors, have
been engaged in active and close consultations with each
and every member of the Council to improve the content of
the text. The draft resolution now before us is the result of
such consultations. It is my firm conviction that this
document represents the united voice of conscience of the
international community on the existential problem that we,
together, face.

I wish to conclude my statement by saying that the
adoption of this draft resolution will be only the beginning
of a long battle to consolidate the international regime of
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and to secure
future generations against the scourge of a nuclear tragedy.
In the interests of the future of humankind we cannot afford
to lose this battle. The Security Council should remain
actively seized of the matter addressed in this draft
resolution and be ready to consider further how best to
ensure the implementation of the present draft resolution.

Japan, as a member of the Security Council, as a
member of the Group of Eight, which is to meet next week
to address the same issue, and as a peace-loving nation in
Asia gravely concerned about the wider implications of the
recent nuclear tests, will spare no efforts in joining the
international community in its endeavour to contain the
present crisis triggered by the recent developments.

