Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
country's accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March and on the convening of
this very important debate on preventing and combating
the financing of terrorism.

I would also like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism; Mr. Marshall Billingslea,
President of the Financial Action Task Force; and
Ms. Mercy Buku, expert in anti-money-laundering
and countering the financing of terrorism, for their
enriching briefings on the subject.

Various countries have suffered despicable
terrorist acts in recent months, the latest of which was
perpetrated, to everyone's disbelief, in two mosques
in Christchurch, New Zealand. Morocco condemns
that terrorist act in the strongest terms and expresses
its solidarity with New Zealand and the families of the
victims. On this occasion, we wish to reiterate our firm
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and stress
that nothing can justify a terrorist act. We reaffirm
that terrorism must not be associated with any religion,
civilization, nationality or ethnic group.

To counter the international community's efforts to
curb terrorist financing, terrorist groups are constantly
adapting and renewing their financing methods.
Between 2014 and 2016, terrorist groups led by Da'esh
and Al Qaida spared no effort to secure the financing
of their terrorist operations and recruitment activities
for foreign terrorist fighters. Recruitment through
incentives, including financing travel to areas of
tension and issuing monthly payments, has enabled the
flow of more than 40,000 terrorist fighters from more
than 100 countries to Iraq and Syria.

Terrorists have made every effort to ensure the
financing of their despicable activities. They have
found recourse, notably, in robbing banks and people
and imposing taxes within the territories under
their control; the illicit sale of cultural property and
natural resources, such as oil; kidnapping for ransom;
trafficking of all kinds, including in drugs, weapons
and human beings, including women and children for
sexual purposes; and money-laundering, among others.

In addition, they have forged links with
transnational organized crime networks to ensure
the financing of their macabre projects. Hence, the
importance of strengthening coordination efforts at
the national, subregional, regional and international
levels to address that serious problem, while respecting
international law, human rights, fundamental freedoms
and the rule of law.

The international community has taken the
overall fight against terrorism, including its financing,
seriously. The Security Council, through the adoption
of a wide range of resolutions, including resolution
1373 (2001); resolution 2178 (2014), adopted at the
peak of the influx of foreign terrorist fighters into
Iraq and Syria; resolution 2199 (2015), concerning the
illicit trade in oil; and resolution 2253 (2015), aimed
at extracting the sources of terrorist financing, has
therefore created the regulatory framework to address
the financing of terrorism.

The measures taken and the sanctions committees
that have been established under the relevant Security
Council resolutions have had an undeniable impact on
the drying up of terrorist financing sources, including
through the freezing of assets and the travel ban on
individuals involved in terrorist financing. However,
without the implementation of the provisions of the
aforementioned resolutions and the intensification of
cooperation between the private sector, especially the
banking sector and the State, on the one hand, and
States at the regional and subregional levels, on the
other, tangible results cannot be achieved.

To that end, the United Nations should provide
guidance to Member States, including through
capacity-building in technical cooperation programmes
supervised by the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism, in particular through the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate should also remain
in contact with Member States, in particular through
country visits, to assess and identify gaps in order to
address them, including upgrading existing counter-
terrorism laws.

Morocco has a legal and regulatory arsenal for
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including measures to restrict financial
transactions and immediately freeze assets held
in the names of individuals and entities subject to
United Nations sanctions on the grounds of terrorism.
Pursuant to article 37 of Law No. 43-05, on the fight
against money-laundering, as amended, the Moroccan
legislation gives full competence to the financial
intelligence unit to receive and process requests
from the Security Council concerning the freezing of
property and assets for terrorist offences.

Moreover, the Kingdom of Morocco, pursuant
to resolution 2253 (2015), prepared a national report
and submitted it to the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011).
The report provided updated information on the
actions and initiatives taken by the Kingdom with a
View to ensuring the optimal implementation of the
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
It complements previous documents submitted by
Morocco to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
and highlights Morocco's political commitment to its
strategy in the fight against terrorism and its approach
to implementing its obligations under the provisions of
the aforementioned resolutions.

Lastly, we welcome today's unanimous adoption of
resolution 2462 (2019), which Morocco co-sponsored,
as it has done with other relevant Council resolutions,
and paves the way to bridge any loopholes that terrorists
may exploit.

