Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): Allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to brief the
Council on the European Union's action in support of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel).

The stability of the Sahel region is key not only
for the countries that comprise it but also for the
neighbouring regions and certainly for Europe's
security. The European Union therefore remains
committed, alongside other international partners, in
particular the United Nations and the African Union,
as well as bilateral partners, whose contribution
is essential.

However, if certain actors deserve special mention
today, it is the Sahel countries themselves, and in
particular those of the G-5. Those countries, based
on a common understanding not only of threats and
challenges, but also opportunities, have taken their
destiny into their own hands through a regional
cooperation initiative. Since the creation of the G-5
Sahel in 2014, the European Union (EU) has actively
supported its growth, including by helping to mobilize
the international community, as it did, for example, at
the international high-level conference on the Sahel,
held in Brussels in February. This is in fact a priority
of the foreign policy of the European Union and its
member States.

I should like to cite some examples of the concrete
support that the European Union is providing to
our partners in the Sahel in the framework of an
integrated approach in the political, development and
security areas.

In regard to our political and diplomatic engagement,
the partnership between the European Union and the
G-5 Sahel is an almost daily reality, with frequent visits
among European and Sahelian leaders, including at
the summit in Brussels that I mentioned and regular
ministerial meetings, the latest of which was held in
June. The partnership is also reflected on the EU side
in the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and the key role played by the
European Union Special Representative for the Sahel,
Mr. Angel Losada.

In that context, support for the Malian peace
process through the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is crucial to the
stability of Mali and the entire region. The European
Union, which remains the largest donor in Mali, is
actively involved in the international mediation in
support of the process. Moreover, through the provision
of targeted expertise, the European Union supports the
efforts of the Malian authorities to consolidate their
governance in central Mali.

With regard to development and humanitarian
action, the aid given by the European Union and its
member States to the region amounts to €8 billion for
the period 2014-2020, including €3.9 billion from the
European Development Fund and the European Union
Emergency Trust Fund for Africa and €l.7 billion in
budget support. That support is consistent with the G-5
Sahel priority investment plan. We look forward to the
next donors' conference to be held in Nouakchott on
6 December. Moreover, in 2017, the European Union
allocated €240 million in humanitarian assistance to
the Sahel.

Lastly, allow me to talk about European cooperation
in terms ofsecurity and defence in the Sahel. The security
situation in the region is deteriorating, particularly in
central Mali and in northern and eastern Burkina Faso.
That was described by the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Lacroix, and I refer to his briefing. In that context,
the initiative of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is therefore
being developed and increased international support in
the areas of security and defence is becoming essential.
The European Union has been present in the region
since 2012 with three missions and nearly 800 European
experts on the ground.

The European Union capacity-building mission
(EUCAP) Sahel Niger and EUCAP Sahel Mali are
civilian missions aimed at supporting the internal
security forces in Mali and in Niger to strengthen their
capacities to fight against terrorism and organized
crime. They also work to contribute to security sector
reform through advice, training and the provision
of equipment. Since their roll-out in 2012 and 2014,
respectively, EUCAP Sahel Niger and EUCAP Sahel
Mali have provided training to nearly 16,000 members
of the security forces in Niger and Mali.

In coordination with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and other partners, those two civilian
missions closely support the Sahelian authorities in
developing the police component of the Joint Force,
a key element in ensuring the judicial follow-up of
military actions and in strengthening the link between
the Force and the local populations.

The European Union military mission to contribute
to the training of the Malian Armed Forces (EUTM Mali), with 570 soldiers, is a military training mission
that provides advice to the Malian authorities on
restructuring the armed forces by training battalions.
Eight battalions were trained between 2013 and 2017.
EUTM. Mali is also a key partner of the Joint Force.
To date, it has organized four training courses for
military staff officers of the five Sahel countries and a
leadership seminar for the Force headquarters and the
three sectors. In addition, EUTM. provides advice to the
Commander of the Joint Force and his command post on
developing organizational and operational procedures
and on infrastructure and equipment requests.

Together with our Sahelian partners, the European
Union has now embarked on a process of adapting
those missions to provide advice, training - through
assistance to the G-5 Defence College and the Sahel
Security College, among others - and support to the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force, as well as bilaterally to each of
its members in terms of their cross-border cooperation.

To that end, first, with the agreement of the G-5
Sahel members, the area of operations of the missions
will be extended to all the G-5 Sahel countries and the
mandates of the missions adapted to the needs jointly
identified. In addition, a regional coordination unit for
those missions will be deployed to Nouakchott to better
support the governance structures of the G-5 Sahel, as
we have agreed with its Permanent Secretary, whom I
warmly welcome.

Secondly, the EU strongly supports the development
and the operational implementation of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force with a total amount of €100 million.
The support is structured as follows: equipment,
services and infrastructure - €75 million; support
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for
operational and logistical support to the Joint Force in
Mali - €10 million; support to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
establish a compliance framework on respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law for the Joint
Force operations - €10 million; and support for G-5
Sahel governance, in particular the operationalization
of the G-5 Sahel trust fund - €5 million.

Although sometimes slower than desired, the
delivery of EU-funded equipment, such as protection
teams, armoured vehicles or anti-explosive devices,
to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force units is under way. The
equipment and services that have already been delivered
to the field or are available to the Joint Force amount
to the sum of €17.9 million. Procurement processes
to the tune of €70 million are under way. Discussions
continue with the Commander of the Force for the use
of the €ll.5 million still available

In that context, I also warmly welcome President
Kabore's announcement during his visit to Brussels
last week that the G-5 Sahel would be ready to bear
the recurrent costs of the Force, namely, €115 million
a year.

Thirdly, the European Union has established
the coordination hub, which is made available to the
G-5 Sahel and international donors to facilitate the
identification of needs and to coordinate the financial
support of donors to the Joint Force. Moreover, I would
like to thank the Security Council for the support
expressed through resolution 2391 (2017) to the
coordination hub, a platform that makes it possible to
share and update the list of needs and lists of offers.
In the context of regionalization, we aim to work
even more closely with the G-5 Sahel trust fund and
support committee.

I would also like to reaffirm that the cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union in
Mali is excellent, particularly between our civilian and
military missions and MINUSMA on the ground. The
EU fully supports the work of MINUSMA and of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
condemns all attacks against the Mission.

The European Union is determined to continue to
build on its partnership with the G-5 Sahel countries,
which is vital to the security and development of the
region. We welcome the support ofthe Security Council
for such efforts.

