Ms. Sipiliiinen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation
and its two co-Chairs first.

I would like to congratulate Sweden on organizing
this very timely debate. We also welcome the fact that
the Secretary-General as been present with us today.

The Group of Friends of Mediation brings together
44 United Nations States Members from various regions
and eight international and regional organizations. With
a broad representative capacity, the Group has made
a significant contribution to the efforts to increase
international awareness on mediation. In addition to
its other activities, the Group of Friends of Mediation
has initiated four General Assembly resolutions on
mediation, which were adopted by consensus. The
resolutions have contributed to strengthening the
framework of mediation and the mediation-support
functions of the United Nations, as well as the
development of the mediation capacities of various
mediation actors, while encouraging them to use the
Guidance for Effective Mediation. The resolutions
have also encouraged enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

The most recent General Assembly resolution
(resolution 70/304) on mediation, adopted in
September 2015, recognized the contribution made
by the 2015 reviews of the United Nations peace and
security architecture, in particular their attention to
the importance of conflict prevention and sustaining
peace, including the use of mediation. It acknowledged
the good offices of the Secretary-General and the
importance of seeking long-term, inclusive political
solutions for sustaining peace.

Taking into account increasing humanitarian
concerns and needs on the global level and specific to
many regions, the 2016 ministerial breakfast meeting
of the Group of Friends of Mediation provided an
opportunity to discuss how best to respond to the call
for global leadership to prevent and end conflicts, as
highlighted in the report (A/71/353) of the Secretary-
General on the Outcome of the World Humanitarian
Summit. The Group of Friends of Mediation strongly
believes that strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, and sustaining peace, is a cost-effective tool
for the United Nations in its work towards peace and
security. We also acknowledge the need to empower
more women to serve as mediators. For that, sustained
political support, coherence, cooperation, systematic
efforts and adequate resources will be needed. The
Group of Friends of Mediation welcomes the new
Secretary-General's commitment to advance diplomacy
for peace and stands ready to support his work and
efforts that strengthen the role of mediation in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and sustaining
peace.

I would also like to make several remarks in
my national capacity. Finland aligns itself with the
statement to be made on behalf of the European Union.

Let me again thank Sweden for this debate, because
the time to improve the United Nations ability to
prevent conflicts more effectively is now. The Security
Council, the Secretary-General and all Member States
must grasp this momentum and turn it into concrete
action. I am very pleased to see that the Secretary-
General has already taken a proactive role in the area
of conflict prevention and shown great initiative with
his recent decisions on improving the United Nations
performance.

The three reviews - on peace operations,
peacebuilding, and women and peace and
security - and their concrete implementation can truly
transform the United Nations peace and security sector.
Recommendations from the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
continue to be valid and should be implemented without
delay. Securing solid funding for both the primacy of
politics and the sustaining peace agenda, including
mediation and special political missions, are of high
importance. Equally important is for Member States to
support and contribute to peacekeeping, as it is a central
element ofthe United Nations peace and security sector.

The Security Council, and the United Nations
as a whole, needs to strengthen its own capacities to
undertake prevention, including by conducting better
horizon-scanning exercises, developing and making use
of early-warning tools, better assessing the root causes
of conflicts and addressing them in a timely manner,
upholding universal human rights and leveraging
sustainable development by implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Technology and
innovations can help in that task. More efforts should
also be invested in dialogue with those countries that
are experiencing a fragile situation.

Finland wishes to see mediation as a tool for conflict
prevention at the forefront of the United Nations work.
Mediation and conflict prevention are the most cost-
effective instruments to work towards peace. Finland's
broad approach to mediation includes national dialogue
and other formal and informal processes that contribute
to more inclusive peace processes, and thereby to lasting
solutions. We continue to support non-governmental
actors, including religious and traditional leaders'
engagement in peace processes. It is also time to
recognize the value of United Nations special political
missions. We, the Member States, should provide the
political and financial support that they need.

We urge the Council and the Secretary-General to
pay particular attention to the active role of women in
conflict prevention. Women remain the single-greatest
underutilized resource in more effective peacebuilding.
Experience shows that empowering women and
supporting their full and active participation in
peace-related, political and economic decision-making
can lead to more inclusive and lasting agreements.
The Security Council holds a special responsibility
in conflict prevention. One concrete line of action
to that end would be the commitment of all Council
members to support timely and decisive action by the
Council to prevent or end mass atrocities and to refrain
from the use of the veto in those situations.

Finland continues to stand ready to support
the Council and Secretary-General Guterres in
strengthening the mutual partnership, as well as making
conflict prevention the United Nations top priority.

