Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate. We were fortunately prepared for it by the
Arria-formula meeting held last week at the initiative of
Portugal and the United Kingdom.

I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, Mr. Abou
Moussa, and the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission on Lord's Resistance
Army Issues, Ambassador Francisco Caetano Jose
Madeira, for their very thorough briefings.

Morocco welcomes the important gains achieved by
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), which have come barely one year after
its effective launching, in the areas of coordination
and cooperation between States and organizations of
the subregion, but also between the United Nations
agencies and missions. Based on our belief that only
effective and united regional cooperation will provide
lasting responses to the Challenges facing the Central
African countries, we commend the strengthening
of cooperation between the UNOCA, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
the secretariat of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. The support for strengthening
subregional institutions must continue to be a priority
for UNOCA.

With regard to the fight against transnational
organized crime, the security challenges from the Sahel
region, and the phenomenon of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea, Morocco commends the efforts of UNOCA to
help to establish regional responses to those challenges
via strengthened cross-regional and interregional
cooperation. We specifically welcome the cooperation
established between the UNOCA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the commitment to
work together to counter the common threats affecting
the security and stability of those two regions.

With regard to piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, we
commend the efforts of the Office to facilitate, on the
one hand, the holding of the regional summit on piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea scheduled for December and, on
the other hand, the cooperation between the ECCAS,
ECOWAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
Morocco supports the efforts of the regional Office
and is prepared to contribute to any initiative aimed at
curbing the current security threats to Central Africa
via our support to countries of the region and in the
framework of the ministerial conference of the African
States bordering the Atlantic Ocean.

Despite the positive gains made to counter the
activities of the Lord's Resistance Army, that group
continues to destabilize and destroy the lives ofthousands
of children, women and men throughout the Central
African region. We continue to believe that the close
cooperation of States in the region and the determined
mobilization of the international community will
ultimately thwart the LRA's destabilization strategy
while complying with international humanitarian law.

In that context, we would like to commend the
mobilization of UNOCA to provide effective regional
cooperation at the governmental level, at the level of
international and non-governmental organizations,
and also in terms of civil society. The protection
of civilians must continue to be at the centre of any
effort undertaken against the LRA, and measures such
as strengthening and expanding the regional radios
stations throughout the four countries affected by the
LRA should be encouraged. The success of the process
of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement or repatriation and national reconciliation
and the prosecution of persons responsible for such
crimes should also continue to be one of the priorities
of countries of the region and of the entire international
community.

We took note with great interest of the regional
strategy crafted by the United Nations to respond to
the threat posed by, and the impact of the activities
of, the LRA. We took note in particular of the five
pillars for strategic action, and we noted with interest
the importance attached to the issue of the social and
economic development of the affected countries, which
is a prerequisite for the promotion ofpeace and stability
in the subregion.

To that end, Morocco will continue to cooperate
with the States of the region, specifically the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in key areas of human development, including
health, education, agriculture and professional training.

Lastly, my country is pleased to contribute, by
means of a large contingent within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to helping to protect civilians
and ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
the provision of medical services.

I should like, before concluding, to commend the
outstanding work undertaken by Mr. Abou Moussa,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and his team and to assure them of our full support
as they carry out their mission. We also unreservedly
support the draft presidential statement prepared by the
delegation of the United Kingdom.

