The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of March, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Njuguna M. Mahugu,
Permanent Representative of Kenya to the United Nations,
for his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of February 1997. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Mahugu for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central America: efforts towards peace

Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1094 (1997) (S/1997/123)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Guatemala in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Martini Herrera
(Guatemala) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 1094 (1997), document S/l997/123.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
1094 (1997) of 20 January 1997 and notes the report
of the Secretary-General on its implementation
(5/1997/123).

"The Security Council welcomes the
deployment on 3 March 1997 of the group of United
Nations military observers attached to the United
Nations Mission for the Verification of Human
Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments of
the Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in
Guatemala (MINUGUA) for the purposes of
verification of the agreement on the definitive
ceasefire between the Government of Guatemala and
the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca
(URNG) signed at Oslo on 4 December 1996
(S/1996/1045*, annex).

"The Security Council recalls its constant
support for the peace process in Central America,
which it has expressed since the adoption of its
resolution 530 (1983) of 19 May 1983. It reaffirms
its full support for the peace process in Guatemala.

"The Security Council reiterates its call in
resolution 1094 (1997) that both parties implement
fully their commitments under the agreements signed
in Guatemala City on 29 December 1996 and
cooperate fully with the verification of the ceasefire,
separation of forces, disarmament and
demobilization of URNG combatants, as well as the
commitments under the other agreements in the
overall package of Peace Accords.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.50 pm.

