Mr. Normandin (Canada): I would first like to
thank you, Mr. President, and South Africa for
convening this meeting. Canada appreciates the
opportunity to participate in this important and timely
debate on small arms. I would also like to thank
Ms. Hoppe for her briefing.

We welcome the excellent report put forward by
the Secretary-General (S/2008/258), and, in particular,
its emphasis on the harmful impact of illicit small arms
on security, human rights and social and economic
development. The recommendations in the report serve
as a useful guideline to encourage further action to
address the proliferation and misuse of small arms.

Measures to address the impact of illicit small
arms must be considered as part of the broader context
of promoting international peace and security,
including peacebuilding and conflict prevention
initiatives. Increased interaction among the various
bodies involved in these issues, including the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Peacebuilding
Commission, would allow for creative approaches to
the small arms issue from a broader perspective. The
Secretary-General's report provides useful
recommendations on ways to enhance the synergies
among those bodies.

Canada applauds the Security Council's work in
addressing critical issues such as small arms through
targeted sanctions, an important and effective tool of
the Security Council. Targeted sanctions have been
used to embargo arms sales to conflict zones and to
prevent certain armed groups from trading in high-
value natural resources, such as diamonds and timber,
which can provide the means to finance arms purchases
and other conflict-related activities.

We have long sought to improve the effectiveness
of sanctions while reducing their humanitarian impact,
including during our most recent term on the Security
5
Council, and have supported a number of studies and
other initiatives to that end. Canada is currently
working closely with the United Nations Department of
Political Affairs to develop an information
management system for use by panels of experts
monitoring sanctions.

We welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendations on possible measures to improve the
monitoring of arms embargoes currently mandated by
the Security Council and to strengthen practical
cooperation between relevant sanctions monitoring
groups, peacekeeping missions and Member States.
Canada supports the inclusion of United Nations arms
embargoes monitoring functions in the mandate of
United Nations peacekeeping missions and the
recommendation in the Secretary General's report that
this task be given to a dedicated unit equipped with the
capacity to carry it out comprehensively.

The management of existing stockpiles and the
destruction of surplus arms and ammunition must also
be a priority for States and the larger international
community in order to prevent their diversion for illicit
use. Canada has already assisted a number of countries
in destroying surplus arms and ammunition. Through
the NATO Partnership for Peace Trust Fund, we are
also assisting Afghanistan in rendering ammunition
stockpiles more secure and improving stockpile
management practices.

In order to combat illicit flows of small arms, we
must continue to strengthen the global regulatory
framework governing small arms transfers.

(spoke in French)

In this regard, Canada was heartened by the
strong support among Member States for the General
Assembly resolution calling for a comprehensive,
legally binding instrument, establishing common
international standards for the import, export and
transfer of conventional arms, including small arms.
We look forward to the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts on the feasibility, scope and
parameters of an arms trade treaty.

As stated at the Small Arms Review Conference
held in New York in 2006, Canada maintains that
strengthening the global framework governing small
arms transfers in order to combat illicit flow of small
arms and light weapons should not impair the
6
legitimate interests of owners, manufacturers and
vendors of legal firearms.

Implementation of regional instruments must also
be strengthened in order to stem the illicit flows of
small arms, which are frequently traded from one
conflict to another in unstable regions. Canada has
contributed to a number of initiatives to examine,
promote and strengthen the implementation of small
arms instruments at the regional and subregional level,
especially in Africa and the Americas.

The adoption in 2001 of the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects was
a major achievement. Ensuring its full implementation
will remain a challenge for years to come. The
upcoming biennial meeting of States provides an
opportunity to take stock of progress in implementing
the Programme of Action and to look at challenges that
remain. Canada is working with other States,
international and regional organizations and civil
society to demonstrate that such meetings can be
effective and useful to accelerate global action on this
critically important issue.

