Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to congratulate Japan on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We also commend Italy on presiding over the Council
last month.

I would like to comment on a point raised by a
number of representatives with regard to the collection
of weapons. As the Security Council knows, the
existence of small arms and light weapons in conflict
zones contributes to insecurity and instability. The
collection of arms and weapons in Darfur is therefore
a challenge for the Government. In that connection,
I would like to point to the recent meeting between
the Vice-President of the Republic the Sudan and
the Joint African Union-United Nations Special
Representative for Darfur. The Vice-President stressed
that the Government of the Sudan will not be part of
the processing of collected weapons if the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) is to be responsible for that task. That is
our degree of cooperation in this matter, an important
one that represents one of three challenges that we
face in our endeavour to ensure security and stability
in Darfur.

The Sudan is not party to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), whose Prosecutor and her Office have
been blinded by political motives and are unable to
see the clear and explicit position of international law,
namely, that any international convention or agreement
is binding only on its parties. It is strange that resolution
1593 (2005), which referred the situation in Darfur, in
the Western part of our country, to the ICC, refers to
the fact that the jurisdiction of the Court does not apply
to countries that are not party to the ICC. That obvious
contradiction with the explicit and binding rules of
international law is the result of the inconsistencies
inherent in the Statute of the ICC - notably, the broad,
unlimited powers granted to the Prosecutor of the ICC.
The shocking reports about corruption in the Court and
of its Prosecutor only show the inconsistencies in the
Statute of the Court.

We did not find this current report to be any
different from previous reports. It has gone beyond all
norms by attacking sovereign States and Heads of State.
Our position is known by the Council, it is related to a
number of reasons. We believe that there is an attempt
to cover up for the Court, and we ask the Council to
examine the situation in a specific meeting to see how
far it affects the implementation of resolution 1593
(2005).

The Prosecutor's report and briefing make no
reference to the armed groups and their responsibility
for the violations. We would like to recall that we invoke
an international law that bans any recourse to violence
to achieve any political objective.

This is the twenty-sixth report of the Prosecutor
of the ICC and her Office. During the short time we
had to study and comment on the report, as was the
case with previous reports, since the third report, we
have time and again concluded that the Prosecutor and
her Office are but tools for one single predetermined
purpose - to use the ICC as a political tool to achieve
a specific political objective.

To prove my point, I would like to refer the Council
to paragraph 39 of the present report:

(spoke in English)

"The Office welcomes the adoption of Security
Council resolution 2363 (2017), which extends the
mandate of UNAMID until 30 June 2018."

(spoke in Arabic)

The welcoming of resolution 2363 comes because the
resolution does not end the Hybrid Mission in Darfur.
The ICC would not like to see an end to the war in Darfur,
as it is linked to specific political objectives. The ICC
is trying to achieve this by applying its jurisdiction on
the Sudan, without consideration for the actual reality
in the region nor caring that the protraction of the war
would lead to more bloodshed in Darfur. That is why
are we convinced that attempts by the Court to exercise
its jurisdiction over the Sudan and its leadership is one
of several obstacles that we should all work to remove
in order to achieve peace in the Sudan so it can turn
its attention to its development - the main task of any
Government - and achieve peace in Africa.

Resolution 2363 (2017) draws a clear line between
war and peace in Darfur. The resolution decided to
start a gradual scaling down of the peacekeeping
force towards a final exit, pursuant to paragraph 24
of resolution 1769 (2007), which created UNAMID.
Regrettably, the Prosecutor and her Office lacked the
courage and honesty to admit the reality to which
resolution 2363 refers.

Based upon the Security Council referral resolution
and the shameful political application in which the
Pre-Trial Chamber and the previous and current
prosecutors participated in, the Court has practiced
politically based discrimination with regard to the
cases it considers - the Sudan included - of which
all are in Africa alone, among all continents and
regions of the world. Such discrimination runs counter
to pre-emptory norms of international law, as well as
article 21 of the Rome Statute of the same Court, which
in its sub-paragraph 3 clearly bans any discrimination
on political basis.

As mentioned before, it is not surprising that the
mere establishment of the Court, on the basis of its
Statute, contravenes principles of international law,
including sovereignty, sovereign equality among
states, and the principle that international agreements
and convention are binding only on their parties. In
that respect, in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the report, the
Pre-Trial Chamber rejects a recognized principle of
international law relative to immunity and subjects it to
Article 27 (2) of the Rome Statute.

Having followed the failures of the Court over
the years, we are not surprised by such a position. It
is rather consistent with previous positions, especially
one particular position, where the Pre-Trial Chamber
of theCourt supported the destruction of evidence
submitted by the previous Prosecutor, Mr. Luis
Moreno Ocampo. It endorsed his decision to dismiss
a senior officer in the Prosecutor's Office because that
senior officer had filed a complaint against the conduct
of the Prosecutor. The Council is undoubtedly aware
that the Administrative Tribunal of the International
Labour Organization ruled that dismissal null and void.

We view all those negative positions in a
comprehensive context. The Court has not left even a
remote chance for anyone with a good conscience to
cherish the hope that it can achieve the objective it claims
that it was created to serve - combating impunity.
The countries that have bilaterally and regionally
welcomed and received the President of the Republic
of the Sudan have therefore upheld the major principles
that govern relations among States - those of peace,
sovereign equality and the exchange of mutual benefits
and interests. We view the targeting of the President
of the Sudan with baseless charges that are refuted by
all evidence as an assault on the political security and
stability of my country. That constitutes an attempt to
dismember the Sudan by pushing it into an endless and
disastrous war.

South Africa, to which the report before the
Council devotes several paragraphs, would not have
attained peace or moved towards an apartheid-free
future without applying the principle of amnesty and
creating truth, justice and reconciliation commissions,
which is the aim of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. The International Criminal Court, where the
trial of one person costs more than €1.3 billion, has
totally failed to contribute to the realization of justice
and peace. T0 offer a simple comparison, the trial of
one person in 1994 by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994 cost $43.5 million, which
compelled the Government of Rwanda to resort to its
national courts, the Gacaca courts, where the trial of
one person cost no more than $540.

All of that places a heavy responsibility upon
the Security Council to respond to the resolutions of
successive African summits, which emphasize the need
for a dialogue that leads to an acceptable solution to the
continent and achieves the Security Council messages
of peacemaking, peacebuilding and sustainability.
I take this opportunity to commend the decision of
Burundi to withdraw from the ICC, which we consider
to be an African decision that promotes peace and
stability in Burundi.

As has been said by the Representative of the
Russian Federation before the Council during the
consideration of the reports on the Sudan and on Libya,
the Court has turned itself into a monitoring body.
The report before us includes fabricated information
concerning the current situation in Darfur, the number
of displaced persons and the violations committed, all
of which are outside the competence of the Prosecutor.
Moreover, the report contains exaggerated figures
that do not match the reports of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. Such inconsistency requires
a serious investigation into and verification of the
Prosecutor's information sources.

The Sudan is a country that is deeply rooted in
history and has a rich share in human civilization,
which was born on our continent. We therefore pay
no attention to the contradictions and indecorous
utterings and phrases of a Court that was born dead,
as was stated by the former Chair of the United States
Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. 1 call on the
Council, to which resolution 1593 (2005) obliges the
Prosecutor of the Court to submit two reports every
year, to firmly reprimand the Prosecutor for recently
referring to it as impotent. The previous and current
Prosecutors have always attacked the Sudan, and have
therefore undermined all norms related to the work of
the International Criminal Court.

In conclusion, it is my pleasure and privilege to
reaffirm that the Sudan, by virtue of its continued
cooperation with the international community and
the Council, will pursue the course of lasting and
comprehensive peace in Darfur and the implementation
of resolution 2363 (2017), adopted by the Council
in June. In doing so, we are protecting the people
in a dear part of our country from falling victim to
conflict - the same people who the Prosecutor and her
Office are exploiting.

The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.
