Mr. Sadeghi (Islamic Republic of Iran): May I
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your skilful
presidency of the Security Council and on your
professional stewardship of its work for this month. I
also commend your predecessor, Ambassador Wang
Guangya of China, for his commendable presidency of
the Council last month.

I would also like to thank the Chairmen of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for their
praiseworthy work and for their comprehensive
briefings to us today. My thanks also go to the vice-
chairmen, members and experts of the Committees,
particularly the members and head of the Monitoring
Team of the 1267 Committee, for their dedicated
efforts to implement the tasks assigned to those
important Committees.

The fight against terrorism remains a priority for
the international community. The role of the United
Nations in addressing that menace is of great
magnitude, and the important contribution that the said
Committees can and should make to tackle that
problem deserves recognition and appreciation. Iran
remains fully committed to cooperating with the
Committees in fulfilling the important tasks with which
they have been entrusted. In the past four years, three
visits have been paid to the Islamic Republic of Iran by
the Chairman of the 1267 Committee and by the 1267
Committee's Monitoring Team. Moreover, Iran has
furnished the said Committees with the required
reports and is in the process of finalizing its fifth
national report to be sent to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.

As a victim of terrorism, the Islamic Republic of
Iran has always strongly condemned terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations and has demonstrated its
strong resolve to fight terrorism by all means,

S/l'V.5446

 

including by arresting one of the greatest number of
Al-Qaida members apprehended by any single State
and handing them over to the authorities of their
respective countries in the past four or five years. In
that context, Iran has intensified its control over and
security at its borders with a View to preventing the
entry of terrorists into or transit from its territory.

Moreover, and aware of the indisputable mutually
reinforcing connections between terrorism -
particularly that of Al-Qaida and the Taliban - and
drug-trafficking, Iran has fought a costly war against
that menace, on which Al-Qaida feeds. Here, I would
like to emphasize that, as also indicated in the reports
of the 1267 Committee, the efforts of the international
community in fighting terrorism, particularly the
threats posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban, will not
yield the expected results unless adequate attention is
also given to the menace of drug-trafficking, which
serves as the main financial feeding ground for that
terrorist group. Indeed, Iran has shouldered the burden
almost single-handedly thus far. Therefore, the
contribution and attention of the whole international
community to that important aspect of fighting Al-
Qaida and the Taliban are unquestionably needed.

Terrorism is a serious threat and a global menace.
The increasing insecurity and the escalation of acts of
violence and terrorism perpetrated by malicious
terrorists in different parts of the world - including
the heinous and unspeakable terrorist acts in Iraq and
also the daily, cold-blooded State terrorism practiced
by the Israeli regime in Palestinian territories - are of
serious concern to the international community.
Terrorism is a perverted product of the mentality
espoused by some State and non-State actors, which
glorifies military might as the source of legitimacy and
denigrates the principles of international law, ethics
and morality as cumbersome constrictions on the
exercise of power. Terrorism can and must be
destroyed first and foremost by reversing the logic of
violence and coercion and changing those mentalities.

The United Nations counter-terrorism
mechanisms are the embodiment of our forces, joined
under the umbrella of the United Nations, to eradicate
the menace of terrorism, and have thus far registered
commendable achievements. Yet, the international
community's efforts to eradicate terrorism have faced
some hurdles along the way that need to be addressed
appropriately. For instance, an opposing unilateralist
trend has, from the very beginning of this effort,

threatened to halt the momentum and shatter the
universal consensus, thus undermining the overall and
effective fight against terrorism.

Moreover, while the decisive stage in the war
against terrorism is that of capturing the minds and
hearts of peoples, the abuse of the fight against
terrorism by some demagogues to spread hatred and
bigotry among various cultures and religions, and their
efforts to demonize and defame certain religions or
cultures by the unfair and unfounded attribution of
terrorism to them, may in fact prove to be no less
serious in their gravity than terrorism itself. In its
endeavours to fight terrorism, the United Nations
should also consider proper mechanisms to rescue the
much-abused term of terrorism from those countries
that unfairly and baselessly use it as a pejorative term
for any other country that dissents from their policies.
We need to recognize that the application of double
standards in dealing with terrorism and terrorist groups
is yet another important matter of grave concern which
seriously undermines the international community's
collective campaign against terrorism.

In the course of the past three decades, the
Islamic Republic of Iran has been subjected to acts of
terrorism by various terrorist groups. Particular
reference should be made to a terrorist group which has
long been stationed in Iraq and which has planned,
financed, supervised and perpetrated terrorist
operations in Iran. These have resulted in the killing of
many civilians and officials as well as in damage to
private and government property. That terrorist group
was long supported and sheltered by the regime of
Saddam Hussein and ironically continues to enjoy
similar protection from the occupying forces in Iraq
today. During this period, that terrorist organization
has staged more than 612 terrorist operations in Iran or
against Iranian interests outside the country, including
hijackings, abductions, bombings and indiscriminate
terrorist attacks against civilians.

There are also other terrorist groups that have
operated against the Iranian people with the
collaboration of other terrorist organizations and with
the tacit support of some foreign countries. Most
recently, a terrorist group attacked and killed tens of
people in the eastern and south-eastern parts of the
country in an attempt to create an environment of
intimidation and insecurity. We are of the strong view
that there should not be a distinction between different
forms of terrorism. In other words, there are no good

Sll'V.5446

 

and bad terrorists or terrorism: terrorism is bad and
should be condemned and combated with no
discrimination.

It is not my intention to take the time of the
Council to respond to some of the baseless and
unworthy allegations raised here against my country by
the representative of the disgraced Israeli regime.
However, I wish to mention the following points. Ever
since its inception, the Israeli regime has been deeply
suffering from a lack of legitimacy. So it is not
surprising that the representative of such a regime,
ruled constantly by those who are culprits of various
crimes against humanity and war crimes, would make
such baseless and fabricated propaganda as a remedy
for the regime's illegitimacy.

Moreover, it is an open secret that the Israeli
regime has continuously and purposely violated many
international laws and norms, not to mention dozens of
United Nations resolutions, including Security Council
resolutions. The response of that irresponsible regime
has been nothing but complete defiance. In that
context, particular reference can be made to the
mischievous policy of the Israeli regime on the nuclear
issue, which is a showcase for its concealment and its
unabated pursuit of a nuclear arsenal in recent decades.
It is indisputable that this ill-intentioned policy has
been threatening peace and security in the volatile
region of the Middle East and beyond for years. In fact,
the Israeli nuclear danger and missile capability,
coupled with its wicked behaviour, present a real threat
not only to regional peace and security but also to the
whole world. Therefore, this threat needs to be urgently
and decisively addressed by the international
community. Indeed, that regime should face a united
front and must be kept under continuous pressure to
relinquish its terrorist acts and its nuclear programme,
and to place all of its nuclear facilities under
international monitoring.

It is worth mentioning that the only existing
obstacle to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East is the Israeli regime's non-
adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its continued clandestine
operation of unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, with the
help and technological assistance of a certain State.
The regime has paid no attention to the constant
international call in many forums, and particularly at
the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT,
which called upon that regime by name to accede to the

Treaty immediately and without any conditions.
Moreover, the regime has never been a party to the
international instruments on weapons of mass
destruction, namely the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the Biological Weapons Convention and
the NPT,

