Ms. Citaku: Twenty years ago this day, on 10 June
1999, in this Chamber, the predecessors of today's
representatives, sitting around this very table, voted
in favour of resolution 1244 (1999) and established
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (see S/PV.4011). The people of Kosovo will
never forget that, on that day, it was the Council that
stood for humankind. We will not forget that it was
the allied forces that stopped the ethnic cleansing and
brutalization ofinnocent civilians in Kosovo by Serbian
forces. More than 10,000 innocent people were killed,
approximately 20,000 women were raped and thousands
are still missing. We will never forget that when more
than 1 million refugees came back to find their homes
in ashes, we had United Nations personnel by our side,
helping us to rebuild our homes and our lives.

The wounds of war do not heal easily and they
never truly disappear. But freedom has recuperative
power - so slowly, but surely, we rebuilt. We drew
strength from one another and had hope because we
were not alone in our misfortune. Today and every day,
we remember Sergio Vieira de Mello, the first Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo,
and all the women and men of the United Nations who
have served in Kosovo during the past two decades.

Much has been accomplished in Kosovo during
the past 20 years and there is a lot the United Nations
can be proud of. It may have been a laborious and
undramatic task, but the Organization's contribution
cannot be overstated. The United Nations helped
build the youngest democracy in Europe and held our
hand through multiple transitions. And although the
challenges were not in short supply or small in scale,
the Organization stood by us when it mattered the most.
Through all the ups and downs, the United Nations
was our rock. It is only fitting that it was the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, the wise President
Martti Ahtisaari, who, after years of negotiations,
proposed that Kosovo declare its independence. As the
International Court of Justice confirmed a and, might
I add, upon Serbia's request - Kosovo was well within
its rights when it declared independence and did not
violate any international laws in doing so.

Allow me to be clear on the following point:
Kosovo's independence is not a product ofa secessionist
movement. As members are all too keenly aware,
Kosovo's independence is a product of decolonization.
Nevertheless, the situation in Kosovo in 2019 is
strikingly different from what it was 20 years ago when
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) was first installed. Kosovo is no
longer in a state of crisis. Our country has made enormous
strides and is becoming increasingly integrated into the
international community, in large part thanks to the
efforts of the United Nations, which, in tandem with
the European Union and NATO, has promoted security
and stability in Kosovo and the region.

While we are deeply grateful to UNMIK for
the vital role that it played in the first decade of our
liberation, we simply do not see any reason for its
continued presence in our thriving Republic. UNMIK is
not an administrative mission because Kosovo governs
itself. UNMIK is not a peacekeeping mission because
Kosovo law enforcement mechanisms and the Kosovo
Force guarantee the safety and security of our people.
Can anyone in the Chamber tell me in all honesty what
exactly the job of UNMIK in Kosovo is today? With
so many issues plaguing people around the world at
this very moment, I am certain that the resources that
this institution allocates to Kosovo can be put to much
better use elsewhere.

As we reflect on the progress that Kosovo has made
during the past two decades, there is one particular
element I would like to highlight and that is the Kosovo
police. The Kosovo police is an organization that
operates to the highest standards of professionalism
and integrity. Since its inception, it has continuously
proven to be a credible partner in global efforts to
combat organized crime and terrorism by cooperating
with international law enforcement mechanisms to
curtail dangerous plots. On 28 May, the Kosovo police
successfully conducted a large-scale operation aimed at
tackling organized crime across several municipalities
in the Republic of Kosovo. That operation followed a
months-long investigation, which began in April 2018,
and examined several criminal groups involved in the
misuse of official position, smuggling, bribery and
illegal trade.

Based on the evidence collected by the Office of
the Specialist Prosecutor of the Republic of Kosovo as
part of that investigation, the Basic Court of Pristina
authorized a request to raid a set of premises utilized by
the suspected individuals. The targets were located in
Zubin Potok, Leposavie, Vushtrri, the city ofMitrovica,
Skenderaj and Drenas. In accordance with the Court's
request and under the direction of the Office of the
Specialist Prosecutor, the Kosovo police raided 12
premises and arrested 19 Kosovo police employees
and nine civilians with outstanding arrest warrants.
The arrested suspects are all citizens of Kosovo and
include 11 Kosovo-Serbs, four Kosovo-Albanians and
four Kosovo-Bosnians. The group consists of one
commander of a police station, three sergeants and
seven police officers. All of them have since been
suspended from duty.

The Kosovo police did not encounter any resistance
during the implementation of their action plan across
the different municipalities, with one major exception.
In Zubin Potok, police officers were met with armed
resistance and gunfire and blocked by large barricades
set up by violent gangs. During that phase of the action,
Kosovo police officers apprehended seven civilians
who were actively engaged in creating barricades and
obstructing the operation.

Among them was a United Nations diplomat of
Russian nationality named Mikhail Krasnoshchekov.
Mr. Krasnoshchekov used an official United Nations
vehicle with UNMIK licence plates to erect a barricade
for the sole purpose of preventing Kosovo police
from carrying out their mission. Kosovo police found
evidence that Mr. Krasnoshchekov used the United
Nations vehicle to transport a chainsaw to the location
where these events took place. This chainsaw was used
to cut down trees that were thrown onto the highway to
prevent the passage of Kosovo police to Zubin Potok.
Mr. Krasnoshchekov placed the United Nations vehicle
in front of the trees to bolster the barricades.

He indicated that he understood the request of
Kosovo police to leave the place. He refused to cooperate

or to provide identification. After Mr. Krasnoshchekov's
repeated refusals to comply with the demands of the
police and his continued attempts to impede their
movement, the Kosovo police proceeded to detain this
individual. Mr. Krasnoshchekov was subsequently
escorted to the police station where he was held in
custody and offered medical treatment before being
transported to medical facilities. 1 have the report of the
hospital in Mitrovica where he was treated, which shows
nothing serious - nothing like what we have heard here
today, In the subsequent days, the Kosovo authorities
decided to deny Mr. Krasnoshchekov future entry into
the country. Upon his request, Mr. Krasnoshchekov
was released and transferred to Belgrade.

The NATO military presence in Kosovo - the
Kosovo Force - confirmed that the foregoing raids were
part of an operation executed exclusively by Kosovo
police and that all relevant authorities were informed.
Three Kosovo police officers were injured during the
efforts to remove the barricades used to obstruct this
operation. Despite the obstacles, our officers were able
to complete their mission.

I must admit that, in the light of these events,
we in Kosovo were appalled by the unending stream
of statements made in Belgrade and certain capitals
around the world with regard to this very successful
operation - an operation whose sole purpose was to
combat crime committed with remarkable coordination
of ethnicities, notwithstanding the efforts to portray
it as an operation with underlying ethnic motivations.
The sole intention of the police was to ensure the safety
and security of the people of Kosovo and protect them
from the gangs and criminal groups that make daily
living in our country very difficult.

Kosovo has hosted a countless number of United
Nations diplomats during the past two decades. They
are our friends, our mentors and our family. No UNMIK
employee has ever been in harm's way in Kosovo.
They have never been targeted with threats, violence
or attacks of any kind. To hear claims that the Kosovo
police or Government deliberately targeted United
Nations employees in Kosovo is beyond comprehension
to those of us who live in Kosovo. Mr. Krasnoshchekov
obstructed law enforcement in Kosovo of his own
volition, or, to put it frankly, he willingly became a
shield to criminal gangs attempting to inhibit an ongoing
police operation. Furthermore, UNMIK personnel in
northern municipalities was warned with an instruction
that advised them to work from home that day.

This episode is unheard of. It has nothing to do with
the mandate of Mr. Krasnoshchekov or the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Kosovo.
I would like to know what would happen if any
of us - accredited ambassadors and United Nations
diplomatic personnel alike, with full diplomatic
immunity i attempted to prevent an ongoing police
operation here in New York or in Moscow or in Berlin
or anywhere else, for that matter. The Government
of Kosovo and its agencies comply fully with all
international legislation regulating the status of
diplomats stationed in our territory and adhere to all
existing standards in terms ofrespecting the privileges of
diplomatic personnel. However, we do find it surprising
that a United Nations international civil servant, who
has undergone advanced training for security in the
field - mandatory training that is provided to every
deployed United Nations staff member - suddenly
finds himself barricading local roads in Kosovo with
his official United Nations-issued vehicle. Are we to
understand that the United Nations mandate in Kosovo
has been extended to include active engagement in
obstructing local law enforcement and preventing it
from fulfilling its constitutional mandates?

A member of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo
put the lives of our police officers at risk. Given the
distressing nature of this incident, the institutions
of the Republic of Kosovo demand a United Nations
investigation into this unprecedented and dangerous
behaviour. Judging from the statements that we have
heard here today, it appears to us that law and order
are an inconvenience for the authorities in Belgrade.
What they desire is that chaos and fear will prevail.
War-mongering is their preferred instrument for the
manipulation of our citizens and the maintenance of
control. We have seen it all: from character assassination
to attempts at actual assassination. Allow me to remind
the Security Council that the main suspect for the
assassination of Mr. Oliver Ivanovie found safe haven
in Serbia, of all places.

We also heard the Council's references to the

dialogue. Kosovo wants dialogue, but we do not want a
conditioned process. It is Serbia that is conditioning the
dialogue with Kosovo. We have also heard that Kosovo
is not implementing the agreements. Kosovo has
implemented every agreement. The only reason why
the Association Agreement is not being implemented is
because local Serbs in Kosovo, who are supposed to be
part of the Working Group's drafting of the Association
statute, are being controlled from Belgrade and told to
abandon Kosovo institutions. I will not even mention
the lack of implementation of the agreement on energy,
school diplomas, among others.
There is only one Government that exercises
pressure against local Serbs in Kosovo, and that is
the Government sitting in Belgrade. During just the
past couple of months, we witnessed the detention
of a member of the Kosovo Parliament, a Deputy
Minister, and a Kosovo Government official of Serbian
ethnicity by the Serbian Government. Their only crime
was daring to speak their mind and act on their own
free will.

The combination ofa medieval mindset and modern
propaganda adopted by the Serbian Government and
State apparatus is a menace to peace. I cannot help but
acknowledge their ongoing campaign to dehumanize
the people of Kosovo, to portray us as inherently
inferior, less than human and akin to savages. As
despicable as that is, it is, unfortunately, no news to
me. That happened in the 1980s and 1990s, and those
are days that I remember well. But it also happened
for centuries.

In 1913, a former Prime Minister of Serbia, Vladan
Bordevic', characterized Albanians as blood-thirsty
animals that are so inconceivably ignorant that they
could not tell the difference between sugar and snow.
Among the Albanians, he said, there seemed to have
been humans with tails as late as the nineteenth century.
Here we are, over a century later, listening to Serbian
officials spewing hatred, continuing with the same
baseless racist claims, attempting to rewrite history.

Let me make a small digression. What Flora

Brovina, a member of the Kosovo Parliament, did was
condemned unanimously in Kosovo. I was one of those
who condemned it. But, unlike in Serbia, our media
and our judiciary do not become complicit in politics. It
was our media, our judiciary that stated the fact that the
photograph was false, but that does not take away from
the truth. It was the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, an American-based health organization,
that conducted the survey and came up with the number
of women that were raped in Kosovo. That was not my
number. And only a few months ago, right here in this
Chamber, the President of Serbia had the audacity to
make a public plea to the Council for someone to tame
those people (see S/PV.8427). Tame them, he said; tame
them. Just last month, the Prime Minister of Serbia
publicly stated, in reference to people of Kosovo, that
those people literally just emerged from the woods.

I would love to hear them repeat those
unconscionable statements to the women and men
of Kosovo who make us proud every day with their
achievements in art, sports and innovation. Let them
unleash their vitriol before the families of the martyrs
who made the ultimate sacrifice to protect their loved
ones from the Serbian aggression. Let them unmask
their true motivation. Let them show us their crippling
fear of the ammunition of democracy: words and
thoughts - words that are spoken abroad and thoughts
stirring up at home. The people of Kosovo will not be
tamed. We will not be subjugated, and we will not be
ruled by Serbia ever again.

It is our hope that this Chamber will not lie abashed
and distracted before triumphant assertions of ethnic
hatred. The Republic of Kosovo will certainly never
waiver in its quest for peace and justice. However dim
the prospects may seem, we intend to fight. We will
fight with the power of our ideas and the courage of
our convictions, because surely that goal is sufficiently
important to deserve our devotion.

One day the professionalism of our institutions will
match the integrity of our media, the success of our
artists and athletes, the strength of our women and the
resilience of our civil society. On that day, we will have
built an even better Republic - one that is independent,
sovereign, integrated into the international community
and at peace with its neighbours, including Serbia.

The invitation stands. Come visit Kosovo, and the
Council can witness with its own eyes the progress that
it has made possible. As an extra treat, it will be able
to see the beautiful mountains from which we are so
proud to come, because as the famous expression by
Ernest Hemingway goes: mountaineering is the one
true sport; everything else is merely a game.

