Mr. Ritter (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein warmly
welcomes the initiative of the Belgian presidency to
hold an open debate of the Security Council on the
topic before us today. We are also grateful to your
delegation, Mr. President, for providing us with a
succinct and substantive concept paper (S/2007/334, annex) to that end. This is an important initiative on a
matter that has not been given sufficient attention in
the past, and we hope that your initiative constitutes
the first step in the ongoing involvement of the United
Nations system in this regard. Given the early stage of
the debate, consideration of this topic in other United
Nations forums could also be useful, provided that
there is the necessary coordination.

The way in which the exploitation of natural
resources and the financing of conflict parties is
interlinked, particularly with regard to the role played
by non-State actors, is well documented. Natural
resources can significantly influence conflict
dynamics. They can be both one of the factors
contributing to the outbreak of violent conflicts and a
reason for prolonging them.

As far as conflict prevention is concerned, we
agree that the governance of natural resources is of
crucial importance. In that respect, it is worth recalling
that common article 1, paragraph 2, of the two human
rights Covenants of 1966 is relevant in that regard and
should be taken into account in all endeavours to
establish regimes dealing with the governance of
natural resources. Within the United Nations system,
the Kimberley Process is the best-known of such
initiatives, since it was launched in response to
situations on the agenda of the Security Council. There
have been other very important initiatives dealing with
the subject, as outlined in the presidency's concept
paper. Their endorsement by the General Assembly, or
perhaps by the Council itself, would certainly enhance
their relevance and effectiveness.

The Council may want to give particular attention
to situations where the exploitation of a natural
resource is an essential element of the national
economy and may present the risk of great revenues
being generated through the trafficking of natural
resources and illicit commodities in a conflict
environment. Of no lesser importance are situations
where a natural resource is indispensable to cover the
basic needs of a population or populations involved.
That is of particular relevance in connection with
water, an increasingly scarce resource for which there
is already competition by consumers in several parts of
the world. Access to water already plays a role in
various current conflict situations. Efforts by the
Council to solve them must take this aspect into
account.

As outlined in the presidency's concept paper, the
Council's action in the past has been focused mainly on
the role of natural resources once a conflict has broken
out, usually in the form of armed conflict. Sanctions
imposed by the Council with regard to certain
commodities have contributed to conflict resolution in
Angola, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Experience shows
that such sanctions need to be tailored to the
circumstances of each individual case and to have
clearly identified objectives, specified measures for
implementation by Member States and conditions for
their suspension or lifting.

In fine-tuning future action against the
background of past experience, the Council can
continue to take effective measures in that respect. But
we also believe that future discussions would benefit
from an enhanced emphasis on aspects of prevention
and early identification of situations where natural
resources could contribute to the outbreak of a conflict.
The debate can thus be framed in the context of
relevant General Assembly resolutions as well as
Council resolution 1625 (2005), adopted during the
2005 World Summit. Very useful work could be carried
out within the United Nations system by establishing
principles on the governance of natural resources,
supporting existing initiatives and ensuring that the
relevance of natural resources is taken into account in
political efforts aimed at conflict prevention.

The role played by natural resources in post-
conflict environments is also essential. When combined
with good governance, the exploitation of natural
resources can have a stabilizing effect by generating
economic growth and thus alleviating poverty. But it
can also become a subject of transnational organized
crime and thereby play a part in causing war-torn
societies to relapse into conflict. It is therefore crucial
that the Security Council support international and
regional efforts to promote assistance to post-conflict
countries that are rich in natural resources. The Council
should in particular explore a possible stronger role for
the Peacebuilding Commission in this respect and
promote increased activities of other United Nations
agencies and programmes, such as the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime.

We hope that this debate will result in a
presidential statement that gives guidance for further
discussion. The next stage of discussion would
certainly benefit from a comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General on the existing activities and
capacities within the system and on the possibility of
strengthening the civil component of peacekeeping
missions in the area of good governance on natural
resources management in all its aspects. In addition,
such a report could elaborate on the possible
relationships between specific resources and certain
kinds of conflicts.

