Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): For over three
years the international community has worked to secure a
negotiated settlement to the conflict in Croatia and to seek
the reconciliation of a divided country. Numerous efforts by
international mediators have been made without success,
not least because of the intransigence of the local Croatian
Serb authorities in acknowledging that their future lies as
part of the Republic of Croatia.

The British Government is fully aware of the deep
frustration experienced by the Croatian Government as a
result of this intransigence, and we have repeatedly
affirmed our commitment to Croatian sovereignty and
territorial integrity and sought to help bring about a
negotiated settlement preserving that territorial integrity.
But that frustration does not justify a recourse to military
action to impose a settlement. Furthermore, the decision to
choose the military option, which has been condemned by
the British Government, was made at a time when it was
clear that the potential for further political negotiations had
not been exhausted. It has inevitably meant the loss of
innocent life - including lives of United Nations
peace-keepers - and the exodus of Croatian Serbs from
their rightful homes. Nor are we prepared to condone what
has been called de facto "ethnic cleansing". We deeply
regret that these Croatian actions have inevitably called
into question Croatia's future relations with the rest of Europe.

The immediate priorities now are to bring the
fighting to an end; to provide humanitarian relief for the
very large numbers of displaced persons - by many
estimates well over 100,000; to prevent a resurgence of
fighting in Eastern Slavonia and the consequent risks of
an escalation in the conflict; and to see that the safety and
rights of the members of the Serb community who want
to stay in Croatia are guaranteed. Thereafter, we look to
all concerned to resume the dialogue on a negotiated
settlement, which is the only way in which long-term
stability can be assured. We call on all concerned to show
the utmost restraint.

We also look, in particular, to the Croatian
Government fully to uphold the civil rights of minorities
in its country and actively to promote the conditions that
will help persuade those Serbs who have fled that it is
indeed safe to return and that they will be treated fairly
by the local Croatian authorities. If the Croatian
Government is to give the lie to accusations of de facto
"ethnic cleansing", it must demonstrate by actions, and
not just by words, that it is committed to fulfilling its
obligations, including those allowed for in its
Constitution, as far as civil rights are concerned. This will
require a sustained commitment at all levels. Access to
the region by international monitors is the essential first
step to help re-establish that confidence. The British
Government is grateful to Mr. Akashi for his strenuous
efforts in that regard.

As a troop contributor to the United Nations peace
forces in the former Yugoslavia, the British Government
has also joined those who have strongly condemned the
attacks on and the treatment of United Nations peace-
keepers, who were present in the Republic of Croatia at
the request of its Government. Our condolences go to the
Danish and Czech Governments, and also to the families
of those soldiers who were killed as a result of actions by
the Croatian armed forces. This Council expects the
Croatian Government to punish all those responsible
without delay, and we expect the Secretary-General to be
in a position shortly to confirm that this is in hand. In the
meantime, the future of the United Nations Confidence
Restoration Operation in Croatia (UNCRO) in the
Republic of Croatia will need careful consideration, and
we, too, look forward to receiving the Secretary-General's
recommendations in the near future.

 

