Mr. Bildt: Let me start by expressing my
appreciation for this opportunity to come back to the
Council on the important issue of the search for self-
sustaining stability in the Balkans. Let me also express
my appreciation for the opportunity to do this when the
High Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy, Mr. Javier Solana, will
also be addressing the Council on these same issues. In
very many ways, the efforts of the United Nations and
the European Union in that region are complementary,
and this discussion here today demonstrates this.

The search for self-sustaining stability in that part
of Europe is certainly not a new one. When I spoke in
this Chamber in late February, I noted the high priority
that has been given to this by the international
community ever since the start ofthe dissolution of the
old Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the
early 19905. I also then noted that we are far from the
goals that we have set. Looking only at the United
Nations, we now have no fewer than three
peacekeeping operations in the area. There have
previously been four other large United Nations
missions. The wider international community has
approximately a quarter of a million young men and
women in uniform either serving in peace operations,
just having come out of such operations or actively
preparing to go into them. And we know that if these
troops were to be withdrawn today there would, in all
probability, be war tomorrow.

This is the reality of the situation in the region
today. Self-sustaining stability can be achieved only
when a firm political framework has been established
for the region as a whole. This will be the case only
when the different national and other communities in
the area have accepted such a political framework and
when it has also been fully recognized by the
international community at the end of the day under the
auspices ofthis Council.

Historical experience shows that when such a
firm framework is in place the peoples and the nations
of the region can live peacefully together in the same
way as in other parts of Europe or, indeed, the world.
But historical experience equally shows that whenever
the political framework of the region is, or is seen as,
unclear, fragile or open, there tends to develop a cycle
of fears on the one hand and expectations on the other,
often driven by extremists, nearly always resulting in
conflict, in war and in massive violations of human
rights.

This was the case during the slow collapse of the
Ottoman Empire. Again it was the case during the
inter-ethnic and national carnage in the area during the
Second World War and, once again, this has been the
case over and over again since the early 19905.

Today, most of our attention is focussed on
Bosnia, where we are making slow but steady progress
with the implementation of the 1995 Dayton/Paris
Peace Agreement, and Kosovo, where the United
Nations, in the absence of a proper peace agreement, is
engaged in one of its most demanding and difficult
missions ever.

But the region is larger than this. It can be argued
the Bosnia and Kosovo are just the most acute fracture
zones where the different national agendas of the
regions most clearly meet. I am stressing this in order
to underline that we will never succeed in either
Kosovo or Bosnia if we fail in the wider region south
of Slovenia and north of Greece.

Stability in Kosovo and in Bosnia is obviously
vital for the region. Such stability is hardly achievable
in the long run if there is not a stable structure for the
region as a whole - and I would add, without a firm
place for the region in the wider process and the wider
structures of European integration. Only thus will a
self-sustaining stability be possible.

In Kosovo, the Council has been recently
informed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kouchner, of the efforts under
way to move towards the setting up of structures of
self-government and substantial autonomy. I consider
this to be of critical importance for wider stability in
the region also. But these efforts are undertaken - let
us be clear on this- in a climate that is far from
satisfactory in a number of respects.

There is a climate of terror against minorities in
Kosovo, primarily the Serb one, and this is repulsive.
There is still far more of the rule of thugs than the rule
of law. Although the local Kosovo Albanian leadership
has condemned acts of violence, there is still a climate
oftolerance ofterror that we must never accept.

This can never be an argument for giving up or
postponing our efforts to develop the structures of self-
government and autonomy. On the contrary, in the long
run - and it might indeed be a long one - there is no
other way. The elected representatives of Kosovo will
soon learn that neither Europe nor the rest of the
international community will accept a political system
that does not clearly address issues of human rights and
the protection of minorities.

In Bosnia, the international efforts are now
focused on the three priorities of the High
Representative: accelerated minority returns,
functioning common institutions and the necessity of
economic reforms. Let me also note the particular
importance ofthe latter.

For far too long, far too little has been done in
Bosnia in this respect. We are now faced with an aid-
dependent economy in a situation where aid is starting
to decline, with the result that a severe economic and
social crisis might be unavoidable. This will threaten
the future of the country.

We will press on with minority returns. But in the
absence of a functioning economy there is a risk that
Bosnia could become a country where the old return to
end their days where they were born, but the young
leave because they do not see prospects for the future.
The elected leaders of Bosnia must take action on this.

If we broaden our horizon from Kosovo and
Bosnia, I believe that the most pressing issue in the
region is the question of the future of the present
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We cannot have self-
sustaining stability in the region if we do not have self-
sustaining stability in its different parts. In this respect,
the situation in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
gives cause for concern. In my opinion, the present
structures ofthe present Yugoslavia are unsustainable.

This is primarily due to the acute constitutional
crisis between the Republic of Montenegro and the
Federal authorities in Belgrade, where the federal
institutions of Yugoslavia have been grossly misused in
order also to exclude the representatives of the elected
authorities of Montenegro. They are today on a slow
but steady course towards a collision. This might not
be imminent, but the trends are very clearly there. I
believe that it is of key importance that we all give
support to the elected authorities in Montenegro in
their efforts to pave the way for the new deal which
they are seeking.

Added to this acute constitutional crisis, there is,
of course, also the unresolved issue of the future status
of Kosovo. Although on paper still an integral part of
the Republic of Serbia, the reality is different. I fail to
see any circumstances under which a peace agreement
will not have to include a clear constitutional
separation between the two.

Thus, we have a situation where the present
structures of the present Yugoslavia are unsustainable.
If we do not recognize this and try to pave the way for
sustainable solutions, there is an obvious risk of further
conflict and disintegration with potentially grave
consequences for the region as a whole.

When I go around the region, I note that most of
its leaders see the continued territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as important both for
wider regional stability and for the internal stability of
the different countries. They are alarmed by the present
situation in Yugoslavia, but they do not favour a further
disintegration ofthe region.

We are undoubtedly handicapped in our search
for peace by the fact that key persons in key public
positions in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are
refusing to respect indictments that have been issued
by the International Tribunal, thus creating a situation
where we cannot deal with them.

This situation is dangerous primarily for the
Federal Republic itself, but also, of course, for the
wider region. I believe it is important to recall that in
the Dayton Peace Agreement, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia subscribed to the position that persons
indicted by the Tribunal and not cooperating with it
cannot hold public office.

What we are demanding of them today is thus no
more than what they themselves have previously
agreed to demand of others as part of the search for
peace in the region. And the sooner the authorities of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its entire
political system see the logic of this, the sooner we can
all work together to create self-sustaining structures -
within its borders as well - as part of the search for
self-sustaining stability in the region as a whole.
We cannot wait too long. We know from bitter
experience that as long as there is a feeling that
arrangements are not final and that core issues remain
open, tensions are likely to persist and there will be the
ever-present risk that the forces of nationalism, of
revanchism and of revolt will surface again with
devastating consequences. That is the situation we are
in today.

There are certainly positive as well as negative
trends in the region. We are trying to strengthen the
former - and let me note the positive political changes
in Croatia - and to dampen the latter: let me note the
rise of organized crime in large parts of the region. But
as long as the core issues of the core conflicts are open,
the danger of the forces of disintegration driving the
region into new conflict will always be there.

And there are numerous open political issues
apart from those connected with the unsustainability of
the present Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The issue
of the Prevlaka peninsula is small but significant. The
succession negotiations have been ongoing for nearly
10 years without any result whatsoever. And there are
issues connected with the establishment of full, normal
relations among all States in the region that have not
yet been solved.

I see all of these issues coming together at some
point in time in a comprehensive regional settlement of
the outstanding political issues. Such a settlement will
not only pave the way for the full and speedy
reintegration of a Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into
the region; it will also be even more important for the
entry of the region into the process of integration with
the rest of Europe and with the international
community. Such a comprehensive political settlement
will not be possible if we do not have a consensus in
the international community, reflected in the Security
Council, on what we are trying to assist the region to
achieve. And it will not be possible if there is not a
recognition that a true deal for true peace must meet
the minimum demands of everyone but is unlikely to
meet the maximum demands of anyone.

The dialogue with, and within, the Council is thus
an essential part of creating that consensus that will
make us ready to move towards a comprehensive
political settlement when the conditions for it are in
place.

This is a year of important elections in the region.
The Croatian parliamentary and presidential elections
are behind us; so are the Bosnian local elections and
the local elections in part of Montenegro. Ahead of us
are further important elections. We are moving, as I
mentioned, towards local elections in Kosovo, and
there will also be local- and fiercely contested-
elections in adjoining Albania and in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. There will later on
be parliamentary elections in Bosnia. And there will
have to be local elections in Serbia as well as federal
elections in Yugoslavia; although it is difficult to see
that these will be free and fair, they could nevertheless
represent an opportunity for the people of Serbia and
Yugoslavia to make their voices heard. Their choice is
between isolation and integration.

There are possibilities for positive change, but
also for disruptive conflicts, in several of these
elections. I believe that the message that the
international community sends will be important for all
of them. Here, the position of the European Union is
obviously of particular importance. I firmly believe
that it is in paving the way for integration into Europe
that we must seek the long-term solutions to the issues
of the region. The forces of disintegration in the region
will finally be overcome only on the day when the full
conditions exist for them to be subject to the forces of
integration in Europe as a whole. Then we can achieve
not only self-sustaining stability, but also the
conditions for self-sustaining economic growth in the
region, without which we will not overcome the
horrible legacy of the many years of war, of
destruction, of sanctions and ofisolation.

With the exception of the Middle East, there has
been no other region of the world, throughout the
history of the United Nations, where so many peace
operations have been deemed necessary as the region
south of Slovenia and north of Greece. We thus not
only have an interest in creating the conditions for the
success of the present United Nations missions in
Kosovo and in Bosnia; we have a strong interest in
assisting a region where the peace is kept by others to
become a region where the peace is kept by the region
itself. But we must all recognize that we have a long
way to go.

