The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Mexico.

The United Nations is the source of, and the
forum in which, the main arrangements and agreements
have been achieved that govern modern international
relations. The United Nations sets out principles and
norms and undertakes commitments that are basis for
coexistence between countries. We must recognize,
however, that the vision of the United Nations is still,
to a large extent, an ideal that remains to be achieved.
But it is a valid ideal, to which political, intellectual
and social leaders aspire to all around the world.

The United Nations is founded on a tremendous
collective force - humanity's aspirations to peace. In
every crisis the United Nations is reborn, and its
purposes and principles are confirmed and renewed. In
this Chamber we have repeatedly addressed the
limitations of the United Nations, the persistent failure
to ensure compliance with some of its resolutions, and
the vital need to reform it.

However, to date the United Nations has been the
best creation of the international community. As we see
it, it is the only option for curbing war and minimizing
the use of force in international relations. To date we
have not always found the way to prevent conflicts.
Experience teaches us that, as long as the original
causes remain that gave rise to conflicts, then those
conflicts will probably re-emerge sooner of later in one
form or another. For that reason, we need to find a way
to strengthen the role of the United Nations in
reconstruction tasks. This must be the focus of
immediate and future discussions of its component
bodies.
We owe a great deal to the United Nations in
terms of the preservation and improvement of the
quality of our lives. To the United Nations, to a large
extent, we owe the little or much that has been
achieved in the banning of weapons of mass
destruction, controlling environmental degradation,
combating endemic diseases, achieving equality for
women and protecting children in conflict situations.

The United Nations is multidimensional and
multifaceted. Among the characteristics that best
reflect the multiple dimensions of the United Nations
are its diversity and its capabilities. In the context of
the role that it recently played in the reconstruction of
communities devastated by war, these capabilities have
been seen in action.

Peace is still a goal that escapes us. However, in
the many and, indeed, contrasting experiences of the
United Nations in post-conflict periods, we are finding
a way towards genuine peace. As each conflict breaks
out, we can find, in the violence and the hatred and
resentment that erupt in every war, the seeds of another
conflict and another war. There are regions such as the
Middle East where this chain appears to be endless.

For that reason, United Nations post-conflict
peace-building operations must be the best possible
instrument to break this vicious circle. In Timor-Leste,
Kosovo, Sierra Leone and Afghanistan, the conditions
of the conflict are different, but the objectives for the
United Nations are alike: rebuilding communities;
supporting them in their efforts to find settlements and
viable ways of ensuring political life; supporting them
in the creation of institutions; and giving them the
means to address the most serious humanitarian
situations, while safeguarding human rights.

Every situation presents special challenges. In
Kosovo, success has to be measured in terms of the
extent to which multi-ethnicity is achieved, not through
forced measures but as an expression of plurality and
shared wealth. In Afghanistan, the measure of success,
among other things, will be the degree to which women
are fully incorporated into the economic, political and
social life of that country. In Sierra Leone, one of the
key tasks on which its future will depend is achieving
disarmament, demobilization and the full and fair
reintegration of former combatants and mercenaries,
many of them children, along with the effective
banning of small arms and light weapons as means to
achieve shared prosperity in that country.

In Timor-Leste, the efforts of the United Nations
have focused on the creation of a national entity that
will be the expression of the aspirations of a country
that must leave behind segregation and violence. In
each of these places, the United Nations has understood
that the key is taking a comprehensive approach, as
well as working jointly and in consultation with all
component bodies and with all countries interested in
promoting reconstruction.

Similarly, the United Nations has had to
understand and draw upon the work of organizations of
civil society and non-governmental organizations. The
Security Council's obligation is to pursue these tasks
on the basis of clear mandates backed up by resources
that will make it possible to perform such tasks
successfully.

To that end, the lines of communication between
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council, and between the Economic and Social Council
and the General Assembly, need to be more flexible.
My delegation is grateful for the attendance and
participation of the Presidents of the Economic and
Social Council and of the General Assembly at this
meeting. This underscores the shared purposes that
should exist throughout our Organization.

The Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
emphasized the importance of this unity of principle
and purpose. In the case of Iraq, the divisions in the
Security Council have been deep-seated and
fundamental. They have to do with a way of
understanding and applying the principles and norms
that govern the authorization of the use of force,
pursuant to the San Francisco Charter.

Given the events that have taken place, these
differences will not be resolved in discussions or in
mere statements. However, we are in duty bound to
overcome them effectively for the benefit of this
Organization. We cannot ignore or underestimate the
elements that have divided us. We must overcome
them. This will be achieved only if we work on the
basis of unity of purpose with respect to the role that
the United Nations should play in the reconstruction of
Iraq.

This unity of purpose will have to be based on the
definitions that the Secretary-General himself has
delineated this morning. The key to reconstruction
must be the inalienable right of Iraqis to decide their
own future, defining for themselves the new political
and institutional arrangements through which they will
try to achieve their national aspirations. The United
Nations is an Organization based on principles.
Without principles, its existence and mission would
have no meaning. In this regard, the future of the Iraqi
people should lie in their own hands. The people of
Iraq must recover full exercise of their sovereignty,
with the support of the United Nations.

Likewise, the United Nations should help to
safeguard the territorial integrity of the country and,
above all, give guarantees that the natural resources of
the Iraqis will be used by them and for them.

The United Nations role in Iraq also deeply
involves the promotion of the human, political, civil,
economic and social rights of the Iraqi people through
the promotion of development and the protection of the
environment. This Organization must also help to
maintain and safeguard the religious and cultural
identity of that country and to preserve its
archaeological and cultural heritage.

However imperfect the international order may
be, we have normative instruments to which all States
involved should subscribe. Of particular importance at
this time is compliance with the conventions relative to
humanitarian protection, in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention. In conformity with that
Convention, the immediate needs of the Iraqis must be
met. Above and beyond that obligation on the
occupying Powers, the United Nations should organize
and coordinate international humanitarian assistance in
Iraq. If we agree on the principles, we must also agree
on the tasks and responsibilities to be shared.

Mexico is convinced that the United Nations is
today the best instrument for finding multilateral
solutions to the challenges of peace-building and for
fostering international cooperation in solving
economic, social, cultural and humanitarian problems.
The Organization can dispense with none of these
purposes without losing its raison d'etre. Post-conflict
reconstruction is bound up with them all. The relevance
and future of this Organization largely depend on the
decisions and consensuses on those purposes that we
reach at this time.

I should like to thank the members of the Council
for the support they have offered the delegation of
Mexico as it discharged its functions and strove to
reach understandings and to promote the initiatives
under discussion by the Council in the course of this
month. I wish also to thank the Secretary-General and
the entire Secretariat team that serves us in the Council
for their tremendous support. I particularly thank the
interpreters, who often have to speak even faster than
we do.

I wish the delegation of Pakistan every success as
it assumes the presidency of the Security Council
tomorrow.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.55 p.m.
