Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
respond to three issues raised by the representative of
Japan in his statement this afternoon.

First, Yasukuni Shrine is a facility that enshrines
not only ordinary soldiers but also Class A war criminals
from the Second World War and many Japanese Imperial
Army and military police personnel who inflicted the
most unimaginable atrocities on the peoples of the
region during the wars and during its colonial rule.
As mentioned by the Japanese representative, Japan's
political leader recently paid tribute to the Yasukuni
Shrine, despite the strong appeals not to do so issued
by many countries of the region and in the world. The
Japanese representative conveniently said that the
Prime Minister did so to make peace. How preposterous
is that?

Worshipping heinous war criminals cannot bring
any peace to a region where the people have suffered
so much from the heinous acts of those honoured
criminals. Paying tribute to the Yasukuni Shrine is
nothing more than an attempt to glorify its past. The
explanation that the Government offers can be received
only as unintelligent to outsiders. If Japan truly
wants to actually contribute to world peace, it is most
important for Japan to face up to history and to build
trust by expressing deep remorse and apologizing to the
Government and the people in the region.

On the second issue of comfort women, which
actually means forced sexual slavery, administered
by the Japanese Imperial Army during the Second
World War, we cannot but express again our utmost
disappointment in the statement made by Japan.
Despite the 1996 report of United Nations Special
Rapporteur Coomaraswamy (E/CN.4/1996/53) and
the 1998 report of Special Rapporteur McDougall
(E/CN.4/Sub.2/1998/13), which firmly underscored the
legal responsibility of Japan for the comfort women,
Japan has never accepted legal responsibility. Instead,
Japan has made continuous attempts to redefine the
issue as a charity and humanitarian on.

No, the issue is one of a crime against humanity,
requiring judicial justice and accountability, not
charity. That issue is not a dead issue, as my delegation
stated this morning, because the victims of those
heinous crimes are still alive. Further, lamentably,
some Japanese leaders have even been saying that
such sexual slavery was committed not only by Japan
but also be other countries as well, and they ask why
Japan alone should feel remorseful, ashamed or even
responsible. Let me reiterate that contrary to Japan's
wish, the issue will not disappear until the Japanese
Government acknowledges its legal responsibility and
takes measures that are acceptable to the victims.

Finally, on the issue of revising the textbook,
today we have reflected on the horrendous scourge
of world wars and the lessons that we have learned
from those horrific experiences. First among the
core lessons we can draw from today's deliberations
is the courage to confront the past with honesty and,
secondly, based on that, the need to make efforts
aimed at reconciliation - reconciliation with the past
and reconciliation with the victims, for the sake of a
peaceful future. Those lessons should be passed on to
future generations through education so that they do
not repeat what previous generations had gotten wrong.

This afternoon the Japanese representativejustified
the recent decision by the Japanese Government to
revise a textbook for Japanese students, including on
J apan's unlawful territorial claims against neighbouring
countries. Our reflection on the world wars clearly
showed that antagonism and hostilities ultimately lead
to conflict and tension. Japan's move to indoctrinate
its younger generations with inaccurate historical
information will only sow permanent discord in future
generations, resulting in tragedy.

In conclusion, I cannot but raise a question about
what kind of peace Japan is trying to contribute to
through its recent proactive strategy.

