Mr. Cardi (Italy): I speak also on behalfof Sweden.

This unanimous vote is a strong sign of Security
Council unity. We are grateful to the United States, in
the role of penholder, for the constructive position that
allowed us to reach an important result. We also thank
Ethiopia for its flexibility and its role in the mission
in Abyei.

We share the points raised by United States on the
need for greater effectiveness in United Nations peace
missions. Renewing the mandate of a peacekeeping
mission should never be considered a routine activity
or business as usual. Instead, it always requires an
in-depth analysis by the Council. That is why, together
with Sweden, which I would like to commend for its
cooporation, and in close consultation with the 10
elected members, we asked on Friday to continue our
discussions. We thank you, Mr. President, for having
accepted that request, which led to a fruitful discussion
that made it possible for us to bridge positions and paved
the way for consensus in the interest of Council unity,
which we consider to be of paramount importance. In
that spirit, we worked towards a balanced solution that
brings together the need for more efficient peacekeeping
while contributing to preventing further instability
across East Africa.

The review of a peacekeeping mission should take
into account the views of the regional actors and of the
troop-contributing countries, in particular when such
views are convergent and adhere to the Secretary-
General's strategic reviews, as is the case with the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
Today's resolution 2352 (2017) does just that.

Nevertheless, we agree that the stalemate in
Abyei has gone on for too long. Today the Council is
saying to the parties that they must demonstrate clear
commitment in the next six months or UNISFA's
support for the joint border verification mission will
come to an end. In that regard, we welcome the recent
meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism,
held in Addis Ababa. The parties must now promptly
take concrete progress on the implantation of the
border arrangements.

The outcome of today's vote can provide a
successful model for discussion in the coming months
on other peacekeeping operations. Italy and Sweden
will continue to work with all members of the Council
for sustainable and inclusive solutions.

