Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the valuable information provided by
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia. We appreciate his

commendable work and commitment in a very complex
situation presenting a major challenge to the
international community. We also welcome the presence
and the message of Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union. And we
welcome, too, the presence of Mr. Omaar, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia; we listened attentively to
his message.

Mexico recognizes the significant efforts of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia as it
works to stabilize the country. We also appreciate the
work of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the commitment shown by the
Governments of Uganda and Burundi in support of
peace and the institutions of governance. We hope that
the reinforcements announced by other members of the
African Union will speedily complete the deployment
of AMISOM, and that the conditions necessary for the
achievement of the political, security and humanitarian
goals of its mandate will be created.

In the face of the resurgence of confrontation in
the capital between forces of the Transitional Federal
Government and insurgent groups, Mexico reiterates
that, in order to lay a foundation for sustainable peace,
there must be simultaneous progress in three mutually
reinforcing areas: the political sphere, security and
development.

We acknowledge the political progress that has
been made, in particular the interest of the Transitional
Federal Government in seeking agreements with more
moderate insurgent groups that remain outside the
Djibouti reconciliation process. The fact that certain
groups have jointed the peace process is a positive
achievement. Another positive development, to which
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
referred, was the recent signing of the joint declaration
with one of those groups to cooperate on security,
development, political and humanitarian issues.

Moreover, we support the steps taken by the
Government of Somalia to develop the country, in
particular the implementation, with the assistance of
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia, of the Transition
Plan for Somalia in such areas as the strengthening of
Somalia's National Security Force and police, as well
as the efforts made with regard to transparency and
accountability.
Mexico reiterates its great concern over the
deterioration in security conditions for United Nations
staff and humanitarian personnel, which has had a
direct impact on the provision of assistance to the
civilian population. It is unacceptable, that, confronted
by violence, attacks and plundering, some funds,
programmes and agencies, such as the World Food
Programme and UNICEF, have found it necessary to
suspend their work to distribute food and provide
health services.

Mexico believes that it is essential to address the
humanitarian situation and to reiterate the obligation of
States always to observe and ensure respect for
international humanitarian law, including their
fundamental responsibility to take every step necessary
to guarantee the protection of civilians. In that regard,
it is essential to ensure the presence on the ground of
the United Nations and humanitarian organizations. In
the current circumstances, safe access and the delivery
of humanitarian assistance are the only real option for
meeting the most basic needs of the population,
including internally displaced persons, refugees and,
above all, members of the most vulnerable groups,
such as women and children. We also call on the
parties to the conflict to prevent and halt the
recruitment of children.

Given the critical prevailing situation, it is a
matter of priority, as we have learned from the
briefings we have heard today, to establish minimal
security conditions on the ground and to ensure an
environment of sustainable security. Implementing the
gradual approach that we endorsed in resolution 1872
(2009) depends, first and foremost, on safeguarding the
survival of the current Government, the security of its
leading officials and the continued and growing
presence of the United Nations throughout the country.
We are convinced that establishing a security zone on
Somali territory and protecting strategic infrastructure,
such as maritime ports, are essential steps in laying the
foundations for the functioning of national institutions
and the international presence. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has rightly
said, insecurity has now become a source of income
and power.

In addition, we believe it important for the
Security Council to take into account the African
Union's call to establish a no-fly zone and a blockade
of Somali ports to prevent the entry of foreign
mercenaries and weapons into the country, as well as to
consider appropriate measures with regard to Eritrea in
order to address that country's support for insurgents,
which contributes to Somalia's ongoing instability.

Acts of piracy have increased during 2009,
including a total of 29 successful hijackings of vessels
through the month of June. Mexico commends the
decision of the Council of the European Union to
expand the mandate of Operation Atalanta. We welcome
the decision of NATO to expand its operations in the
region. We also support the proposals of the Secretary-
General to establish an additional working group
within the Contact Group to consider ways to combat
piracy on land, promote coordination of efforts
between States and the Government of Somalia, and
strengthen Somalia's coastguard capacity and its
judicial system in order to prosecute alleged pirates.

Lastly, in its capacity as Chair of the Somalia
Sanctions Committee, Mexico urges countries of the
region and the entire international community to
cooperate with the Committee's efforts with regard to
the arms embargo and the political, logistical and
financial support enjoyed by armed groups in Somalia.
In that connection, we ask for resolute support and full
cooperation with the Committee's monitoring group to
enable it to fulfil its mandated functions. We trust that
timely action by the Committee to implement resolution
1844 (2008) will become a fundamental component of
a coordinated regional approach to creating the
stability that the country so desperately needs.

