Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank Ambassador Gary
Quinlan for his informative briefing. We should like
to congratulate him and his team on having assumed
the chairmanship of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).

During the reporting period, the Committee
continued to undertake the tasks assigned to it with
transparency, impartiality and objectivity, without
compromising its mandate. We believe that it should
continue to do so in future.

We commend the work of the Committee, which
has continued to examine national reports, requests
and reports of alleged violations by Member States.
Regarding the requests made by States for information
on the sanctions regime, it is important that the
Committee respond in a clear, direct and expeditious
manner, pursuant to its mandate.

We welcome the work being done by the Panel of
Experts, including its dissemination and awareness-
raising activities. We encourage the Panel to continue its
work in strict compliance with the relevant resolutions.

The Panel provides invaluable support to the
Committee through, inter alia, its investigations into
alleged violations and incidents. Its conclusions and
recommendations, based on verifiable and reliable
information, provide a substantive basis for the
Committee's decision-making process.

Guatemala has always been in favour of the right of
all States to pursue the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
pursuant to international treaties, as long as they
comply with their verification obligations.

We believe that the Islamic Republic of Iran should
fully cooperate with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) to re-establish trust and to prove the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
As a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Iran is obligated to meet its
treaty obligations. Likewise, that country, as a member
of the IAEA, must cooperate fully with the Agency
within the framework of its Safeguards Agreement.

We have taken note of the recent IAEA report
on the implementation of the safeguards regime in
Iran pursuant to the NPT, in which it is once again
indicated that Iran has continued to accelerate its
nuclear programme and that pending questions remain
unresolved, including those related to the possible
military dimension of its nuclear programme. That
situation continues to be of great concern to us.

We join the call of the IAEA and urge Iran to
adopt measures towards the full implementation of the
Safeguards Agreement and other NPT obligations and
commitments and, in particular, submit to inspections.

In that context, we note with satisfaction the talks
held with the Agency in January and February, and we
hope that an agreement will soon be reached on the
structured approach.

Guatemala has been consistent in pressing for a
political and diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear
question. It does not believe that there is an alternative
to a negotiated solution. Efforts towards that end must
be made on the basis of the principles of consistency
and reciprocity and pursuant to the NPT.

We are encouraged by the recent talks between
the E3+3 group and the Islamic Republic of Iran held
in Almaty, which have been described by some as a
turning point in the process. Perhaps it is too early to
feel optimistic, but we hope that we can soon envision a
negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear questions. We
can only hope, together with the rest of the international
community, that the upcoming meetings to be held in
Istanbul and again in Almaty will result in real progress
and a positive outcome.

In conclusion, my delegation will continue to
actively participate in the Committee's deliberations,
with the goal of contributing to a lasting solution
ensuring the full implementation of the relevant
resolutions.

