Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): I would like to
thank the President for calling and presiding over this
open debate of the Council today.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of both New
Zealand and Australia.

I would also like to thank Mr. Egeland for his
sobering briefing this morning on the international
situation regarding the protection of civilians. It is
clear that there is a crisis in protection despite the
existence of important international human rights
instruments and international humanitarian law. The
examples of the situation in Darfur, the ongoing
conflicts in West Africa and violence in the Middle
East are testament to the need for sustained and
increased attention to this issue by the international
community.

Others have spoken about the need for the United
Nations and the international community to move
towards a culture of protection. New Zealand and
Australia share those views, and I would like to make
just four specific points here today.

First, we continue to see too many violent and
often fatal attacks deliberately targeting humanitarian
workers, most of whom are unarmed civilians
participating in United Nations missions in the field. In
his fourth report on the subject, the Secretary-General
highlighted that the safeguarding of humanitarian
personnel is a key challenge for the United Nations.
Regrettably, little has changed since that report was
published.

Secondly, it is of great concern that those who
carry out attacks against both civilians and
humanitarian workers do so seemingly with impunity.
The sad reality is that most of those responsible for
such atrocities have not been brought to justice. A high
degree of impunity has been allowed to exist because
of delays in establishing, or indeed the failure to
establish, appropriate criminal tribunals in which
offenders can be brought to justice. Impunity allows
those responsible to avoid being held to account for
their actions, denies justice to the victims and their
families and sends the message that the international
community is not prepared to take action, even when
the fundamental rights of humanity are breached.

New Zealand and Australia are strong supporters
of the International Criminal Court. Since the adoption
of the Rome Statute, we have worked closely with
others to encourage its widespread ratification and
implementation and to ensure recognition and respect
for the Court in the United Nations and in the wider
international arena.

The crucial role that the International Criminal
Court will now play in dealing with genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity cannot be
overstated. The United Nations and its Member States
must fully commit to establishing a culture of
protection for civilians. To that end, all countries that
have not yet done so are urged to accede to the
convention establishing the International Criminal
Court and to recognize its jurisdiction.

Thirdly, the scope of the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
must be widened to cover all situations where United
Nations and other associated personnel are engaged in
peacekeeping, humanitarian and other assistance-
related activities.

New Zealand and Australia remain committed to
working towards ensuring that the international legal
regime adequately meets the needs of personnel who
form part of United Nations operations, and whose
work, by its nature, renders them vulnerable to attack.
We also stress, however, that it is vital for the integrity
of the United Nations that the conduct of United
Nations peacekeepers and United Nations missions is
also beyond reproach in fulfilling the duty of
protecting civilian populations.

Fourthly and finally, New Zealand and Australia
welcome the report of the Secretary-General's High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, and its
focus on effectively addressing the range of threats to
global security. The Panel's recommendations on
internal threats and the responsibility to protect are
timely, and we urge Council members and the wider
United Nations membership to give them serious
consideration.

As strong advocates of multilateralism and the
rule of law, New Zealand and Australia support the
concept of the responsibility to protect as a good basis
for developing a new consensus on international action
within a United Nations framework in order to prevent,
or to respond effectively to, situations of extreme
suffering. Gross and systematic violations of human
rights anywhere are a threat to the security of us all and
cannot be tolerated.

