Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the presence of Mr. Ivan Mrkic',
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, in today's
meeting and share the ideas he has expressed. We have
carefully listened to Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

We thank Mr. Zarif for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) (S/2013/444) and the assessment of the
situation in the province.

The stabilization of the situation in Kosovo
remains distant. In the context of the implementation of
the agreement of 19 April between Serbia and Kosovo,
the international community, and especially the United
Nations, should not reduce the attention given to
the Kosovo settlement process. What is needed is to
genuinely leverage the capacities of UNMIK, taking
into account that the agreement has not eliminated the
province's core problems and that its implementation is
limping along due to the failure of one side with regard
to its obligations.

A milestone in the implementation of the agreement
would be the holding of municipal elections in the
province. We welcome the efforts of Belgrade aimed at
holding elections. We must ensure the participation of
the greatest possible number of voters living outside of
Kosovo, including internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugees.

It is necessary that the electoral process remain
status-neutral, even at the technical level. Both UNMIK
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), under resolution 1244 (1999), have the
mandate and power to prepare and monitor elections. We
note the importance of preventing -including through
the OSCE - possible sabotage by the Kosovo Albanian
authorities of the registration of Kosovo Serbs.

An nalysis of the situation attests to the fact that
Kosovo Albanian authorities, with the collusion of the
international presences, have essentially paralysed the
return to the province of more than 200,000 Serbian
refugees and IDPs, the restoration of their property
rights and the observance of internationally recognized
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Such a
distressing situation demands radical improvement.

We are seriously concerned about signals from
Pristina with respect to the downsizing in 2014 of the
activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), including of the unit that deals
with the investigation of cases identified by Council of
Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty with respect to
the illegal trafficking of human organs in Kosovo. That
Mission was deployed with the consent of the Security
Council, which authorized UNMIK to give it a number
of powers that EULEX cannot unilaterally transfer.
Because of the fact that resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully valid, those powers, in international legal terms,
remain within the competence of UNMIK and cannot
be transferred to a third party, particularly to a self-
proclaimed Pristina structure.

We also would like to remind the Council that it
empowered UNMIK to play the most active possible
role in assisting in the process of reaching a Kosovo
settlement. The Mission must seek to resolve problems
in such areas as the rule of law, the protection of the
rights of minorities, working out inter-communal
dialogues, gender issues and the protection of Orthodox
holy sites. To that end, it needs the appropriate human
and financial resources. We call upon the leadership
of the Mission to focus its efforts on implementing the
provisions of its mandate, even despite the impediments
that are imposed on it by the Kosovo-Albanian
authorities.

We are deeply concerned by the lack of assessment
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2013/444) of the
agreement reached by Tirana and Pristina in terms of
military cooperation, which governs issues concerning
the entry, withdrawal and temporary presence of the
armed forces of Kosovo and Albania on each other's
territories. The document de facto provides Albanian
armed forces the right, on some allegedly legal basis,
to be stationed in the territory of Kosovo, which
fundamentally contradicts the provisions of resolution
1244 (1999). Our position is that under the Serb-Kosovo
agreements, the security of Serbs in the province is
guaranteed by the NATO-led Kosovo Force. Kosovo
armed forces or other units of any kind should not be
present in northern areas of the province

We anticipate that the dialogue mediated by the
European Union between Belgrade and Pristina at
a high political level will contribute to a long-term
settlement of the issues of Kosovo. However, the final
say in any case remains with the Security Council.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force and
continues to be binding in international legal terms on
any Kosovo settlement.

