Mr. Fowler (Canada): Mr. President, we salute your
invitation to Mr. Olara Otunnu to set the context for our
discussion of Sierra Leone this morning. I can think of no
more fitting reminder of what we are seeking to achieve
with the draft resolution before us than Special
Representative Otunnu's vivid and jolting reminder of the
horrors perpetrated upon children - including infants as
young as eight weeks old - over the course of Sierra
Leone's eight-year-long civil war.

Additionally, it is fitting that we should be
welcoming to this table new colleagues from both Sierra
Leone and Nigeria on this occasion. The Canadian
delegation looks forward to working closely with both
Ambassadors Kamara and Mabanefo as the Security
Council grapples with threats to the peace and stability of
their region.

(spoke in French)

Canada will support the draft resolution before us
today. My delegation would like to thank our British
colleagues in particular for their efforts to integrate the
views of all Council members in the draft resolution. The
adoption today of the draft resolution establishing the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) will
be an important step in the implementation of the Lome
Agreement. It will show our firm commitment to the
peace process, both that of the Council and that of the
broader international community. We thank all those
whose efforts have brought us to this important juncture,
and in particular Mr. Okelo, the personnel of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone, the troop-
contributing countries, in particular Nigeria, and, of

 

course, all the personnel of the Economic Community of
West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG).

We also wish to pay a tribute to the heroic efforts of
humanitarian workers in Sierra Leone. Far too often,
humanitarian personnel are victims of the very violence
whose effects they are trying to alleviate. The growing
number of casualties among them demands that we take
urgent measures, as was so forcefully and eloquently
pointed out by the Deputy Secretary-General in her
statement to the General Assembly last week.

(spoke in English)

The establishment of a United Nations-funded and
United Nations-commanded peacekeeping operation will at
last allow the international community to relieve some of
the burden assumed by ECOMOG for so long. The funding
of this Mission through assessed contributions will ensure
that much of the financial load is assumed by the wider
international community and that UNAMSIL will be
equipped with a predictable source of financial support. It
is of considerable regret to us that some of the soldiers
serving in Sierra Leone on behalf of the international
community, the non-UNAMSIL ECOMOG contingents, will
not be funded on this basis and will instead continue to rely
on voluntary contributions, which have been desperately
slow in coming and which are, at least on the basis of past
practice, unlikely to relieve significantly the financial
burden ECOMOG troop-contributors have assumed.

The conflict in Sierra Leone has had a truly tragic
impact: tragic in its dimensions and tragic in its
consequences for the civilian population. The people of that
small, impoverished nation have been subject to
unimaginable atrocities and unspeakable suffering. Most
often the victims have been women and children. The
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation
will help provide, in cooperation with ECOMOG, a more
secure environment for the people of Sierra Leone. In this
regard, Canada is pleased that UNAMSIL's mandate
includes provisions for the protection of civilians and of
United Nations and associated personnel under Chapter VII
of the Charter, and we appreciate the kind words of
colleagues for our efforts in this regard.

United Nations peacekeepers now have the authority
to act decisively and forcefully in the face of threats to
civilians. This should have an important deterrent effect. A
strong and robust United Nations presence will give those
who would threaten defenceless civilians, including tiny
children, still greater cause to consider the consequences of
their actions. UNAMSIL will also play an important role
in the implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former rebels. The successful
implementation of the peace process will hinge largely on
the success of the disarmament programme, and I am
pleased that as of this week that important process has
now been launched.

It will be essential for UNAMSIL and ECOMOG,
each of which has roles to play in the disarmament
process, to coordinate their activities closely to ensure that
their efforts are mutually reinforcing. The coordination of
the work of two international forces in Sierra Leone will
pose significant challenges. But with strong command,
unity of purpose and a determination to work closely
together, UNAMSIL and ECOMOG should be able to
carry out their important mandates successfully.

As there can be no lasting peace without justice,
Canada also welcomes the incorporation of UNOMSIL's
human rights unit into the new UNAMSIL. We expect the
unit to continue to play a critical role in the promotion
and protection of human rights, with particular emphasis
on human rights monitoring in all parts of the country,
and in the implementation of human rights technical
cooperation programmes. The unit will complement the
crucial work of the bodies established by the Lome
Agreement, particularly the truth and reconciliation
commission and the human rights commission. Such
human rights units are now standard components of
United Nations peace support operations and constitute a
practical means of enhancing human security.

While the commitment of the international
community is key to the future peace and stability of
Sierra Leone, so too, of course, is that of the people of
Sierra Leone themselves. Ultimately, the destiny of Sierra
Leone will, of course, remain in the hands of Sierra
Leoneans. Canada therefore urges all parties to respect
fully the provisions of the Lome Agreement and to work
together in a spirit of compromise and reconciliation.

The incorporation this week of former rebel leaders
into the Government of Sierra Leone constitutes an
important step in the implementation of the Lome
Agreement. We in Canada stand ready to assist so that
the process of rebuilding can begin in earnest. In
partnership with the international community, the people
of Sierra Leone can rebuild their society. Today's
establishment of UNAMSIL is an important step in that
direction.

 

