Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I wish to start by thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Wane and President
Mogae for their comprehensive briefings to the Council
this morning.

The political, security and humanitarian situation in
South Sudan remains deeply concerning. The ongoing
conflict continues to have a profound impact on the
people of South Sudan, with almost 2 million people
having fled the country and half of the remaining
population in need of assistance. As has been said
before, a political solution is the only way to resolve the
conflict and to end the suffering of the people. Efforts
to that end must therefore be redoubled and encouraged.

In this regard, we welcome the recent initiatives
by South Sudan's neighbours, in particular the decision
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) to convene a high-level revitalization forum
and the approval by the IGAD Council of Ministers
of a detailed timeline to implement this decision.
The forum should help move the parties towards a
permanent ceasefire and a credible political process.
We also welcome the efforts made by Uganda and
President Museveni, as well as by the African Union,
in supporting the process. The commitment of IGAD to
engage all parties, including estranged groups and other
stakeholders, is particularly important. Let me take this
opportunity to also underscore the need to strengthen
the role and participation of women in this process.

At the same time, we are deeply concerned at
the fact that, in spite of these regional efforts and the
repeated declarations by President Kiir of a unilateral
ceasefire, reports ofintensive fighting continue. Recent
confrontations around Pagak and Torit are particularly
worrying and show that the Sudan People's Liberation
Army has launched new offensive operations, calling
into question the political will to find a peaceful
solution. We call on all parties to immediately lay down
their arms and to adhere to the ceasefire, as the Council
has stressed on numerous occasions. While this is first
and foremost a humanitarian imperative, there can never
be a meaningful political process unless the fighting is
brought to an end, as the representatives of Ethiopia
and other countries have emphasized this morning.

In the face of these latest developments, it is
essential that the Security Council remain unified
and reinforce the intensified regional efforts. We have
called for an end to the violence and impunity; for
increased humanitarian access; for the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to be able to do its
work; and for support for the implementation of the
peace agreement. It has to be made clear that we intend
to follow through on our decisions.

Our efforts should also continue to be well
coordinated with those of the region. We look forward
to the visit by the IGAD Council of Ministers to Juba
next week. This will be an important opportunity to
engage the parties on the need to immediately adhere to
a ceasefire, facilitate humanitarian access and engage
in a meaningful political process. Today's meeting
makes clear that the IGAD delegation has our full
support and backing.

The humanitarian situation, particularly in terms
of food security, continues to worsen. Meanwhile,
humanitarian access is becoming more restricted, with
100 humanitarian-access incidents reported in June,
the highest number recorded in one month so far in
2017, as others have mentioned. Further humanitarian
financing is needed, and humanitarian access must
remain a key priority.

We commend UNMISS for responding swiftly to
ensure the protection of civilians in South Sudan. As
outlined in the Secretary-General's report, women,
girls and children have borne the brunt of the crisis. We
encourage UNMISS to continue to respond proactively
to those who are particularly vulnerable, including
to address sexual and gender-based violence. We
commend Special Representative Shearer for engaging
the Government in operationalizing the proposed
"one-stop shop" to ensure that UNMISS can operate
effectively, and we call on the Government to swiftly
establish this mechanism.

The longer this conflict is allowed to continue, the
harder the road to recovery, reconciliation and peace
will be. The leadership being shown by regional actors
deserves our active support, as a united, proactive and
assertive effort towards peace is long overdue.

