Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset to thank the
delegation of Austria for having organized this
important meeting and to thank you personally, Sir, for
presiding over it. I wish also to thank His Excellency
the Secretary-General for his presence among us and
for his important contribution to the debate. Nor can I
fail to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and the Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their statements.

Participants at the 2005 World Summit endorsed
the principle of the responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. The Security
Council's deliberations and its relevant resolutions,
including resolution 1674 (2006), helped to establish a
framework incorporating measures on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Those measures were
intended to enhance the implementation on the ground
of the principles of international humanitarian law and
human rights law.

But in spite of the substantial progress achieved
in the sphere of the codification of international
humanitarian law and in spite of the endorsement of
the general principles of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, the tangible results in terms of
implementation have not yet reached the target. This
frequently creates frustration because of the great
divergence between principle and action.

The number of victims of armed conflict,
including victims of foreign occupation, has not
decreased. The suffering of victims has increased. This
suffering includes torture and other forms of inhumane
treatment such as gender-based and sexual violence,
violence against children, the recruitment of child
soldiers, trafficking in persons, displacement and the
deliberate denial of access to international assistance.

We continue to live in a world in which States
and groups wilfully and wantonly target civilians or
adopt strategies that they know have the potential to
result in the killing of civilians. Here, we note that
wars have been and continue to be waged on the
pretext of fighting terrorism or self-defence. In most
such wars, principles and norms of international
humanitarian law have not been heeded. The majority
of casualties in these wars have been civilians. That is
true in particular of Israel's repeated acts of aggression
against Lebanon, the war in Iraq and the invasion of
Afghanistan.
Nor must we forget the victims of local conflicts.
The Somali people have been subject to killings,
displacement, exile as refugees, hunger and threats and
have been deprived of their fundamental rights. In the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
civilians continue to suffer as a result of the conflict
and daily violations of their rights. In Darfur and in
eastern Chad, civilians continue to fall victim to tribal
conflicts and regional disputes. That list is far from
exhaustive, and everybody knows it.

The Palestinian people continue to suffer the
harshest and most inhumane treatment under Israeli
occupation. In the Gaza Strip, the most basic needs of
more than 1.5 million Palestinians continue to be
neglected. They are being denied access to
humanitarian assistance - even assistance provided
under the supervision of the United Nations, which
cannot reach them in a timely manner. The Gaza Strip
has become a huge prison, with entry and exit still
being obstructed. That is unprecedented in human
history.

But the Israeli occupation authorities were not
satisfied with the situation and launched a flagrant 22-
day act of aggression against the Gaza Strip,
employing every means of mass destruction, including
internationally prohibited weapons such as white
phosphorus. The attacks spared no one and did not
distinguish between civilians and members of the
military. They wantonly targeted civilians, civilian
infrastructure such as hospitals and schools and United
Nations property and facilities. The result is known to
all and has been set out in trustworthy international
reports that are beyond question.

In fact, we cannot understand how the Security
Council can remain silent, and how it can fail to move
immediately to prosecute Israeli perpetrators of war
crimes, in particular the crimes in Gaza. These are very
well documented and have been set out in the report of
the fact-finding body established by the Secretary-
General to investigate damage to United Nations
property in Gaza, as well in the report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Israeli aggression
in Gaza, chaired by Justice Richard Goldstone (see A/HRC/12/48). The General Assembly has considered
the latter report and endorsed its recommendations; it
has called on the Security Council to adopt measures
on war crimes and crimes against humanity perpetrated
by the Israeli occupation forces against civilians in
Gaza. We hope that, ultimately, the support of some
Council members for Israel will not block the
Council's attempts to shoulder its responsibilities. We
hope that Israel will cease to be an untouchable entity
that is above the law.

Thousands of Palestinians were mercilessly killed
or wounded in full view of the international
community. Internationally prohibited weapons were
used against Palestinians, and the infrastructure of
Gaza was almost completely destroyed. For justice to
prevail, the perpetrators of these crimes must be
prosecuted. The Security Council must complement the
role of the General Assembly so that its deliberations
on the protection of civilians can be meaningful and so
that the Council can regain its credibility.

When it adopted resolution 1674 (2006), the
Security Council was very clear about the need to
provide unobstructed humanitarian assistance to those
in need. The Council must adopt an unwavering
position on the provision of international humanitarian
assistance and on meeting the basic needs of those
requiring assistance. For that reason the Council must
pressure the Israeli occupation authorities to lift their
siege on Gaza, enabling people, goods and money to
move freely, so that the basic needs of those under
siege are met.

Some countries take the high moral ground when
they preach at us in the Security Council about the
protection of civilians. But those countries do nothing
to protect Palestinians from Israeli terror or from
Israel's systematic crimes against the Palestinian
people, even though it is within their power to put an
end to them. These countries compete to provide the
weapons that the Israeli entity uses to kill and mutilate
Palestinians. Moreover, they claim to be committed to
Israel's so-called security, which certainly includes the
security of the Israeli occupation in occupied Arab
territories. This undoubtedly complicates the lives of
Palestinian and Arab citizens who can find no
explanation for this blind support for Israel's
behaviour.

The issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict
should be addressed comprehensively and in a context
that includes prevention, motivation, rationales and
outcomes. We would stress, first, that the Council must
place greater priority on preventing the outbreak or
exacerbation of conflicts. To that end, international
efforts must be coordinated to combat hunger and
poverty and to redress the injustices inflicted on many
peoples. The activation of preventive diplomacy and
early warning mechanisms would do much to prevent
the outbreak and exacerbation of conflicts. Secondly,
pursuant to resolution 1674 (2006), the protection of
civilians should be a core priority of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, which should be endowed
with the means necessary to that end. Thirdly, when the
Security Council acts to guarantee the protection of
civilians, its actions should be balanced and
transparent, avoid double standards and be supported
by a system of accountability and sanctions that serves
as a deterrent to all without distinction.

We hope that our debate will result in coordinated
action commensurate with the importance of the issue
under discussion, which touches first and foremost on
the dignity of humankind.

