Mr. Own (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having promptly granted the request
to hold this meeting to discuss a grave situation in
which international peace and security are threatened
because of aggression against the people of Iraq.

First, I express my respect and admiration for the
resisting people of Iraq, who are fighting courageously
in these critical moments of their history and the
history of the Arab region. At a time when there would
be repercussions in the Middle East, it is regrettable
that the few and poorly armed people of Iraq would be
targeted by powerful nations on an unprecedented
scale, by air, ground and sea attacks and by advanced
conventional weapons and weapons of mass
destruction.

There has been continuous daily bombing of
cities, villages and the infrastructure of the Iraqi
people, with many innocent civilian casualties. We see
this on all television stations except those of the
aggressor States, which are hiding what is going on and
providing erroneous information, although they pretend
to be defending freedom and democracy.

At the beginning of this aggression, which went
outside the scope of international legality, United
Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan, as well as
Security Council members, said that it was a sad day
for the United Nations and the international
community. Millions of people around the globe shared
this feeling of disappointment. This war has frightened
them and touched their souls. It is a sad day that the
international community is experiencing. One of the
major States of the United Nations has violated the
collective spirit; collective legal efforts were
abandoned. This Organization, established by our
fathers and our grandfathers, has become marginalized,
even though it has been the place to settle disputes
through peaceful means. It is clear that substantial
damage has been done to the United Nations and its
institutions, and it will be in a difficult state for a long
time.

The evil aggression that is being conducted by the
United States and the United Kingdom, as well as a
small number of other allied nations, against an
independent and sovereign State that is a Member of
the United Nations constitutes a flagrant violation of
all laws and international norms. It is a blatant
violation of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter, and it disregards all the efforts of the
institutions that are responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, including this Council.
The resolutions that have been adopted - most
recently resolution 1441 (2002) - do not authorize the
use of force against Iraq. Moreover, this was explicitly
stated by the representatives of the United States and
the United Kingdom when the resolution was adopted.
They stated that resolution 1441 (2002) did not
stipulate automatic use of force and that they did not
have hidden motives except the disarming of Iraq.

It became clear to everyone that the objective was
not to disarm Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction,
for this had already been realized and confirmed by the
chiefs of the inspections teams in statements and in
reports and, in particular, in the work programme. The
two States declared that regime change in Iraq,
establishing freedom and democracy and respect for
human rights, was the main objective. So, we wonder
whether it is legal to commit aggression against
another State and to change its regime. How can
freedom and democracy be carried out with missiles
and bombings that destroy all civilian institutions and
facilities in Iraq and cause hundreds of deaths,
including women, children and the elderly? This
aggression has torn and destroyed their bodies, their
homes, their schools, their hospitals, their towns and
their villages. Is this democracy? Is this the freedom
we hoped for at the start of the twenty-first century?

Who are the great Powers on whom the
international community has bestowed the right and
responsibility to maintain peace and security and the
right of veto? How can this privation and these killings
be justified? How can we make sure that the rights to
life, security, food, health services and water are
respected? Is it reasonable to stop programmes that
have been established by the international community
to provide the Iraqis with their essential needs for
survival? How can we justify stopping the oil for food
programme without a decision by a legal body, the
Security Council in this instance? Is it wise to conduct
a war unequalled in scope and in destructive capacity?
Is it reasonable to just provide humanitarian assistance
to the victim and let it go at that? Should we not
demand that this unjustified and destructive war be
stopped immediately, since it is against international
legality? Is it not just to demand the withdrawal of all
forces from Iraqi territory and to compensate the Iraqi
people for the destruction and killing?

The people of Iraq do not need the humanitarian
assistance that is being requested by some of the
coalition States that are trying to provide it from the
wealth and resources of Iraq, although they have
stopped the oil for food programme. The people of Iraq
have refused to head off towards the camps that have
been prepared in the border regions of their country.
Iraqis who live outside their country are returning to
their country to defend it. They are not living in the so-
called freedom camps that the aggressor States thought
they would fill with millions of refugees.

We see a clear connection between these evil
designs against Iraq and the tragedy that is taking place
in the Arab world, ignored by the aggressor States. I
am talking about the killings perpetrated by the Zionist
occupying forces in the occupied Palestinian territory.
These are killings of an unarmed people by an
occupying State that has highly sophisticated weapons
that it uses against civilians. Dozens are dying daily
and these so-called democratic States do not lift a
finger. It is protected by the aggressor State, which
uses the right to veto in the Council, therefore making
it impossible to take any measures against Israel,
including the implementation of resolutions, the
withdrawal of occupying troops from the Palestinian
territories, allowing the Palestinian people to exercise
its right to self-determination and establish an
independent State on its territory. It is ironic that the
invading States are calling for the implementation of
the Fourth Geneva Convention on prisoners of war in
spite of the illegality of this war, even though these
same States reject the implementation of the
Convention on the Palestinians' territory. The right of
veto has been used by these States within the Security
Council to block the adoption of a resolution calling
for the occupying Israeli State to follow the Fourth
Geneva Convention and to protect the Palestinians
from daily killings.

We point out that 11 Council members were
opposed to military action; 116 Non-Aligned
Movement countries and 57 countries from the
Organization of the Islamic Conference were all
opposed to the use of force, because it represented a
threat to their States and to international peace and
security.

My country, as the current President of the 119th
session of the Council of Ministers of the Arab League,
categorically states that we support our Council of
Ministers resolution. We are asking the Security
Council to condemn this aggression against the people
of Iraq, to stop the aggression by all available means,
to ask the invading countries to withdraw their troops
immediately and unconditionally, outside of Iraq's
international borders, and to confirm the sovereignty of
Iraq, its political independence, its unity and territorial
integrity.

The people of Iraq must be able to choose their
future under their own sovereignty and in their own
national interests, so that they can maintain their
wealth without interference in their internal affairs in
order that peace, security and stability can be restored
in Iraq and all countries in the region.

