Lieutenant General Ahmed: It is always a great
honour and pleasure to interact with the Security
Council. Today I am here to introduce the panel of
Force Commanders who will deliver statements to the
Council. I would like to begin, however, by saying that,
for the first time in the history of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the very first female Force
Commander, Major General Kristin Lund, Force
Commander of United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP), has been appointed.

The Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Ladsous, was very keen to personally
introduce the panel, but, as the Council is aware, he is
currently on his way from Mali to New York.

Madam President, I am very thankful to you for
the invitation to this dialogue about our peacekeeping
missions on various peacekeeping topics. The meeting
of Force Commanders with the Council has become
a tradition and is one of the highlights, if not the
highlight, of the conference. It underlines the Council's
much-appreciated commitment and interest in gaining
first-hand information. The Force Commanders are
very honoured and very eager to share their experiences
with the Council in order to contribute to well-informed
decision-making.

Currently they are commanding more than 90,000
soldiers out of 105,000 uniformed personnel, and this
number is likely to grow in the coming period. They
operate in an environment that is often very difficult.
Mali is a case in point, where we have suffered
maximum casualties this year. The Central African
Republic, the Sudans, the Golan and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) are some of the
other challenging missions. The Force Commanders
are operating in failing or failed States where there is,
frankly, hardly any peace to keep.

Ebola is yet another dimension of this complexity.
The Force Commander of the African Union Mission
in Somalia is our usual conference guest and is sitting
behind me. Lieutenant Silas Ntigurirwa commands
more than 20,000 soldiers in a very difficult
environment in Somalia. This year's conference theme
is "mandate accomplishment and capabilities in the
field, expectations and future initiatives". Within
that framework, we have selected key topics for
presentation today. The protection of civilians will be
presented by the Force Commander of MONUSCO,
Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz; expectations
from the military contingents under a changed security
environment by the Force Commander of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, Major General Kazura; and the
accomplishment of traditional mandates under changed
political and military environment by the Force
Commander of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, Lieutenant General Singha.

