Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for another
informative briefing on the gains of the Government of
Iraq in increasing stability and prosperity for its people.

To achieve the enduring defeat of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and successfully stabilize
those areas formally under its control, all communities
in Iraq must feel secure. Security depends on removing
destabilizing armed groups from liberated areas and
replacing them with professional security forces that are
responsive to Baghdad and enforce the rule of law. We
strongly support the full implementation of Executive
Order 237, announced by Prime Minister Al-Mahdi
in July, which seeks to bring all popular mobilization
forces under the exclusive control of the Government
of Iraq.

As the Council knows well, the United States has
long been concerned about Iran's malign activities and
its destabilizing impact on the region, including in Iraq.
Recent events have demonstrated that our concerns
are well-founded. Iran's sponsorship of destabilizing
armed groups in Iraq, operating outside Government
control, undermines Iraq's sovereignty and threatens
the safety of civilians. We call for those destabilizing
armed groups to be removed from civilian centres
and replaced with professional security forces that are
responsive to Baghdad and responsible for enforcing
the rule of law.

United States forces operate in Iraq at the invitation
of the Iraqi Government. We support Iraqi sovereignty
and have repeatedly spoken out against any potential
actions by malign actors inciting violence in Iraq. The
Government of Iraq has the right to control its own
internal security and the responsibility to protect itself
against the corrosive effects of armed groups whose
actions jeopardize Iraq's recovery and regional stability.

We welcome progress on Government formation
but note, as the Special Representative has, that none
of the Cabinet positions and only two positions on
parliamentary committees are filled by women. We
urge the Government of Iraq to appoint qualified female
candidates to senior decision-making positions.

Continued action on anti-corruption measures is
essential for long-term stability and economic growth
in Iraq. We urge the Government of Iraq to strengthen
its efforts going forward.

We welcome the continued cooperation between
the Government of Iraq and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) on provincial
council election preparations scheduled for next April.
The amendments to the electoral law passed in July
by the Council of Representatives are a significant
step forward in preparing for those elections. We
urge the Government of Iraq to expand and expedite
its efforts to register eligible Iraqi voters with the
biometric voter registration system in order to prevent
disenfranchisement. Also important to the long-term
stability of Iraq is the commitment by, and ability of,
the country's leaders to deliver essential civil and social
services to its people, including health care, education
and infrastructure.

Such efforts will help restore public trust in
Government institutions and are crucial to paving
the way for stability and prosperity for all Iraqis.
We continue to prioritize restoring key services and
infrastructure in areas liberated from ISIS control.
Additional donations are urgently needed for the
Funding Facility for Stabilization of the United Nations
Development Programme and, as we announced earlier
this year, the United States will contribute $100 million
to that effort. We encourage other members of the
international community to also step up and do their
part. We welcome today's announcement by the
Government of Iraq ofits $33 million pledge.

Regional integration is a prerequisite to securing
a peaceful and prosperous future for Iraq. Kuwait and
other Arab neighbours have paved the way in recent
months. We welcome and support UNAMI's role in
that effort, including the signing earlier this month
of a memorandum of understanding between UNAMI
and the Government of Iraq to establish the Iraq
Reconstruction and Recovery Trust Fund, in support of
Iraq's own recovery and development framework. That
is a positive step towards urgently addressing Iraq's
immediate humanitarian stabilization responses and
longer-term development needs by the international
community, including improving the fulfilment of
international pledges from the Kuwait International
Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq, held in 2018.
We support continued efforts by the Government of
Iraq, UNAMI and the International Committee of the
Red Cross to address the unresolved issue of Kuwaiti
missing persons and property from the first Gulf War.
The recent discovery of human remains in Samawah
and efforts to positively identify them are a step towards
reconciliation and healing between Kuwait and Iraq. We
commend ongoing efforts to improve relations between
Baghdad and Erbil. We note with concern, however,
the continued disagreements over oil authorities and
revenue-sharing and urge the Iraqi Federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government to resolve
those issues as quickly as possible.

Support for threatened religious and ethnic
communities remains a top priority for the United
States. Iraq's diverse diversity is critical to its richness
and strength as a nation. We encourage UNAMI to
continue engaging those communities across Iraq. We
urge the Government of Iraq to make urgent progress in
support of them, including by preventing armed groups
from blocking their return to their homes and villages.

As Iraq continues to make progress, efforts to
stabilize areas liberated from ISIS, urgently address
the plight of internally displaced persons and ISIS
family members and further integrate Iraqis into the
surrounding region must all be accelerated. With
UNAMI's continued engagement, those efforts can
help steer Iraq towards a bright, prosperous and
stable future.

