Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2166
(2014) by the Security Council. We were pleased to
have been a sponsor and compliment Australia on the
leadership it has shown on the issue. It was imperative
that the Council send a strong and united message that
the international investigation into the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7 must proceed without
delay, that the integrity of the crash site be preserved
and that respect and dignity be accorded to those who
have died. It is, as Foreign Minister Bishop has said, a
decisive step.

New Zealand strongly supports the resolution's
call for an independent investigation led by Ukraine
in close coordination with International Civil Aviation
Organization experts and other international experts,
not least the Netherlands in the role that was outlined for
us a short time ago by Foreign Minister Timmermans.
We now appear to be in a situation where some of that
cooperation is now at hand. But we must still wait to see
the extent to which it eventuates.

There is increasing evidence that the crash of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 was not an accident,
that it was a criminal act, punishable under national
and international law, and those responsible must be
brought to account. We specifically call on all countries
involved to act in accordance with their international
legal obligations. That means that the crash site is a
crime scene, but reports indicate that access has been
denied by local separatists and that they have removed
evidence, including the black boxes that are so critical
to air accident investigations. Now it appears that they
have been handed over, but they should never have been
touched by unauthorized personnel. Even worse has
been the removal of the bodies of victims.

We call on those people to cooperate with
international authorities immediately and unreservedly,
particularly to allow a full, safe and unfettered corridor
of access to the site. We also call on Russia to use its
influence with those groups to ensure that progress is
made, and that it is made immediately. The integrity
of the crash site must be preserved, and bodies must
be accorded proper respect, as must personal effects,
including passports. Those who loot bodies or who
play with the toys that have fallen from the hands
of children are beneath contempt. The victims are
not being treated with appropriate dignity. Such
callousness is insulting to the victims and brings
further and unnecessary suffering to grieving families.
It is utterly unacceptable. Reports that bodies are now
being removed to Amsterdam are welcome, but that is
the dignified treatment they merited days ago, not just
now.

Resolution 2166 (2014) demonstrates the
international community's resolve that things need
to move and they need to move now. The relevant
authorities must be allowed to go about their appointed
tasks unfettered and without any interference. This
Security Council must pay close and continuing
attention to the crisis, and it must ensure that progress
is swiftly made, that human dignity is respected and
that the perpetrators of this violent criminal act are
brought to justice.

