Mr. Khare: This is my first appearance before
the Security Council as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, and it is a great
pleasure for me to introduce today the first report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), contained in
document S/2007/50 and covering the period until 26
January 2007.

I would like to begin by acknowledging the
presence amongst us of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Prime
Minister of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste. I
would like to thank the leadership of Timor-Leste for
the warmth, graciousness and cooperation that I have
received from all of them. The Government, organs of
sovereignty, other relevant institutions of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste and UNMIT are
working well together to fulfil the mandate given by
the Council in its resolution 1704 (2006). The
Committee on High-level Coordination, foreseen in
operative paragraph 8 of the resolution, held its first
two fortnightly meetings in January. In addition, Prime
Minister Jose Ramos-Horta and I have established a
regular pattern of weekly meetings which are, of
course, supplemented by additional meetings during
the course of the week, depending upon situational
requirements. Regular dialogue is also being
07-23460
maintained with President Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao,
President of the National Parliament Francisco "Lu-
Olo" Guterres, leaders of political parties and civil
society organizations, as well as diplomatic missions
represented in Timor-Leste.

These are important times for the young nation of
Timor-Leste as it prepares for its first national
elections since the restoration of its independence. The
first round of presidential elections is scheduled to be
held on 9 April, and the date for the parliamentary
election will be announced thereafter. The authorities
of Timor-Leste and its people are working to ensure
elections that are credible, free and fair, organized in a
transparent manner under the supervision of the
independent National Commission on Elections,
without violence or even intimidation, in conformity
with international standards and with results that are
broadly acceptable to all, so that the elections have a
restorative and unifying impact on the body politic and
on society. Codes of conduct for the political parties
and their agents, as well as for the media and electoral
observers, are being considered. A political declaration
or pact concluded by all political parties is also being
actively debated.

These will be the first national elections to be
organized by the authorities of Timor-Leste, who. with
the assistance of the international community, are
grappling with several challenges that lie ahead. The
challenges include the delayed onset of the rainy
season, transportation difficulties associated with the
difficult terrain and the state of the infrastructure, the
need for better dissemination of information regarding
the elections. as well as voter and civic education, in
order to ensure the full involvement of the general
public in the electoral process.

Security is clearly seen by all stakeholders as a
critical element for the success of the electoral
processes. The situation is demonstrating some signs of
improvement, but remains fragile. The efforts of
leaders of Timor-Leste to search for solutions to
contain the criminal elements in the martial arts groups
deserve praise. The progress in the deployment of
UNMIT police into communities throughout all
districts of the country has also proved useful in
reducing response time and enhancing our ability to
contain such incidents. However, although there are
longer periods of calm and fewer outbreaks of
violence, the situation is still volatile and spikes in
violence still occur - most recently two weeks ago,
07-23460
when four murders were recorded in Dili within a span
of only two days.

UNMIT police and officers of the Timorese
National Police (PNTL) deployed with them are
working with dedication to maintain law and order. As
an example of their good work, a large-scale operation
was carried out on 31 January in two neighbourhoods
of Dili, during which 48 people were arrested and a
large number of lethal traditional weapons, as well as a
few home-made firearms and improvised explosive
devices, were seized. UNMIT police and the PNTL will
continue to stand firm against those who engage in
violence.

The screening of PNTL officers is progressing
steadily. To date, 409 of the 1,098 registered PNTL
officers in Dili have successfully undergone the
screening process and refresher or reintegration
courses, and are now working with UNMIT police.
Another 64 are currently under training and 131 are
waiting to participate in the provisional certification
course. Two hundred and twenty-six PNTL officers are
undergoing the screening process, while 315 have been
identified as requiring further investigation. Following
a request from the Government of Timor-Leste, priority
is being accorded to the screening and retraining of
PNTL members of the Rapid Intervention Unit. A
graduation ceremony for the first 38 retrained officers
of that Unit was held on 29 January.

However, it is clear that the process of screening,
evaluation and retraining needs to be considerably
expedited without affecting its integrity, particularly as
quite a few PNTL officers in Dili have been found to
merit further investigation. UNMIT will of course
ensure that, as the Security Council has endorsed,
PNTL officers are fully involved in the security-related
preparations for the forthcoming elections.

Nevertheless, I believe that the deployment of an
additional formed police unit, as recommended by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2007/50), is
essential for the pre- and immediate post-electoral
period. That unit would be based in Dili but would also
cover also the adjacent districts of Ermera, Aileu,
Ainaro, Liquica and Manufahi. The additional unit
would strengthen UNMIT's capacity to address
security challenges, and thereby contribute to the
holding of peaceful elections.

The conclusion of the trilateral memorandum of
understanding between the Government of the
3
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, the Government
of Australia - as the lead nation of the international
security forces - and the United Nations on 26
January was an important development that will
enhance coordination of all security-related activities
in Timor-Leste. Two operational-level meetings of the
secretariat of the Trilateral Coordination Forum have
already been held. Simultaneously, the conclusion of
the technical arrangement between Australia and the
United Nations has provided a formal basis for the
provision of two dedicated armed companies, with
necessary support elements, to ensure adequate
protection for United Nations premises and property as
well as a rapid response capacity for the UNMIT
police. I must place on record my sincere appreciation
to the international security forces, which have always
responded positively to requests from UNMIT, even
prior to the conclusion of the technical arrangement.

I am happy that the Government has taken steps
to initiate the comprehensive review of the security
sector. Terms of reference for the review have been
drafted by the working-level committee co-chaired by
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Eric Tan Huck Gim, which has senior
representation from the Ministry of Defence and the
Ministry of the Interior, as well as from the PNTL and
the Falintil-Forcas Armadas de Defesa de Timor-Leste
(F-FDTL). UNMIT will continue to play a strong
supporting role in this review, which provides a vital
opportunity to address the shortcomings observed
during the recent crisis in both entities.

I strongly believe that justice is a precondition for
national reconciliation. I am delighted that this view is
shared by all leaders of Timor-Leste, who have
repeatedly reassured me that impunity will not be
permitted to prevail in Timor-Leste. I am encouraged
that all organs of sovereignty have taken some positive
steps towards the implementation of the
recommendations of the Independent Special
Commission of Inquiry. The ad hoc parliamentary
commission established to study the report accepted all
its recommendations and recommended additional
measures of accountability, while also calling for
further investigations and judicial proceedings in some
cases. The recommendations of the Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry, as well as the
additional recommendations made by the ad hoc
parliamentary commission, were approved by the
national parliament in a resolution adopted on
9January. Furthermore, the Council of Ministers
approved a resolution regarding measures for
assistance and reparations to the victims. Those are
important initial steps, but efforts must continue in
order to ensure that all the recommendations of the
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry are
implemented and any perceptions of impunity strongly
refuted.

A number of outstanding issues require further
attention. Fugitive Major Reinado, who escaped from
Becora Prison together with 56 other detainees on 30
August, remains at large and is a serious threat to
security. Efforts are being made to ensure that Reinado
submits to the judicial process in a peaceful manner.

It is absolutely essential that international
assistance is provided to the justice sector to meet the
growing demands placed on it to follow up on the cases
related to the events of April and May 2006.
Furthermore, the development of capacities in, and the
institutional strengthening of, the justice sector also
require international support. The justice sector support
programme of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the proposed comprehensive
review of justice sector needs, to be led by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of Timor-
Leste and supported by UNMIT, deserve special
attention.

In consultation with UNMIT, the United Nations
family, donors and the diplomatic community, the
Government has made significant progress in the
establishment of an international compact. The first
meeting of the "compact" partners took place on 6
February. At that meeting, the Government announced
that it had identified public safety and security;
elections; public sector strengthening, including, inter
alia, stronger budget execution; youth employment and
skills development; strengthening of the justice system;
and social reinsertion as the key areas to be addressed
over the next two years. The first high-level meeting of
the compact is tentatively scheduled for next April.

Let me now turn briefly to socio-economic issues.
The Government, under the leadership of Prime
Minister Jose Ramos-Horta, is working hard to restore,
and indeed enhance, efforts to promote development of
the country. Already, there are visible signs of progress
in Dili, such as road repairs, improved street lighting,
installation of traffic lights and beautification of parks.
Significant efforts are also under way to fast-track
07-23460
employment initiatives. The Minister of Labour and
Community Reinsertion is preparing a national
employment plan and a youth employment plan to
address the challenge of unemployment.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, I must
commend the Government of Timor-Leste for the
tremendous efforts it has made in strengthening
coordination, adopting a number of policies and
initiating concerted action towards enabling dialogue
and national reconciliation between fractured
communities, thus facilitating the return and relocation
of internally displaced populations. I should also like
to commend the humanitarian agencies that continue to
work tirelessly to help resolve the crisis of internally
displaced persons.

However, internal displacement, food insecurity
and disruption of basic social services are likely to
persist beyond the elections. Significant improvements
in the current situation will depend not only on the
progress made in increasing the sense of security and
safety of the population as well as the level of
confidence in the judicial system, but also on the
ability to stabilize the socio-economic situation.

In order to address the basic needs of internally
displaced populations and other vulnerable groups, and
to support their return, relocation and social
reintegration, as well as to address the issues of
emergency preparedness and transition to
rehabilitation, an inter-agency Consolidated Appeal for
Timor-Leste in the amount of $16.6 million was
prepared and launched in January 2007 in Dili by
Prime Minister Jose Ramos-Horta. Its successful
implementation will depend on timely and generous
contributions by the international community.

Timor-Leste continues to strengthen its
cooperation with other countries and regional
organizations. On 13 January, the Prime Minister
signed the Treaty on Amity and Cooperation with the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
which is a first step towards future membership of that
organization. A conference on regional economic
cooperation is being organized by the Government in
Dili on 19 to 21 February to further develop measures
in that direction.

The emergence of the crisis in Timor-Leste in
April and May 2006 is a reminder of the need for the
international community's long-term commitment to
the new nation. Development and strengthening of

democratic institutions is a long-drawn process and
requires continued support. The people of Timor-Leste,
who are desirous of peace and stability in a climate of
democratic, responsive and accountable governance,
need the support of the international community in the
months to come. The Secretary-General therefore
recommends that the mandate of UNMIT be extended
by an additional 12 months.

Before I conclude, permit me to thank the Deputy
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General, Eric
Tan Huck Gim and Finn Reske-Nielsen, and all the
members of UNMIT, whose assistance has been
invaluable to our efforts to achieve the tasks mandated
by the Council. Their dedication and commitment,
particularly under challenging circumstances, is a
matter of great pride and satisfaction.

I greatly value this opportunity to address the
Security Council on the report of the Secretary-General
and look forward to receiving the Council's guidance.

