Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her
presentation of her eighth report pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), and to reiterate our support and appreciation
for the work she and her Office are doing.

After 40 years of dictatorship, building a
democratic nation in Libya is a lengthy and difficult
process. Libya is facing significant challenges,
particularly in the area of security, as the recent events
that Ms. Bensouda referred to have shown. However, it
continues to maintain a constructive dialogue with the
Court. We welcome the steps taken to implement the
memorandum of understanding between the Office of
the Prosecutor and the Government of Libya, designed
to encourage collaboration and sharing of tasks
related to investigations and prosecutions, as well as a
strategy for arrests. We especially welcome the recent
fruitful meeting in Rome between the Prosecutor and
the Attorney General of Libya's team on practical
arrangements for implementing the memorandum.

Concerning the Prosecutor's other investigations,
we note that Ms. Bensouda's report points out that
the lack of sufficient resources is still significantly
delaying the collection of evidence against other
potential suspects. In that regard, we reiterate our
consistent position that the Court should be provided
with the means necessary to enable it to fully discharge
its duties.

Concerning Libya's obligations, the Prosecutor
rightly recalled both in her report and her presentation
that Libya is obliged to hand over Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi to the ICC. We know that a suit has been
filed in Libya, but it should ensure that the trial does
not contravene Libya's obligations to the Court. We
also note with concern the slow progress that has been
made on the issue of detainees in Libya. We call on
the Libyan Government to work to put an end to that
situation, release the detainees there is no evidence
against and refer cases where there is evidence to
the national courts, in accordance with the law on
transitional justice. Many of those prisoners have been
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment. We again
urge Libya to enforce the law criminalizing torture,
forced disappearances and discrimination. We are
concerned that the Prosecutor's report indicates that
so far no State official or member of an armed group
or militia has been brought to justice to answer such
charges. We also urge the Libyan Government to
resolve the situation of the inhabitants of Tawergha. It
is essential that a strategy be devised to ensure that the
30,000 displaced persons can return home.

As in the past, we also encourage the Libyan
Government to develop and implement a comprehensive
strategy for putting an end to crime and impunity
in Libya, with the help of its key partners where
appropriate. The Court and the Council should be kept
informed of progress in that area. It is up to the Libyan
authorities to ensure respect for the rule of law in their
country. We call on them to redouble their efforts to
create a stable security environment that guarantees
freedom, justice and respect for the rights of every
individual. For its part, the international community
should continue to help Libya in this crucial phase
of its transition. The issue goes beyond the scope of
the cooperation between Libya and the International
Criminal Court. In that regard, we believe that the
idea of forming an international contact group on
justice-related issues that would facilitate legal and
material support for Libya is worth considering.

In referring the situation in Libya to the Prosecutor
of the ICC under resolution 1970 (2011), the Security
Council demonstrated its ability to act quickly and as
one in order to fight impunity. We should now ensure
that that approach is vigilantly followed up. More
generally, the Security Council's continued and active
support to the International Criminal Court is essential
to enabling States to cooperate with the Court and to
ensure that referrals to the Court achieve their goal of
seeingjustice done and maintaining international peace
and security. As the Prosecutor said, we can all do more
to help the Court in its vital work. I would therefore
like to conclude by reaffirming our support for an idea
that was mentioned on 23 October during the open
debate on our methods of work (S/PV.7285), in which
Ms. Bensouda also took part - that of establishing a
mechanism that reflects the Council's commitment to
effectively monitoring the situations it refers to the
International Criminal Court.

