Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): At the outset, Mr. President,
I wish to express the deep appreciation of my delegation
for your innovative and highly imaginative interpretation of
international security as including human security as well
in this post-cold-war era. I commend you for your
exemplary courage and foresight in making the long-
neglected problems of Africa the theme of your presidency.

This morning the presence of the Vice-President of the
United States at this inaugural meeting highlighted very
specific suggestions, measures and commitments. In this
respect, I would like to highly laud his efforts and those of
his Government in this direction.

In many ways, it is fitting to begin this focus on
Africa with an examination of the economic and social
devastation wrought by the AIDS epidemic, which is now
the number-one killer in Africa. Obviously, AIDS has had
a catastrophic impact on peace and security in Africa. Since
the beginning of the epidemic, 50 million individuals
worldwide have been infected with HIV, 16 million of
whom have died. Of those who died, 12 million, or nearly
75 per cent, were in Africa. Two million died there last
year alone, which corresponds to five times the number of
deaths due to AIDS in the United States in the entire last
two decades. Most stunning of all, of the 34 million people
currently affected and still alive, roughly 23 million, or 68
per cent, are in sub-Saharan Africa. A syndicated columnist
in Newsweek wrote last week that

"every minute 11 people worldwide are infected with
HIV, 10 of them in sub-Saharan Africa".

In the 1950s, sub-Saharan Africans had an average
lifespan of 44 years, a figure which, with improved living
standards, had risen to 59. Today that figure is rapidly
declining, and could, before the end of the decade, reach 45
years, wiping out the gains of half a century. Yet all the
sub-Saharan countries combined have a mere $160 million
to spend confronting AIDS, and the challenge they face is
simply enormous.
The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) literature states that Africa remains the global
epicentre of the epidemic. However, certain other regions,
it seems, are catching up with Africa, in particular the
newly independent States of the former Soviet Union and
the Eastern and Central European countries. What this
shows is that AIDS cannot be dismissed as an African
problem. Rather, it is a global human problem, or, more
correctly, a global human tragedy, one which concerns
every one of us, wherever we may be. Hence, Mr.
President, your ingenious idea of convening this meeting
on a health issue, the first in the history of the Security
Council. Since AIDS is killing far more people than war,
it certainly deserves the Council's attention. Hopefully,
this laudable effort will nudge the global conscience
towards action, more specifically to leverage the resources
of our planet to defeat this plague of our era. Many
countries in Africa, as has been noted at this meeting, are
responsibly tackling this problem. They need, however,
recognition, more meaningful assistance and long-term
support.

Africa, ironically, cannot rely on the wonder drugs
that have cut mortality in rich countries, because those
drugs cost over $20,000 per person per year, whereas
poor countries, which bear the brunt of AIDS, cannot
afford more than $20 per person per year. The answer
does not lie only in reducing the cost of treatment, but in
providing the necessary health infrastructure, as well as in
investing in the development of a cheap, easily delivered
vaccine. But this remains a long-term proposition.

We enter the new millennium with more poor people
than the world has ever known, and we are in the midst
of plenty, awash with resources. Out of the world's
current 6 billion people, 1.3 billion, or about 20 per cent,
live below the absolute poverty line, on less than $1 a
day; and 2.8 billion, or about 50 per cent, eke out survival
on less than $2 a day. Obviously, inequality has
multiplied enormously. The majority of Africans lack a
minimally decent life, as expressed in such things as
clean water, sanitation, health services and education -
hence, the excessive prevalence of AIDS in Africa. In
truth, the peril of HIV and AIDS in Africa lies in the
continent's poverty. So, in an era of declining
international resource flows for Africa's development
needs, the worry is that the AIDS peril may continue to
ravage the continent's vital asset: its scarce human capital.

Fighting AIDS requires a more holistic approach.
We must improve societies, institutions and economies to
eliminate poverty, the source of most of Africa's ills. In
particular, the elimination or containment of AIDS will
require concrete steps to prevent, to cure and to treat. Dr.
Bruntland, Director-General of the World Health
Organization, wisely notes that

 

"while prevention is the most promising strategy for
managing AIDS epidemic in the long term, we cannot
lose sight of the fact that millions of people are
affected today. For them we must do a much better
job of increasing access to health care and support,
including inexpensive antibiotics that can add many
months to the lives of people already sick with AIDS,
to palliative therapies that can help increase comfort
and reduce suffering and to psychological and social
support for patients and their families."

In conclusion, let me say AIDS in Africa is not all
poverty, but at current levels, it is very close.

