Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank the Secretary-
General for his remarks and Ms. Chan and Dr. Nabarro
for their briefings. I also welcome the initiative of
the United States presidency that led to the Council's
adoption today of resolution 2177 (2014), which Italy
was happy to co-sponsor.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union (EU) and would
like to add a few remarks in a national capacity.

Ebola is more than a health crisis. It has already
become a broader humanitarian emergency with
dramatic social, economic, security and political
implications. We are deeply concerned by the gravity of
the situation and are closely following its evolution. We
are also mobilizing both public and private institutions
to support countries struck by the virus and to prevent
further transmission of the disease.

At this juncture, it is of the utmost importance to
undertake determined, collective action to stop the
Ebola epidemic, which is indeed a global threat to
security. We will take every opportunity during our
ongoing European presidency, within the European
Union Council's working groups on humanitarian and
development affairs, to deepen the discussion, raise
awareness among EU member States and mobilize
additional resources to tackle the Ebola virus in an
effective, concerted way. The EU ministers of health
will meet in Milan on 22 and 23 September to coordinate
the response to the Ebola outbreak.

The Italian Government has supported the World
Health Organization (WHO) since the outbreak of the
crisis, making a preliminary contribution of €200,000
in April for WHO activities in Guinea. An additional
€240,000 was recently disbursed. Moreover, we have
just approved a bilateral action, to be implemented in
partnershipwithItaliannon-governmentalorganizations
in the field and the Spallanzani National Institute for
Infectious Diseases in Rome, for the prevention and
treatment of the virus, through capacity-building and
technical assistance to the national health systems of
the affected countries and public information about the
transmission of the disease. In the very near future, the
Italian Development Cooperation will carry out new
humanitarian initiatives valued at up to €4 million,
depending on the situation on the ground.

We have heard what the Secretary-General said
today and what he asked of us. We believe that Italy's
expertise in bio-security could be an asset for tackling
the Ebola emergency. We are open to discussing
further, on a case-by-case basis, the technical and
financial details ofpossiblejoint operations for medical
evacuation of international personnel.

In conclusion, allow me to pay tribute to the
extraordinary efforts of the humanitarian and health
workers on the front line who continue to work in
the affected countries, placing their own lives at risk.
I would also like to praise the massive efforts of the
Governments ofthe affected countries, who are bearing
the heaviest burden of the tragedy.

