Mr. Antonio: Today's meeting is taking place
against the backdrop of major achievements in Somalia
towards the realization ofVision 2016, for which we must
commend the leadership of the Federal Government of
Somalia and the Somali security forces. We must also
commend the countries of the region, which, through
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), have remained actively engaged in the efforts
to achieve peace, security and reconciliation in Somalia.

I pay tribute to all the uniformed and civilian
personnel of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), as well as to the troop- and
police-contributing countries, namely, Burundi,
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Nigeria and Uganda. Since
their deployment, which is now entering its ninth year,
AMISOM. personnel has displayed an unparalleled
commitment, sense of duty and courage. At the
African Union (AU), we take particular pride in their
achievements. The huge sacrifices they have made
have enabled Somalia to open a new and more hopeful
chapter in its troubled history. We are determined to
ensure that the sacrifices made are not in vain.

I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
convening this meeting, which will provide us with an
opportunity to take stock of the situation, including
the implementation of Vision 2016, and agree on how
best to address the remaining tasks. I acknowledge
the presence of the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs, which is yet further testimony
of the importance that the United Kingdom attaches
to the situation in Somalia and a reflection of its
determination to assist that country to overcome the
daunting challenges confronting it.

I commend the members of the Security Council
for their continued commitment to the quest for peace
and reconciliation in Somalia. Over the years, they have
continued to extend significant support to the African
Union-led efforts aimed at neutralizing the Al-Shabaab
terrorist group and creating the conditions for the
successful conclusion of the ongoing political process.

It would be remiss of me ifI did not once again put
on record the African Union's deep appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon for his tireless efforts
towards the promotion of peace and security on the
African continent and in Somalia in particular. I have
no doubt, as we move ahead, that we can continue to
rely on his support. The deployment of AMISOM. and
the progress made in the implementation of its mandate
would not have been possible without the support
of other African Union partners. Those include the
European Union and its member States, as well as the
United States of America.

As we gather in this Chamber today, we should
applaud the Federal Government of Somalia for
reaffirming its commitment to respecting the
constitutionally-mandated terms of the legislature and
executive. These, as all members know, will expire
in August and September 2016, respectively. In this
respect, the recent launch of the national consultative
forum on elections is another promising step. The forum
agreed on the consultative process and methodology,
and began the initial debate on the approaches to the
electoral process. Injust a few days, public consultations
on the electoral process will commence in various parts
of Somalia. It is our hope that the national and regional
stakeholders will maintain the unity of purpose they
have shown thus far.

Significant progress has also been made against
key milestones in the completion of Somalia's federal
State formation process and towards reviewing the
Provisional Constitution. These positive developments
have greatly enhanced the prospects for the successful
conclusion of the political process. Much remains to be
done, however. Against this backdrop, all international

stakeholders should continue to provide the required
support to Somali stakeholders in order to overcome
the remaining challenges. The African Union remains
committed - including through AMISOM, whose
mandate, as determined by the Peace and Security
Council, also includes a political component - to
continuing to support and facilitate these processes, in
close coordination with IGAD, the United Nations and
other partners.

Nevertheless, while reviewing the ambitious
State-building agenda that lies ahead, we must not shy
away from assessing the effectiveness of the efforts
deployed on the ground, the extent to which we are
promoting a truly Somali-owned process and the level
of coordination among the international partners. It is
only through such an approach that we can ensure that
we are taking the realities on the ground in Somalia
into account at every step and maximizing the impact
of our support.

In Somalia, we are now facing a threat ofa different
nature than what we were contending with just a year
ago. AMISOM. and the Somali National Army have
conducted a number of successful offensives, the latest
being Operation Juba Corridor. While these offensives
have continued to deplete Al-Shabaab capabilities
by limiting their sources of revenue and freedom of
movement, AMISOM. was also, as a result, compelled
to extend its lines of communication. The Mission now
covers an expanded area of operation.

Under pressure to maintain relevance, Al-Shabaab
is taking advantage of these extended lines of
communication to conduct targeted attacks against
AMISOM. and the Somali National Army defensive
positions. The group has also continued to conduct
asymmetric attacks with increasing efficiency and
lethality on the Government and the local population
alike. The most recent attack was just a week ago on a
popular hotel in Mogadishu patronized by Government
officials. These attacks serve as a constant reminder of
the fragility of security, not just in Mogadishu, but in
Somalia as a whole.

Another source of concern is a potential alliance
between Al-Shabaab and the so-called Islamic State.
As a result of its depleted capability and desperation
for support, Al-Shabaab is exploring this avenue for
survival by possibly shifting alliances to more resourced
international terrorist groups. This is a worrying
development that all stakeholders must closely monitor.

To address the evolving security challenges, there
is a pressing need to step up efforts to complete the
expansion phase, with a View to liberating the remaining
areas controlled by the Al- Shabaab terrorist group. This
will pave the way for the transition to the stabilization
phase by March 2016. In line with the relevant decisions
of the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council, the Commission, with the
involvement of all concerned stakeholders, including
the United Nations, has developed a revised concept of
operations for AMISOM. This document was forwarded
to the Secretary-General by the AU Commissioner for
Peace and Security on behalf of the Chairperson of the
Commission, Dr. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, through a
letter dated 23 October, for onward transmission to the
members of the Security Council.

The strategic end-state, as identified in the concept
of operations, is significantly to deplete the military
and related capacity of the Al-Shabaab and other armed
opposition groups. Within this context, the security
strategy in the period ahead is to create and preserve an
enabling environment for the unfolding political peace
and reconciliation processes in Somalia. The concept
of operations addresses the challenges identified by
the Joint African Union/United Nations benchmarking
exercise. It is imperative to note that the most consistent
View expressed during the development of the concept
of operations was the importance of the provision of
flexible and timely logistical support to AMISOM
through a more responsive and robust United Nations
Support Office for AMISOM.

It was against this background that, in its
communique of 18 September, the African Union
Peace and Security Council, having welcomed the
strategic review of the United Nations Support Office
to AMISOM. (UNSOA), underlined the imperative
for UNSOA to remain an independent and dedicated
capacity that reports to United Nations Headquarters
and is accountable to the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for all
matters relating to logistical support for AMISOM. This
was seen as a sine qua non for the delivery of logistical
support in a flexible, timely and responsive manner.

While taking note of resolution 2245 (2015) and
acknowledging the advances it contains with respect
to support to both the AMISOM. and Somali national
security forces, I would like to reiterate the relevance of
the Peace and Security Council's position, as outlined
above, and regret that this position was not adequately
reflected in the resolution. I commend the African
members of the Security Council for the sustained
efforts they have made in the course of the consultations
on the draft resolution for the AU's concerns to be taken
into account.

In the period ahead, the African Union will consult
with the Secretariat on the implementation of the
relevant provisions of the resolution to ensure that the
required support to AMISOM. takes into account the
peculiar conditions in which the Mission is operating
and is delivered in a timely and responsive manner,
based on the needs of the Mission and on the request
made by the AMISOM. leadership.

The African Union welcomes the planned provision
of in-theatre medical evacuation for the Somali police
force. We express the hope that that step will be
followed, in the not too distant future, by a logistical
support package to the Somali police force, along the
lines of the one provided to the Somali National Army.
That is critical, in view of the increasing role expected
of the Somali police forces in the period ahead in the
context of the revised AMISOM. concept of operations.

While the African Union appreciates the United
Nations support for AMISOM, it is also important to
bear in mind that, in deploying a mission in Somalia, the
AU is acting on behalf of the Security Council, which
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Accordingly,
the United Nations has the duty to provide all the
necessary support to AMISOM, whose action aims at
creating conditions conducive for the early deployment
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation that would
support the long-term stabilization and reconstruction
of Somalia.

Such enhanced support is all the more urgent and
necessary, as AMISOM. is facing additional constraints
brought about by the decision of the European Union
to cut the allowances to the uniformed personnel of
AMISOM. by 20 per cent, beginning in January 2016.
That measure affects the very personnel who are
making the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty on
behalf of the entire international community. There is
no doubt that that decision will have a serious adverse
effect on the morale of uniformed personnel, at a time
when more is expected of AMISOM. on the ground. Let
me add that the decision by the European Union will
compound the serious financial gap already created by
the depreciation of the euro in relation to the dollar.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that we are in
the last stretch of our long journey aimed at helping
the Somali people and authorities bring to a definite
end over two decades of senseless violence, untold
suffering and complete anarchy, which has affected
both regional and international security. At this critical
juncture, AMISOM. and the Somali national security
forces deserve increased support. Without such
support, we run the risk of undermining the tremendous
achievements made at such a high cost during the past
nine years.

Needless to say, our support to Somalia should
go beyond security. We have to step up our efforts to
address the prevailing humanitarian challenges, which
were compounded by the recent flooding, which resulted
in additional displacement of populations. We have to
increase our economic and financial support to provide
the much-needed peace dividends to the suffering
Somali population. We have to step up our capacity-
building assistance for the emerging Somali State to be
able to stand on its own and shoulder its responsibilities.
It should nonetheless be clear that, ultimately, Somalia's
leaders have the primary responsibility for responding
to the aspirations of their people to peace, security and
reconciliation. They ought to do more and demonstrate
the necessary leadership, vision and determination to
that end.

