Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Helen La Lime, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
briefing on the situation in Haiti and the work of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti.

In our view, the second of the series of quarterly
reports (S/2018/1059) mandated by resolution 2410
(2018) is a remarkably objective reflection ofa complex
situation in a critical period for the country. The closer
we get to the time when the Council must consider
the issue of the Mission's closure, the more frequently
Haiti and its people are encountering challenges
that they will soon have to deal with by themselves
and take national ownership of. The already very
fragile security situation has been subjected to new
stresses. The mass protests, which reached a peak on
17 October and again on 18 November, emphasized that
resolving any of the issues between the people and the
Government must be done through direct, constructive
and, most importantly, peaceful dialogue, and strictly
within the framework of Haiti's legal arena. We believe
that its citizens' inalienable right to peaceful assembly
and freedom of expression must be exercised solely in
compliance with their national legislation. We support
our colleagues who have urged the demonstrators to
respect the law and refrain from violence or action that
undermines Haiti's stability and social order. We hope
that our Security Council partners will take a similar
position on all such situations, wherever they may
happen to take place.

We are pleased with the report's positive
assessment of the process of transferring responsibility
to the Haitian National Police. We were interested in
the description of the fact that the work of dealing
with the mass protests enabled the police to display
the professional skills they have gained. While those
complimentary assessments give rise to optimism, we
were surprised that the report made reference in that
regard to some so-called international stakeholders who
remain nameless. We would like to see the Secretary-
General's own assessments in his reports, based on
information provided by the Mission. We cannot ignore
a statement in the section of the report on human
rights to the effect that during the reporting period the
Mission cited 15 violations allegedly committed by the
police. In every instance, for example in paragraph
56, there are references to allegations of the excessive
use of force by police officers. We want to stress that
this wording is too vague for a report on an issue as
critical as human rights. We would like to point out
that in April (see S/PV.8226), our American colleagues
insisted that resolution 2410 (2018) should apply
the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations to the Mission's entire mandate, which
undermined the Council's long-standing consensus
on Haiti. Was that really done so that we now have to
discuss certain proposals?

We are extremely alarmed by the report's
assessments of the rapidly deteriorating economic and
humanitarian situation. The plight of a significant part
of the population is being compounded by continuing
outbreaks of cholera, while only 11 per cent of this
year's humanitarian response plan has been funded. On
top of that, the earthquake that occurred on 6 October
resulted in 18 deaths and has either destroyed or
damaged around 11,000 homes.

In these exceedingly difficult circumstances, the
Government, led by President Jovenel Moise, has made
serious efforts to make progress in accordance with the
Secretary-General's benchmarks, including in the areas
of political reform, security, the strengthening of the
judicial system and, of course, the police. However, we
believe that it is crucial to ensure that the legislative,
executive and judicial branches of the authorities work
together. Needless to say, neither can the international
community remain indifferent. It must help the
Government and the people of Haiti to establish their
national ownership of post-conflict peacebuilding. The
United Nations staff still have a great deal to do in their
task of providing the Haitian authorities with as much
assistance as possible.

Russia supports Port-au-Prince and will continue to
work to ensure that the Security Council's efforts will
result in genuinely normalizing the situation in Haiti
and strengthening its sovereignty and self-sufficiency.

