Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the Chinese
presidency for convening this timely open debate on
multilateralism, which represents one of the great
contributions of the United Nations to humankind. We
would like to express our appreciation to Secretary-
General Anto'nio Guterres, Ms. Alya Ahmed Said
Al-Thani, Acting President of the General Assembly,
Ms. Inga Rhonda King, President of the Economic and
Social Council, and Judge Ahmed Yusuf, President of
the International Court of Justice, for their insightful
and frank briefings. My delegation would like to make
some comments on the following steps and measures
to strengthen multilateralism with a View to addressing
emerging threats.

We believe that we need to reinforce the principles
that govern international coexistence - global
leadership, shared responsibility and collective action.
Challenges such as protracted wars, unresolved
conflicts, terrorism, extremism, poverty, disease,
illicit migration, the instability of the humanitarian
space and climate change are beyond the scope of
any one nation. These problems are aggravated by
unpredictable regional and global insecurity, the
erosion of internationally legally binding norms,
external interference, proxy wars and the threat of the
use of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). In that
regard, my country's President, Nursultan Nazarbayev,
in his manifesto entitled "The World. The Twenty-First
Century", called on world leaders to work jointly for a
just global economic and social order. He also urged
that we work to end all conflicts and terrorism, abolish
WMDs and eliminate other scourges by the time the
United Nations marks its centenary.

Kazakhstan is therefore committed to promoting
multilateralism and considers the United Nations to
be its core element. During its tenure on the Security
Council, my country has consistently sought to introduce
the best possible kind of multilateralism, transparency,
impartiality, honest brokerage, confidence-building
and partnerships - the hallmarks of our foreign
policy - into the Council's day-to-day activities. We
have also prioritized the issues of nuclear energy and
water and food security in our work in the Council and
will do so beyond our term.

We also call on all to stand together for a rules-based
global order and safer world, adhering to the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.
This is important in order to prevent international
norms from being torn apart by narrow, vested national
interests, distrust and geopolitical tensions. We stand
for a people-centred, egalitarian multilateralism that
leaves no one behind. We also advocate for empowering
women and young people, as well as expanding their
rights and opportunities, because we are confident that
they will lay the groundwork for conflict prevention
and sustainable development. Multilateralism must also
be invigorated by implementing the decisions taken in
Addis Ababa, Sendai, Paris and now Marrakech, as well
as in the framework of other global processes. That will
ensure not only early warnings of multifaceted threats
but also our ability to take early action to avert them.
Our outreach is particularly oriented towards building
capacities in least-developed and landlocked least-
developed countries and small island developing States.
In that context, we believe it is important to ensure
concerted international efforts to create just, resilient
and stable societies in vulnerable States, among other
things.

Multilateralism has to be innovative and
multidimensional. As far as possible, therefore, it must
include valuable forums that shape the rules of the
game, such as, for example, within the peacebuilding
architecture, across the areas of defence and security;
within the development system, through investments
by multilateral banks, trading and commerce; on the
humanitarian front; across the public health sector
and with non-State actors, such as religious leaders,
academics, the media and civil society, who can
exercise significant positive influence under each
and every United Nations pillar. We therefore need
people-to-people connectivity, not just across borders
but also transcending continents. This can lead us
towards a community of a shared future for mankind,
as proposed by the Chinese presidency. Indeed, as the
Chinese proverb states,

"If you want one year of prosperity, grow grain.
If you want 10 years of prosperity, grow trees. If
you want 100 years of prosperity, grow people."

We should also strive for close partnerships
of the United Nations with multilateral regional
arrangements, such as the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe; the League of Arab States, the
African Union, the European Union, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the Organization of American
States, the Caribbean Community and other
international bodies. That is necessary to strengthen
these existing platforms for regional and subregional
dialogues on security. Through that, we must shape
harmonization in policymaking and dialogue for
development aid, as well as assistance in implementing
regional programmes. Such interaction is important,
because nowadays regional and subregional structures
play key roles in reforming the United Nations systems,
particularly its peacekeeping and peacebuilding
architecture.

The field visits of the Security Council and
its Committees to the Lake Chad basin, the Sahel,
the Horn of Africa, Afghanistan, Haiti, Colombia,
Bangladesh, Myanmar and, recently, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, have indicated the significance
of the three-pronged strategy that Kazakhstan
introduced. It consists in strengthening the security-
development nexus, revamping and invigorating the
regional approach and utilizing the United Nations
principles of Delivering as One. This strategy, which
will complement the Secretary-General's reforms, was
approved by the Council in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/l. In the future, we intend to continue
expanding and developing that strategy to incorporate
it into wider United Nations operations, among other
things. We also underline the importance of the
presidency's Belt and Road Initiative in that regard.

International terrorism cannot be defeated without
a coordinated response and approach. That is why
Kazakhstan launched a code of conduct aimed at
helping to achieve a world free of terrorism with an
inaugural high-level event and signing ceremony held
at United Nations Headquarters on 28 September. The
document coalesced like-minded Member States around
the call to honour their commitments to implementing
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and other instruments. In Central Asia, working in
close collaboration with United Nations entities such
as the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, the Office of Counter-
Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, we have launched the third
phase of our regional joint action plan for implementing
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, for which we
were the first country to become a donor, voluntarily
contributing 10 per cent of the plan's overall budget and
sending it to the United Nations.

Kazakhstan has proven itself to be a moral leader
in nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and as an
act of multilateralism with its neighbours, created the
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. Our country,
which is among those that have been most affected by
the tragic consequences of nuclear tests, is making
enormous efforts to reach global zero and is enabling
cooperation among the nuclear-weapon-free zones. Our
story clearly tells the world that true protection comes
not from nuclear weapons but from mutual trust. It also
means that multilateralism will move forward if we can
break the impasse in the Conference on Disarmament
and the Disarmament Commission, as well as at the
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

It is evident that Kazakhstan has contributed to
multilateralism in innumerable ways, the most recent
being the deployment of120well-qualifiedpeacekeepers
to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, as
part of an Indian battalion. We are proud that this
innovative deployment occurred during Kazakhstan's
non-permanent membership of the Security Council.
We express our gratitude to our Indian colleagues, as
well as to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support.

To conclude, Kazakhstan intends to join
other Member States in rallying for the defence of
multilateralism. We reiterate that it is only through
our collective will and solidarity that we can turn this
world in crisis into a planet of hope and great promise.

