Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America):
Allow me to apologize for my tardiness; as I was
arriving here, the Secretary-General contacted me
regarding the fast-moving developments in Sierra
Leone concerning Mr. Foday Sankoh, who as we all
know is at the airport area in Freetown. He is wounded;
I believe he is receiving medical treatment from British
doctors. The circumstances are still very murky, and
the Secretary-General has been seized of the issue. I
profusely apologize for holding up the convening of
this meeting, particularly since, as head of the Security
Council delegation, I recognize my obligation to begin
this discussion.

I congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
extraordinary way in which you have handled a month
in which nothing has gone according to plan. Every day
there has been something new; it has been a difficult
period during which to oversee the Security Council.

It is a great honour, Sir, to have been asked by
you and by your predecessor, Ambassador Fowler, to
chair the delegation that went to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and ultimately to the Horn of
Africa. I want to stress that the seven nations took no
national positions; there was a consensus throughout. I
would like to speak in the same capacity today,
following up on the report that Ambassador van
Walsum, Ambassador Greenstock and my other
colleagues gave last week while I was still overseas.

The fact that we spoke with one voice carried a
very powerful message. Three representatives from
Africa - Tunisia, Namibia and Mali; three
representatives from the European Union - the United
Kingdom, France and the Netherlands; and an
American: this was an extraordinarily well balanced
trip. We made it clear, however, that we were also
speaking for the eight countries not present. None of
our interlocutors could see any differences between us
because there were none. The disagreements that often
occur in this Chamber simply were not present on this
trip. It was a great privilege to be the chair of such a
diverse group of talented diplomats. Every single one
of the seven ambassadors spoke in every meeting, on
every issue, interchangeably. This symbolized to our
interlocutors the importance of African leadership in
the Security Council and in the United Nations at large.
To the other four members of the delegation it showed
that Africans were willing and eager to share the
burdens of peacemaking in Africa and beyond, and to
the rest of the world a delegation so carefully balanced
sent a very powerful symbol.

I think that the three missions that the Security
Council has authorized in the past eight months - to
East Timor under Ambassador Andjaba, to Kosovo
under Ambassador Chowdhury, and this one - are also
an important emerging aspect of Security Council
activities. This mission fell somewhere between a fact-
finding mission, a report to the Security Council and,
as it turned out almost inadvertently, a negotiating
mission, at least twice: over the crisis in Kisangani and
in our unexpected diversion to the Horn.

The trip was not about tourism. It is critical that
we get the Security Council out of this magnificent
Chamber, out of presidential palaces and luxury hotels,
and into the real world. In Kinshasa, for example, we
held simultaneous meetings with an ecumenical
religious delegation, leaders of civil-society
organizations and representatives of political parties.
Three of our team, Ambassador Andjaba, Ambassador
Greenstock and Ambassador van Walsum, made an
extraordinary trip to Kananga, which I hope they will
describe in more detail. Members may have seen
reports of it on television; it was certainly the
emotional high point of the trip, and the four of us who
remained in Kinshasa deeply envied their opportunity,
which was in essence a chance to see the people of the
Congo in a massive human demonstration of a desire
for peace.

In every meeting, we heard a loud and
unmistakable endorsement of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. Based on these remarkable meetings, I
think we can say the following about the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo: they want peace;
they want the withdrawal of outside forces; they do not
want to live under foreign occupation; they do not want
to see their rights threatened or their resources
plundered. They want the Congolese rebel movements
to lay down their arms and commit to a political
process aimed at forging a new dispensation. They
want armed insurgents from neighbouring States, such
as the ex-Rwandan Armed Forces, Interahamwe and
UNITA, to leave their country forever. They want the
present Government to engage in the national dialogue
and abide by its results. They want to live in a vibrant
State built on solid democratic institutions, and they
want economic opportunities and the freedom to travel
within their own country which is their right.

I want to underline that we went on this trip,
however, not in an effort to undermine the existing
Government. We reinforced and stressed to President
Kabila at all times that we deal with him as the
President of the country and that the national dialogue
is part of the Lusaka peace process. I mention that
because it is a matter of great concern to the
Government what the national dialogue's real purpose
is, and I need to underline that everything we did was
designed to further that process. It is the only way
forward and the only way to address the yearnings of
the Congolese people. There is no military solution to
the present conflict.

Our efforts must focus on two areas. We must use
all our collective influence to keep all the signatories
firmly within the Lusaka Agreement. It is the only way
forward; if one party is allowed to violate it, others will
also violate it. We must strengthen the regional and
international consensus for peace based on Lusaka.

There is one area of our report that we need to
underline: our unanimous view that Council decisions
and actions in the Congo should not be affected by the
dangerous and terrible events in Sierra Leone. This is
difficult. We recognized, and it was clear on every day
of the trip, that the shadow of Sierra Leone was
hanging over United Nations peacekeeping, not only in
Africa, but around the world. But there was no direct
effect of the events in Sierra Leone in the Congo or on
the Lusaka peace process. Sierra Leone is not a
metaphor for Africa; it is not a metaphor for United
Nations peacekeeping. The trip reinforced our belief,
and my personal belief, that Africa is as diverse as any
other collection of 53 independent nations in the world.
The three conflicts that immediately preoccupy us -
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia-
Eritrea and Sierra Leone - dominated our mission, of
course, but it is immediately clear that they are as
diverse in scope and kind as East Timor, southern
Lebanon and Kosovo. It is a fallacy based on
superficial and insufficient knowledge to say that the
failure of the Lome accords in Sierra Leone
intrinsically implies an inevitable failure elsewhere,
simply because the elsewhere is on the same continent.

That being said, we must get peacekeeping right.
And that extends far beyond the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Sierra Leone illustrates the dangers of getting it
wrong. Peacekeeping is this institution's core function,
the one that was foremost in the founders' minds 55
years ago. Whether the United Nations succeeds or
fails in the twenty-first century, and whether this great
institution, the Security Council, continues to be the
world's pre-eminent forum for peace and security,
depends in large part on the future of peacekeeping.

Yesterday in the Fifth Committee we had an
important discussion on the current challenge to
peacekeeping and how together we must work to fix
peacekeeping in order to save it. This means addressing
the shortcomings, and how we finance peacekeeping,
as well as improving how the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) operates. It will not
happen overnight. It will require all of us to make
tough choices. But if we fail to act, if we allow the gap
between capacity and demand to widen even further,
then the United Nations and all the people depending
on it around the world will suffer.

I am particularly grateful for the efforts and
support expressed yesterday by many speakers in the
Fifth Committee. What they discussed in that
Committee yesterday has immense importance for our
deliberations here, and I would particularly single out
the countries that yesterday voluntarily said they were
prepared to move from group C to group B in
financing. Five have already come forward - Cyprus,
Israel, Hungary, Estonia and the Philippines - and
others have indicated their intention to do the same.
This strengthens our efforts, because it begins to
broaden the financial base by which peacekeeping will
be funded.

Let us also praise the men and women of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and of
the specialized agencies, who work under difficult
conditions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its neighbours, with special praise reserved for the
Special Representative, Ambassador Morjane, and the
Force Commander, General Diallo. They are doing
outstanding jobs under difficult circumstances. We
recall General Diallo's courageous defence of
Monrovia in 1992, and we saw on this trip that he also
possesses equal diplomatic skills.

MONUC's deployment in adequate conditions of
security and cooperation should remain a key priority.
We took a major step forward on the first day of the
trip with the signing of the status-of-forces agreement
in the presence of President Kabila, who decided to
change his schedule to attend the signing ceremony.
This essential step is now behind us. We are inclined to
believe that all the States signatories to Lusaka are in
favour of MONUC deployment and will, if necessary,
bring pressure to bear on any reluctant parties to follow
suit.

Let me be frank on another problem that was all
too obvious and cannot be disguised - the strains that
continue to exist between the Joint Military
Commission (JMC) and MONUC. We met with the
JMC in Lusaka. The meeting raised questions as to
how we can move forward, and we hope that those
questions can be addressed. We remain convinced that
the JMC should be physically co-located with MONUC
and must be a permanently sitting body that can
respond to breaking events on the ground as part of a
joint effort. I want to stress to those of you who were
not with us that there was a linguistic misunderstanding
between us in this room and the people on the ground,
which we only realized during the trip - and that is
that the word "co-location" has a different meaning in
Africa than it did here. When we talked about
"co-location", we talked merely about MONUC and the
JMC being in the same building. That was not the issue
to our friends in Africa. The issue was what city the
JMC would go to. This was quite different from what
we expected. No one we talked to objected to sharing a
building. But several of the Lusaka peace signatories
stated that they will not send their representatives to
the JMC to Kinshasa at this time, and they gave us
little hope to believe that they wanted to send them
ever. So this is an unresolved problem that I believe we
were not adequately aware of until we got there, and it
requires our attention. I want to clarify it, because the
same word, "co-location", had two significantly
different meanings.

As a result of the meetings in Lusaka with the
JMC and the Political Committee, Ambassador Levitte,
in his prospective capacity as President of the Security
Council in the month of June, invited the Political
Committee to come to New York on or about 16 June. I
thank our good friend Jean-David Levitte for this
important initiative. I believe this will be a critical
meeting. I am sure Ambassador Levitte will have more
to say on it, but I would draw everyone's attention to
the fact that this will be another step forward in the
emerging joint Organization of African Unity (OAU)-
Security Council collaboration in furtherance of the
Lusaka Agreement. It will be a very important meeting,
or to be more precise, series of meetings, and I hope
we can all protect the dates of 15 and 16 June on the
calendar, awaiting instructions from Ambassador
Levitte in his capacity as June President.

We raised only two issues with the Political
Committee - the national dialogue and the need to
disarm non-signatory armed groups operating in the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
members of the Political Committee stated clearly that
they wished to keep the national dialogue in the hands
of the Congolese people, but they did engage us on the
question of the armed groups. I think it is vitally
important that this be one of the main topics for
discussion in June; a successful disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement
campaign is essential for the success of Lusaka.

Finally, let me address the unexpected outbreak
of fighting between Ugandan and Rwandan forces in
Kisangani on the second day of our trip. At first, we
feared that the fighting in Kisangani would wreck our
trip. In fact, in an unexpected way, it provided us with
a challenge and an opportunity that, I am proud to say,
the seven nations of this special mission addressed. In
what amounted to de facto mini-shuttle diplomacy, the
seven nations of the Security Council mission
negotiated, between President Kagame and President
Museveni, face to face and by telephone, a Security
Council/Government of Rwanda/Government of
Uganda statement issued on 8 May and reaffirmed two
days ago in their summit in the United Republic of
Tanzania. The fighting then stopped. If anyone wants
additional proof of the precedent that Ambassador
Andjaba set in East Timor of the capability of Security
Council missions, I think this once again illustrates
that, under certain circumstances, the Security Council
can, as it did again here, and particularly in East Timor,
make significant strides forward.

This opportunity will, however, require
implementation; both President Kagame and President
Museveni made it absolutely clear that they were
prepared to demilitarize Kisangani, but they wanted to
do full demilitarization only when MONUC forces got
to Kisangani. I also talked with President Mugabe and
President Kabila about this arrangement before it was
announced. Both President Kabila and President
Mugabe welcomed the announcement, and both of
them said that they thought it was potentially a model
for the successful implementation of all of the Lusaka
Agreement. However, it needs to be stressed,
particularly to our colleagues in the DPKO office, that
time is essential. It is vitally important that the forces
from MONUC that will go to Kisangani get there ahead
of the initial deployment schedule. Dates like July will
not work for Kisangani. I understand that the
Secretary-General has already been in touch with
several countries about this. I think I can safely say,
speaking for the members of the Security Council
mission, that we believe that getting a United Nations
unit, of whatever nationality, to Kisangani immediately,
in the next few weeks, is deemed appropriate, is
absolutely critical. Otherwise, the risk of war
beginning again is very substantial.

I also wish to draw the Council's attention to the
very positive announcements and statements coming
from the Government of South Africa concerning their
readiness to play a more active role in the process.

In conclusion, we remain convinced that the link
between the exploitation of natural resources and the
continuation of the conflict is a critical area for the
Council's further investigation. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola and Sierra Leone are all
adversely affected by the plundering of their natural
resources, even though the actual circumstances vary
from country to country. But these issues are central to
peacekeeping, and they need to be looked at in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo context.

As we said on our last day in Asmara, by the end
of the trip, including the diversion we took to the Horn
at your instructions, Mr. President, it was difficult to
tell whether we had been on the road a week or a year.
My colleagues and I felt sleep-deprived, either
underfed and overfed, depending on where we were,
and constantly on the move. But I assure you, Mr.
President, that by arriving at this consensus we feel we
served the purposes of the Security Council. On a
personal basis, I would gladly travel with any and all of
them again under the chairmanship of any of my six
colleagues, and I hope that when they say similar
things about me that they actually mean them.

I thank you, Mr. President, for the honour of
asking me to lead this delegation. I apologize for being
late, but I want to state that under the most unusual
circumstances it was one of the most satisfying
experiences of my professional life, and despite the
enormous difficulties and our inability at the last
minute to prevent what turned out to be an inevitable
resumption of hostilities between Ethiopia and Eritrea,
I believe that we move forward the cause of peace in
our primary mission, and if we can address the fresh
opportunity that Kisangani has put before us, we can
actually make genuine progress. But once again, as in
all of these issues, implementation is what matters, not
simply the paper agreements.

