Mr. Ouane (Mali)(spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative of convening this public
meeting to consider general questions relating to
sanctions. We thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Assistant
Secretary-General, for his exhaustive, accurate and
detailed introduction to the topic.

We also thank the Swiss and German
Governments for their important contributions to
improving our sanctions regimes through the Interlaken
process on financial sanctions and the Bonn-Berlin
process on smart sanctions, particularly embargoes on
weapons and travel. We thank the Swedish Government
for its initiative to pursue the Interlaken process and
the Bonn-Berlin process, and we welcome the
participation of the Swedish Secretary of State in our
debates.

We hope that the results and specific
recommendations emanating from these processes will
be useful tools that will help the Council determine the
best time to impose sanctions under Chapter VII of the
Charter.

If sanctions are a useful tool that the Council can
employ in specific circumstances, under the Charter, it
is also true that because of their negative and undesired
effects, they have become a source of legitimate
concern for the international community. That is why
the Council must develop sanctions regimes that are
functional and cause the minimum of undesired
secondary effects.

In this connection, sanctions - the best coercive
measure - must not be decided on before exhausting
all other means of peaceful settlement of disputes
envisaged by the Charter. We also believe that
inasmuch as sanctions are provisional and temporary
tools, they must include certain humanitarian
exemptions, so that help can be given to the most
vulnerable sectors of the population and to minimize
their effects on the civilian population and on third
States.

Furthermore, we believe that the sanctions should
be lifted as soon as the Security Council's requirements
have been met, because this would enhance not only
their legitimacy, but also their acceptance by the
international community, whose will they should
reflect.

We welcome the new steps taken by the Council
for the imposition of well targeted sanctions, with a
time limit, aimed at changing the conduct of
individuals or groups that are well identified. Studies
of the decade of sanctions imposed by the United
Nations have demonstrated that the sanctions have
rarely achieved their goals, though they have caused
untold suffering for civilian populations. A continuous
evaluation of their socio-economic impact is therefore
needed.

Finally, my delegation regrets that, despite the
outstanding work accomplished, it has not always been
possible to reach consensus on the reports of the
Council's Working Group on sanctions. My delegation
gives its full support to the recommendations contained
in the report proposing concrete measures for the
Security Council to enhance the effectiveness of
existing sanctions regimes, as well as a specific
orientation for any future action.

