Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation supported the
adoption of resolution 2377 (2017), endorsing the
size and mandate of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, which will begin its work on
26 September. We consider it important that the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia was elaborated in close consultation with the
Colombian parties.

The successful course of the peace process in
Colombia allows us to draw two lessons, the first of
which is the importance of the principle of national
ownership. It is only as a result of the will of the
Colombian sides that the peace agreements were able
to be reached and implemented. Secondly, the example
of Colombia proves that primarily political solutions
are the only guarantee for an effective and lasting
settlement. The role of the United Nations and the
Verification Mission is to help the parties in preserve
the peace process and moving it forward, which has
already enabled us to take to the first steps on the path
towards the socioeconomic and political reintegration
of former combatants, including the formation of a
political party. We hope that the parties will continue
to address outstanding issues in good faith and that the
Verification Mission will provide the requisite support.

It is important not to weaken the close attention
we have paid to the security situation to ensure that
no vacuums emerge. We therefore deem important the
progress in the peace process achieved between the
Government of Colombia and the National Liberation
Army on a temporary ceasefire. This became possible
in part through the help of guarantor States: Brazil,
Venezuela, Cuba, Norway, Chile and Ecuador. We
hope that it will bring about a lasting settlement of the
long-standing internal conflict and contribute to the
establishment of peace.

We await the Secretariat's imminent recommendations
on how the Verification Mission should respond to the
request by the Government and the National Liberation
Army's for assistance in monitoring the implementation
of their agreement. We again reaffirm our readiness
to continue to assist the people and Government of
Colombia in their endeavour to forge robust peace and
post-conflict development.

