Mr. Spantfi: Let me begin by congratulating you,
Madam President, on your assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month. I am grateful to you for
convening this meeting. Afghanistan deeply
appreciates the strong support and solidarity of the
family of nations in its arduous struggle to stand on its
feet after decades of conflicts and suffering. Specially,
we are grateful for the excellent work and efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). Our special thanks go to Ambassador Kai
Eide and his able team. I am also thankful for his
comprehensive report on the situation in my country.

I would like to brief the Council on our recent
presidential and provincial council elections and the
way forward. This will be somewhat complementary to
Mr. Eide's efforts.

The August elections were important milestones
in the processes of democratization and State-building
in Afghanistan. They were a multifaceted undertaking,
involving different entities and players. They included
Afghan national security forces, the Independent
Election Commission, the Electoral Complaints
Commission, the Afghan media, United Nations
agencies, national and international observers, Afghan
civil society, the Afghan political community, the
International Security Assistance Force and, of course,
the Afghan citizens. It was the first time in the history
of modern Afghanistan that Afghans had the
opportunity to organize a nationwide election.

What made this election different from other
elections was the degree of the threat to security.
Al-Qaida, the Taliban and other terrorist groups did
their utmost to disrupt the election. Painfully, we lost a
number of our security forces, our international
partners and Afghan civilians to terrorist attacks prior
and during the election day.

Taking into account the socio-historic realities of
my country, we passed this national test successfully.
As with any emerging democracy, there were cases of
irregularities. But in passing judgment, we should be
aware of the context, the process and the full picture,
rather than only one aspect or issue.

For the sake of the stability and consolidation of
our nascent democratic institutions and process, it is
imperative that all of us respect and support the
forthcoming decisions from the Afghan electoral
bodies. Continuing efforts to undermine the integrity
and legitimacy of the process and our institutions will
certainly result in a worsening of the situation, not only
for Afghanistan but also for the international
community.

Afghanistan is faced with challenges and needs
that fall into four categories: stabilization, humanitarian
concerns, reconstruction efforts and sustainable
development. Only by pursuing a comprehensive long-
term strategy can we consolidate the fragile advances
we have made and the institutions we have built since
2001. Short-term, compartmentalized and partial
solutions are doomed to fail.

The objective of such a strategy must be to help
create a fully sustained and functioning State. The
main pillars of this strategy are security, good
governance, economic development, regional
cooperation and international solidarity.

A comprehensive long-term strategy needs to be
supported by adequate and appropriate resources and
skills. To implement such a strategy, there needs to be a
clearer division of responsibility between us and the
international community. Afghanistan has to shoulder
the main responsibility for creating a secure,
prosperous, progressive and democratic Afghanistan.

The sustained and substantial support of the
international community will be crucial in enabling us
to realize our national priorities. We are very pleased
with the placing of Afghanistan high among the
priorities of the new United States Administration. We
are confident that the surge in United States military
support coupled with increased civilian and
developmental assistance is the best way forward.

Afghanistan we1comes the proposal to convene
an international conference on the situation in
Afghanistan. We will be pleased to host it in Kabul.
This conference will be an opportunity to renew our
partnership and to outline specific and concrete steps
and programmes. The conference will be an important
forum for identifying effective ways to implement the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy.
Furthermore, it will provide an opportunity to discuss
our mutual responsibilities and commitment to
principles of good governance, mutual accountability,
transparency, aid efficiency and enhanced coordination.

I should like to say a few words about the
strategic issue of good governance. An accountable and
functioning State is absolutely essential for addressing
Afghanistan's short- and long-term needs and

challenges. However, it is a reductionist View to boil
all our problems down to one issue. Terrorists are
motivated by a set of factors, primarily their fanatical
mindset and ideological ends.

In the context of Afghanistan, we often suffer
from weak or, as Kai Eide mentioned, even absent
governance, as well as bad governance. In many cases,
we lack the basic tools required for governance. Rather
than bashing and delegitimizing our young State
institutions, we have to invest in our national
institutions. Furthermore, it is wrong and unethical to
ignore bad practice on the part of other actors,
including within the donor community.

Another important issue is the question of
re-integration of illegal fighters into civilian life. From
the beginning, it has been our stated policy that
Afghanistan belongs to all Afghan citizens. To this end,
and in the context of the Afghan Constitution, we have
used all means to encourage those Afghans who took
up arms against their country to participate in the
process of reconstructing their motherland. In the
coming weeks and months, we will accelerate our
efforts towards that end. To succeed in this endeavour,
our efforts must be consistent with the ends that we
envision for Afghanistan and the region. Secondly, as
long as the leaders of the Taliban and other terrorist
groups remain protected by external entities, we will
not be able to achieve our goal of dismantling the
dynamic of insecurity in my country. Any sustainable
reintegration effort must focus on the leadership as
well as non-ideological fighters.

Another important issue for Afghanistan is
regional cooperation. For us, regional cooperation is a
pillar of our foreign, security and development policy.
We fully believe in the utility of economic peace in our
region. Many of our challenges are regional in nature
and consequence - in particular, terrorism and drug-
trafficking. Only by creating a cooperative
environment in the region can we collectively address
our interrelated challenges. In this context, our
relations with the Islamic Republic of Pakistan are of
the utmost importance. Fortunately, in recent months,
there has been a cooperative atmosphere between us
and the new civilian Government in Pakistan. I should
like to thank our friends for their support in bringing
this bilateral relationship about through the trilateral
meetings held in Washington, Ankara and Istanbul. It is
our sincere wish to extend this to other entities in
Pakistan. To this end, the international community
must ensure that only good behaviour is rewarded.

In addressing all these issues, the United Nations
has played and must continue to play a leading role.
UNAMA is well placed to facilitate communication
between us and our international partners and to bridge
our mutual needs and expectations. Enhancing
coordination among different stakeholders is another
important role for UNAMA.

I should like to conclude by reiterating
Afghanistan's full commitment and readiness to
strengthen our relationships with our international
partners. I am absolutely confident that with their
support and solidarity, Afghanistan will resume its
historical role and place as a model for cooperation
among different cultures and as a crossroads for trade,
transit and tourism in the region.

