Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this debate. I also thank
High Commissioner Pillay, Under-Secretary-General
Amos, Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and Director-
General Daccord for their exemplary leadership on
protection matters.

As the Secretary-General assessed in his most
recent report on the protection of civilians (S/2013/689),
the current state of the protection of civilians leaves
little room for optimism. The messages delivered by
our briefers make such bleakness plain. We have heard,

in the words of Under-Secretary-General Amos, about
reactions of outrage, despair and shame.

We know that protecting civilians is at the heart of
what the Council does and peacekeeping is one of the
primary means at the Council's disposal to do it. The
standing and authority of the United Nations depend
decisively upon the capacity of its peacekeepers to
protect civilians effectively.

We all know that today's peacekeeping missions
are highly diverse and complex, not least stemming
from the fact that most of those missions are mandated
explicitly to protect civilians. Resolutions 1894 (2009)
and 2086 (2013) reinforce the normative framework
on protection and peacekeeping but, as always, the
real test remains to ensure that the existing norms are
implemented on the ground. I carefully note all our
briefers' comments in that regard this morning.

In the past year, the Council has taken serious
decisions to equip peacekeeping missions with robust
protection mandates. We are seeing the positive impact
of such mandates in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Mali. There will always be limits to what
peacekeepers can do, but we must continue to evaluate
the effectiveness of those mandates and compile the
lessons learned to establish best practice.

Instrumental in that effort is ensuring, as Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous has reminded us, that

the peacekeeping partnership - the Council, the
Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries - share a common understanding of

protection challenges. Regular briefings by United
Nations force commanders allow the Council to hear
the perspectives of those responsible in the field for
delivering on those mandates. We strongly support
United Nations police commissioners briefing the
Council in the same way.

The Council should consider upgrading the status of
its informal expert group on the protection of civilians.
That would help to build consensus about protection
challenges, allowing the Council to take appropriate
actions to enhance protection in a timely way.

We must be prepared to react nimbly, as necessary
and without hesitation, to protect civilians when
situations change quickly, as is the case in South Sudan.
Nine hundred thousand civilians have fled their homes,
75,000 of whom are sheltering in United Nations
camps. Resolution 2132 (2013) authorized an increase
in the military and police capacities, effectively using
inter-mission cooperation. However, we will have to
consider carefully the future mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, with the protection
of civilians our paramount consideration. Resourcing
should not be allowed to stand in the way.

If peacekeepers are to effectively protect civilians,
they must have appropriate training, equipment and
critical enablers. The proliferation of weapons also
affects the ability of peacekeepers to provide security
for themselves and for civilians. We encourage further
support so as to assist peacekeepers in tracking and
managing illicit weapons flows and in implementing
arms embargoes, as resolution 2117 (2013), adopted last
September, requires.

We should be prepared to encourage greater use of
technologies that enhance the capability ofpeacekeeping
missions to perform increasingly complex tasks.
Unarmed unmanned aerial vehicles will enhance early
warning on threats to civilians, deter armed groups and
bolster the safety of personnel. The sooner they are
rolled out right across missions the better.

Ultimately, the best way in which the Council can
protect civilians is to prevent armed conflict itself in
the first instance. As the Council, we must sharpen our
ability to anticipate and to respond to emerging crises
affecting civilians. Regular horizon-scanning briefings
are one means to that end.

We welcome the Secretary-General's "Rights up
front" initiative, which identifies concrete action to
improve the United Nations response to future crises.
Protection is at the core of that initiative, and we need
to ensure that all parts of the United Nations system
implement it both systematically and organically.

The primary responsibility to protect civilians
rests with all the parties to a conflict. That requires
full adherence to international humanitarian and
human rights law. Those responsible for committing
serious violations must be held to account, preferably
at the national level but, if not, the International
Criminal Court may have a role to play. Our design
of peacekeeping missions should reflect that need for
accountability.

The daily horror of Syria reminds us that the
international community and the Council must condemn
the denial of humanitarian access, in all its forms, as
a weapon of war, and must do all we can to ensure
rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access to meet the
needs of civilians. The Council needs to act through
a resolution on this now. That is why Luxembourg,
Jordan and Australia have prepared one.

Ultimately, the international community has a
responsibility to protect populations if States will
not, or cannot, fulfil their obligations to prevent mass
atrocity crimes. That is a responsibility that the Council
needs to uphold.

To conclude, the presidential statement we have
adopted today (S/PRST/2014/3) necessarily reaffirms
the need for the Council and Member States to
strengthen further protection for the many millions of
civilians who desperately need help. The update of the
aide-me'moire pertaining to the protection of civilians,
which is annexed to the presidential statement and
was initially adopted by the Council in 2002, remains
essential guidance for the Council's future work.
As we have agreed today, we must use it on a more
systematic and consistent basis as we further develop
and, crucially, implement our decisive and permanent
task of protecting civilians.

