Mr. Ali (Bangladesh): Madam President, I should
like to begin by thanking your country, Nigeria, and
you personally for steering this very important open
debate on the situation in the Middle East. At the
outset, I express our sincere condolences at the demise
of the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia. We also express
our condolences at the loss of life and property in the
recent earthquake in Turkey.

I convey our appreciation to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.

The Bangladesh delegation aligns itself with the
statements delivered by the representatives of Egypt
and Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, respectively. In addition, I wish to briefly
make certain points that Bangladesh believes to be of
importance.
In order to achieve a lasting solution in the
Middle East, it is very important to address the key
issue, which is the prolonged and illegal occupation of
the Arab territories by Israel. We believe that the
occupying Power should immediately cease its
continued settlement activity, which remains the key
blockage to the resumption of direct negotiations
between Israel and Palestine.

We commend President Mahmoud Abbas's
leadership of the Palestinian Authority and the
continued Palestinian State-building efforts, especially
in the areas of governance, the rule of law and human
rights, livelihoods, productive sectors, education and
culture, health and so on.

We are concerned, however, at the destruction by
the occupying Power of properties, homes and
economic institutions, and the construction of the Wall,
contrary to international law, in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in and around East
Jerusalem, which have hampered the already critical
socio-economic situation that the Palestinian
population faces. We are also worried because of the
Israeli military operations and the continuing Israeli
policy of closures and severe restrictions on the
movement of people and goods, including
humanitarian personnel as well as food, medical, and
other essential supplies, in the Gaza Strip, which are
causing civilian casualties, and we therefore call for
maximum restraint with respect for international
humanitarian law.

We express our concern at the inhumane
treatment of Palestinian prisoners languishing in Israeli
jails. My delegation is pleased, however, at the recent
Egyptian-brokered prisoner-exchange deal under which
Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit has been released in
exchange for more than 1,000 Palestinian prisoners.

My delegation believes that the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the relevant General Assembly
resolutions, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 425 (1978), the principle of land for
peace and the Madrid Conference terms of reference,
which guarantee Israel's withdrawal from all occupied
Arab and Palestinian territories back to the line of
4 June 1967, the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative are the best guides for achieving a two-State
solution.

The principled support of the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination from all
corners of the globe, both bilaterally and multilaterally,
has been an essential pillar of Palestinian resilience
over the decades. My delegation welcomes in this
regard Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas's speech
of 23 September 2011 (see A/66/PV.19) before the
General Assembly and his formal submission to the
Secretary-General of an application for United Nations
membership. It is also heartening to note that more
than 130 countries have recognized the State of
Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders. It would
therefore be morally befitting for this body to
unanimously respect the will of the majority of the
Member States and to endorse the application of
Palestine.

Let me now turn to the situations in Lebanon and
in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights. We call upon the
concerned parties to fully respect the sovereignty of
Lebanon and to cease continuous breaches of
resolution 1701 (2006). We further demand that the
occupying State immediately halt its actions to alter the
legal, physical and demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights in accordance with resolution
497 (1981).

In conclusion, let me reiterate the long-standing
position of Bangladesh that the continued illegal
occupation of Palestine over the past six decades is the
root cause of Violence, unrest and destabilization in the
region. Let me also reiterate our full support for a
lasting peace for all inhabitants of the region, both
Arabs and Israelis, and our strong commitment to the
realization of an independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
living side by side and in peace with all its neighbours.

