Mr. Sallah (Gambia): As I am speaking for the first
time in this Council Chamber, I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, for the excellent manner in which you have
carried out your mandate as President of the Security
Council for the month of January. I extend similar
sentiments to your predecessor, Ambassador Fernando
Berrocal Soto of Costa Rica. I also wish to pay tribute to
the outgoing non-permanent members of the Security
Council for their excellent contribution during their term. I
think that my delegation has cooperated with you,
Mr. President, and we will continue to do so with your
successors.

My delegation is pleased to participate in this debate.
Allow me to extend my delegation's felicitations to the
Secretary-General for his detailed and vivid report on the
situation in Angola. We wish to pay a special tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Angola,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, to his staff, to the dedicated
men and women of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA), and to the troika countries - Portugal,
the United States of America and the Russian Federation -
for the impressive work they are doing towards the
achievement of the objectives of the Lusaka Protocol. We
applaud the troop-contributing countries for their valuable
contributions to MONUA, without which the progress
made so far in the implementation of the Angolan peace
process would not have been possible.
Slow but steady progress has been realized in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. However, a lot
still remains to be done in the resurrection of the unity
and national integrity of Angola. The attainment of this
goal requires the full cooperation and commitment of the
Angolan leaders themselves. They must continue to take
the necessary steps, as democratic pillars, to achieve a
Vibrant economy and fully functioning State institutions
that command the support and confidence of the people
of Angola.

If such is the ardent wish of the international
community for Angola - and indeed it is - the Angolan
leaders must embrace honestly all the efforts being made
in that direction. My delegation is dismayed by the recent
discovery of re-mining activities by UN ITA personnel and
the reported increase in the movement of unregistered
UNITA troops which have caused ravages in some
provinces. This one-step-forward and two-steps-backward
attitude is far from helpful in moving the Angolan peace
process forward.

In this regard, we hail the move made in Harare by
the six Ministers of Defence and Security of the States
members of the South African Development Community
(SADC) in issuing a communique warning UN ITA
supporters of the negative consequences of their continued
support of the movement. This prompts me to re-echo my
delegation's firm support for positive interventions in
conflict situations by regional organizations.

In welcoming the timetable approved by the Joint
Commission, according to which the two parties to the
Angolan conflict have agreed to accomplish the remaining
tasks of the Lusaka Protocol by the end of February 1998,
my delegation is of the View that both the Government
and UNITA must be urged to fulfil their obligations and
to give their honest and resolute support in that direction.

It is one thing to successfully accomplish the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, but it is another
to consolidate and sustain the gains realized. These are
major tasks that, in my view, require the continued
presence and involvement of MONUA. Thus, my
delegation supports the extension of the mandate of
MONUA not only to the end of April 1998 but, if

 

necessary to consolidate the peace process, also beyond
1998.

In the context of the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol, MONUA has the essential function of reassuring
the civilian population and paving the way towards national
reconciliation and peaceful coexistence. Thus, strengthening
the civilian police component will be an appropriate move.
Civilian police provide the transition from military to
civilian authority and from peacekeeping to peace-building.

As a result of the protracted war in Angola, the
security covenant that should exist between the Angolan
people and their Government could remain fragile for a
long time. Therefore, it is vital to offer assistance in
fostering a culture of peace and respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms. Thus, all the components of
MONUA have a Vital role to play in the Angolan situation:
the military task force will continue to enforce the ceasefire
while the civilian police provide monitoring and training of
the Angolan National Police so that democratic principles
can finally take root in the country.

A lasting, self-sustaining security and police structure
in Angola, based on the confidence of the citizens, needs
the unflinching cooperation of the local authorities, for war
can be forcibly halted by international troops, but national
reconciliation can come only from the people's hearts and
minds. We therefore welcome the impressive work being
done in the area of public awareness by the public
information network component of MONUA.

My delegation is of the View that the continued
presence of MONUA in Angola should not be limited by
time bounds, but should rather be measured by the impact
made in the implementation of the provisions of the Lusaka
peace process. This presence, as we see it, can ensure
concentration on the political, economic and social issues
and challenges that desperately need attention in Angola.
Not only is this presence essential for the accomplishment
of the mandated tasks of MONUA, but it is also necessary
for the creation of conditions conducive to the holding of
future elections.

In the light of what I have said, my delegation
supports the draft resolution before us and will vote in
favour of it.

