Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, allow me to offer my sincere congratulations to
you, Mr. President, and to your brotherly country on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February. We are confident that your
country and your Mission here in New York will be
able to successfully discharge the serious tasks of the
presidency of the Council.

I would also like to convey to you, Sir, greetings
from your brother President Abdel Fattah Al-Sisi, who
would have liked to be present at today's meeting in
response to your kind invitation. However, regrettably,
he could not be here due to previous commitments.

I would like to thank the Dominican Republic for
its presidency of the Security Council last month. I
also thank the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for their briefings
at the beginning of this meeting. I also welcome the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, C6te d'Ivoire
and Gabon to the Council today. I also congratulate
China on the Chinese new year.

I would like to commend you, Sir, for your interest
in today's topic on peace and security in Africa. That
is reflected in the judicious selection of themes to be
considered by the Council this month.

I believe that today's theme on the impact of

mercenary activities on peace and security in the region
of Central Africa is an emerging trend and a threat to
peace and security in various regions of our continent.
It is closely linked to the growing impact of non-State
actors and the negative repercussions of their criminal
activities on peace and stability in our States. Egypt
reiterates the importance of stepping up African and
international efforts to address the problem. We will
work tirelessly during our presidency of the African
Union, which is to begin in a few days, to pay greater
attention to eliminating this phenomenon as part of the
global strategy to maintain peace and stability on the
African continent.

Egypt has always been committed to the
implementation of measures outlined in sanctions
resolutions adopted by the Security Council, in
particular arms embargos and the transfer of assets
and funds, aimed at preventing armed groups - other
than regular State armies, of course - from acquiring
weapons. Access to weapons can undermine the
security and stability of countries and entire societies.
In that regard, Egypt underscores the importance of
strengthening and promoting national institutions, in
particular national security forces, to enable States to
exercise full control over their territory. We also call for
greater regional and international cooperation through
information-sharing on transnational security threats,
foremost of which is terrorism and mercenary groups.

In the light of all this, Egypt is very proud of
our efforts to address threats to transnational peace
and security, in particular terrorism, when we were
members of the Security Council in 2016 and 2017. We
actively participated in the negotiations of resolution
2368 (2017) of July 2017, on combating the financing
of terrorism. We also submitted a draft resolution on
preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons, which
was unanimously adopted by the Security Council as
resolution 2370 (2017) in August 2017. In that regard,
I would like to pay tribute to the efforts of Equatorial
Guinea in focusing on emerging unconventional
transnational security threats, which undermine the
stability and security of African countries.

Today's debate on mercenaries is another important
step in our regional and international cooperation that
can be used to address those threats. Egypt is very
interested in technical cooperation with our African
brothers in order to assist them in strengthening
African national capacities in the areas of security,
border control and addressing negative security threats.
In addition, we are ready to take part in cooperation
efforts to rebuild and develop their countries and
eradicate poverty in the context of our endeavour to
address the root causes of mercenary activities and
other security threats faced by the continent.

International and regional efforts to combat the
phenomenon of mercenaries already possess the
appropriate legal frameworks, in particular the 1989
International Convention against the Recruitment, Use,
Financing and Training of Mercenaries, as well as the
1977 Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa. We call on all States to accede to those
treaties and commit to implement them.

In that regard, emphasis should be placed on
strengthening regional cooperation among African
States, and the international community as a whole,
so as to ensure that mercenary groups are deprived of
any support, whether weapons or funding, as part of a
comprehensive strategy that includes the peacebuilding
dimension and addresses the root causes of the problem
through a cooperative approach among the States of
the region, the African Union, other African regional
organizations and international partners.

Finally, the relevance of eliminating the phenomenon
of mercenary combatants is linked to the common
African and international efforts to promote and
achieve the goal of silencing the guns by 2020, in View
of the concrete impact of this negative phenomenon on
the peace and security situation on the continent. In that
regard, we value the importance of the special meeting
on this subject, Sir, to be held under your Council
presidency. We reiterate our sincere appreciation for
your initiative, Mr. President, in choosing this vital
subject to be the focus of our discussion today. We
are confident that it will contribute to strengthening
our efforts to combat the phenomenon of mercenary
combatants and strengthen the foundations of security
and stability in the Central African region and on our
continent as a whole.

