Ms. Neumaus (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank you, Madam President, for having organized this open debate. Transitional justice is a critical issue in which the Security Council has an important role. Resolution 2282 (2016) identifies transitional justice as a key component of sustainable peace. For over 15 years, Switzerland has supported many partner countries in their processes of dealing with the past, through which societies try to come to terms with the atrocities they have suffered. On the basis of our experiences, I would like to highlight three points. First, the adoption of a set of legal and non-legal measures is essential for preventing the recurrence of large-scale violations and abuses of human rights law and international humanitarian law, as well as for establishing a new social contract. Respect for human rights is essential for achieving lasting peace. While criminal justice is crucial, it is but one dimension of transitional justice. With its Integrated System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition, Colombia serves aS an example of an innovative approach based on the four pillars of transitional justice. We call on the Council to give greater consideration to the complementarity between legal and non-legal measures when using the instruments at its disposal. The Secretary-General's guidance note on the United Nations approach to transitional justice can serve as a reference. Switzerland supports the revision process of that note, which is under way. We also support the references made today to the importance of the advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission. Secondly, as the presentations in this open debate have shown, civil society is a driving force in advancing accountability and the fight against impunity. Civil society, in particular women, must participate alongside decision makers in the design of such measures. In that connection, we wish to acknowledge the commitment of Yasmin Sooka and all those who, like her, have invested decades in seeking justice for the victims of the mostserious crimes. The Council must understand the need to involve and protect civil society, including human rights defenders, in the relevant items on its agenda. Thirdly, each context is different. We call on the Council to take context-specific and tailored measures based on an understanding of the needs of society as a whole. The Council must make full use of its flexibility in the formulation of mandates to ensure that targeted and achievable measures are taken.
