Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing
on the quarterly report (S/2016/532) of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Afghanistan. We convey
our deep appreciation and gratitude for the work of
Mr. Haysom and for his contribution in facing, with the
Afghanistan authorities and people, the great challenges
in achieving peace and a better life. We praise the work
of UNAMA in discharging its mandate under extremely
difficult conditions while Afghanistan struggles to
establish a society based on the fundamental values of
peace, human rights and social equity.

This debate offers us an opportunity to assess the
political, security and human rights situation, as well
as the latest regional and international developments,
concerning Afghanistan. The overall situation in the
country, as portrayed in the report of the Secretary-
General is most worrisome. In the past three months,
the Afghan Government continued to face significant
political, security and economic challenges. However,
despite a dire situation, as Mr. Haysom stressed,
important progress was achieved in the past 10 years.
The Afghans and the international community must
do everything in their power to ensure the gains are
irreversible. We deeply regret that the initial impulse
of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan
Peace and Reconciliation Process in its efforts to
facilitate a peaceful solution to the conflict through
dialogue between the Government and the Taliban did
not bear the desired results.

As in the previous period, the security situation
remained unstable, characterized by continuous and
intense armed clashes in various regions of the country
and terrorist attacks perpetrated by the Taliban, with a
disastrous impact on the civilian population. We took
note, with dismay, that over 1,900 civilian victims were
documented in the period covered by the report, with
60 per cent of the deaths attributed to non- governmental
elements. The indiscriminate killing of civilians
deserves our most vigorous condemnation, and we urge
all parties to the conflict to respect their obligations
and human rights and international humanitarian law
by putting an end to attacks against civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

Continued and widespread armed clashes and
very low economic growth generate a precarious
humanitarian situation, characterized by increasing
numbers of internally displaced people and a high
number of Afghan migrants already in Europe. On the
other hand, humanitarian access remains a matter of
concern. Incidents involving humanitarian workers
are on the rise, while humanitarian funding for food,
nutrition, health care and refugee programmes are
insufficient to meet such huge humanitarian needs.

The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
have shown increasing resilience despite the pressures
they face, including rising casualty and attrition rates,
which create great challenges to the sustainability
of the forces, as underlined in the report of the
Secretary-General.

It is common wisdom that long-term stability
and prosperity in Afghanistan depend upon national
reconciliation, based on respect of human rights and
fundamental liberties, regional and international
cooperation, mutual respect and non-interference in
one another's internal affairs.

Afghanistan is pursuing regional commitments
with an emphasis on the economy and security. During
the period under review, regional cooperation appeared
to be the most virtuous development in and around
Afghanistan. The agreement among Afghan President
Ghani, Iranian President Rouhani and Indian Prime
Minister Modi on transport, trilateral transit and
facilitation of trade among the three countries and the
engagement by the countries of the region with the
similar Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process as a platform
for regional cooperation, including the fight against
terrorism, are other welcome developments, as are as the
consultations held in Kabul by the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force with Government officials
on plans to develop a structure for a regional strategy on
combating terrorism. In that regard, we commend the
efforts on the part of the Afghan authorities to develop
relations with regional partners in neighbouring
countries in the fight against terrorism and in pursuing
a political settlement to the conflict they have been
engulfed in for so long.

We take good note of the determination on the part
of the Afghan authorities and institutions to adopt more
rigorous policies and practices and translate them into
actions aimed at building the population's trust. The
agenda for the reform of the Afghan Government has
started to produce a meaningful impact on the lives
of the Afghans. The fight against corruption is a key
feature of the agenda. We welcome the establishment, by
a presidential decree, ofa High Council on governance,
Justice and Anti-corruption to oversee the drafting and
implementation of a national anti-corruption strategy
and presidential statements outlining measures to step
up the anti-corruption drive.

In conclusion, we are mindful that the challenges
faced by Afghanistan are immense. We join the
Secretary-General in applauding Afghanistan's
commitment, along with China, Pakistan and the United
States, in the context of the Quadrilateral Coordination
group on the Afghan peace and reconciliation process to
reach a negotiated agreement between the Government
and the Taliban for the achievement of sustainable
peace for the Afghan people.

