Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Madam President,
on the United Kingdom's accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of November
and thanking you for convening and choosing the topic
of this debate. I thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing, which confirms his resolute commitment to
consolidating and sustaining peace. I would also like
to thank the other speakers for sharing their views on
this issue.

This debate is dedicated to a topic that is not often
independently addressed at the Security Council,
but nonetheless remains important, even crucial, for
building and sustaining peace. Without successful
reconciliation processes, the risk of relapsing into
conflict significantly increases, which history has taught
us to the detriment of our populations, who continue
to suffer the horrors of conflict, in particular on the
African continent. Morocco welcomes this opportunity
to share its views on the issue by highlighting the
following points.

First, as rightly pointed out in the concept
note (S/2019/87l, annex) before us at this debate,
reconciliation has often been associated with
transitional justice. That is extremely important in
order to definitively turn the page on a conflict.

Secondly, the leading role of community and
religious leaders must be highlighted. Especially in
societies that could be described as traditional, those
leaders enjoy a special status and command significant
respect, which they do not hesitate to use for the benefit
of their communities if conflicts arise. Their role is
even more important in the case of a religious conflict.
The simple fact of seeing representatives of different
religions involved in a conflict holding information
meetings and working jointly to raise awareness among
the population about the benefits of living together can
have a decisive impact on populations.

Thirdly, although no conflict or crisis is the same,
it is important to draw on our broad pool of experience
and expertise in reconciliation. However, what ensures
success for any process based on past events is national

ownership. That cardinal principle makes it possible
to adapt experiences to the specific situation of any
given country. It also allows for greater involvement of
country leaders and civil-society representatives - an
essential component of the process.

Fourthly, Morocco welcomes the growing role
played by women in reconciliation processes, in line
with the women and peace and security agenda. The
involvement of women, who are unfortunately often
the first victims of conflict, remains fundamental
to the success of reconciliation processes. We fully
support the Secretary-General in his desire to promote
women's participation in all areas, including in
reconciliation processes.

The United Nations has, and continues to play, a key
role in most past and ongoing reconciliation processes.
Whether through its presence on the ground, the means
at its disposal or by its good offices' services, the
United Nations is equipped to provide decisive support
to reconciliation processes. In that regard, I would like
to align myself with the delegations that have cited the
Peacebuilding Commission as one of the bodies that is
best placed to address issues related to reconciliation.
The main strength of our Organization is, of course,
its impartiality and neutrality, which are essential
components of any action supporting a reconciliation
process. It also has the ability to compile and use best
practices and, lastly, it can support other organizations
that could benefit from their comparative advantages
over the United Nations.

In conclusion, I wish to stress that any reconciliation
process must operate at both the national and local
levels. Dialogue at the local level must foster dialogue
at the national level, thereby ensuring the inclusivity of
the process and national ownership.

