Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): I would like to begin by
thanking the Jordanian presidency for organizing this
important meeting and circulating the concept paper
on the role of youth in countering Violent extremism
and promoting peace (S/2015/231, annex). I would also
like to commend His Royal Highness for presiding over
this meeting and for his commitment to youth issues.
And I would like to express our deep appreciation to the
Secretary-General and all the briefers.

Today there are more than 1 billion youth around
the world, a young population characterized by its
unprecedented access to information technology. At the
same time, this population faces many challenges that
exacerbate its vulnerability, with more than 6 million
youth living in fragile and conflict regions, and about
75 million unemployed.

Youth are to be found on both sides of terrorist
activities. They are targeted in their schools,
universities and homes, in Palestine, Libya, Yemen,
Pakistan, Central Africa and Kenya, and youth are
targeting journalists and tourists in Paris, Tunisia,
Sweden and Brussels, among other places. This
alarming phenomenon emphasizes that terrorist attacks
transcend borders and are not limited to one country,
religion or ethnicity and represent a serious threat to
international peace and security around the world.

Prevention starts on benches in schools and
continues throughout the social mobility chain.
Education is pivotal in building up the resilience
of future generations. It should engrave in them
knowledge, human rights, understanding of the other,
openness, dialogue, tolerance and the rule of law. It
should promote critical thinking that will help fight
bigotry, stereotyping and essentialism. Education
should also be oriented to the needs of the labour market
and ensure a dignified livelihood, social inclusion and a
wider participation in the public political sphere.

The fight for the minds of young people should
continue through standing up to the attractiveness of
extremist and intolerant religious figures. Modern
and attractive social organizations for youth should
constitute a better alternative in order to educate and
prepare those youth for leadership posts and to be
positive role models.

All of the organs and specialized agencies of the
United Nations should continue to work relentlessly to
address the root causes of terrorism, to fully implement
strategies highlighting the interlinkages between peace
and development, with a strong emphasis on the needs
of youth, and, most importantly, putting an end to
impunity and double standards in the implementation
of law and ensuring justice.

The Middle East and the Arab world are informed by
the Israeli occupation, protracted conflicts, Violations
of human rights, shattered dreams, an unprecedented
surge in terrorism and radicalization whose main
focus is on youth, who represent one third of our Arab
population.

Aware that the youth are our ray of hope in the
midst of all these challenges, my Government adopted
in 2012 a youth policy in Lebanon, drafted by young
people and capturing their priorities in five areas,
namely, demography and economic participation;
education and culture; health; social integration; and
political participation. Moreover, Lebanon's vibrant
civil society has always offered platforms for inclusive
dialogue between its young people, with full respect
for their intellectual diversity. Suffice to mention the
Common Space Initiative, whose objective is to build
youth capacity in debate and solution formulation in
the context of national and regional programmes; and
the Adyan workshops, during which young people such
as Sara, a young Lebanese woman, state that they are
determined to break stereotypes and draw a different
picture of Islam than the one promoted by terrorism and
extremism.

This journey, at the national, regional and
international levels, will not be successful if our youth
are not our partners in elaborating a plan of action to
fight terrorism. They are not only the future generation;
we need to involve them now in today's affairs to secure
a better future for all of us.

