Mr. Guan Jian (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
listened carefully to the reports of President Meron and
Prosecutor Del Ponte of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of President Mase
and Prosecutor Jallow of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). We express our
appreciation to the Tribunals for their work.

The two Tribunals have continued to take steps to
actively implement the completion strategies. We
commend them for their work in that regard. We are
gratified to note that, in accordance with the time
frame set out in the completion strategies, the two
Tribunals will complete all investigative work by the
end of this year, thus marking a propitious beginning to
the successful implementation of other goals outlined
in the completion strategies. We believe that the timely
transfer to competent national jurisdictions of cases
involving intermediate and lower rank suspected of
being responsible for crimes is of crucial importance; it
will help to ensure that the two Tribunals complete
their work as scheduled and that reconciliation and
justice can be realized in the two countries and regions.

The transfer process should be intensified when
that is practicable. We note that the Prosecutors of the
two Tribunals have begun to submit proposed transfer
cases to the competent Trial Chambers for approval.
We hope that the War Crimes Chamber in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be operational by January 2005, and
we expect that Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro,
Rwanda and a few other countries will be prepared to
receive appropriate cases at an early date.

We appreciate the efforts of the two Tribunals and
of the international community to strengthen the
national judicial capacity-building in both regions. We
believe that the Security Council, the countries
concerned and the Tribunals should continue to assist
in the establishment of national chambers that conform
to international standards.

It is our hope that, with their vast experience and
expertise, the Judges of the two Tribunals will, in
addition to ensuring fair trials, further enhance the
efficiency of trials and accelerate trial processes. In
that regard, it is necessary that both the Trial Chambers
and the Offices of the Prosecutors make specific
arrangements to ensure that those objectives can be
attained.

