Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Before
we proceed to the voting, I would like to tell you how
pleased I am, Mr. President, that we are meeting now
to adopt the draft resolution on Burundi contained
in document S/2016/301, thus marking the launch
of the Chinese presidency of the Security Council, a
presidency to which I extend my most heartfelt wishes
for success. I would also like to thank all my colleagues
and their teams for the constructive discussions that
have enabled us to meet here for this important vote. I
would briefly like to recall the objectives of our draft
resolution.

The draft has five main objectives. The first, and
main, objective of our draft resolution is to back African
efforts to bring about an emergence from the crisis in
Burundi, efforts undertaken by both the East African
Community and the African Union. In backing those
efforts, we want to contribute to forging inclusive and
genuine dialogue - I will come back to this 4 among
Burundians, and to find a peaceful solution to the crisis.

The second objective of this draft resolution is
to bolster the United Nations presence in Burundi
and strengthen the team of the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Jamal Benomar. This is
fundamental. We need the United Nations to be more
present on the ground and, as the Security Council, we
should be able to follow the situation in Burundi closely
so that we can be alerted if the situation continues to
deteriorate and so that we would be in a position to
react in timely fashion to avoid the worst.

The third objective of the draft resolution is to
call for the immediate launch of genuine inclusive
dialogue between the Burundian Government and all
stakeholders committed to a peaceful solution, whether
present in their country or not. That is a fundamental
message for reconciliation among Burundians.

The fourth objective is to request the Secretary-
General to propose to the Security Council options for
a United Nations police presence in Burundi, and that
within a maximum period of 15 days. The goal in that
regard is also to back the efforts of the African Union,
which has deployed observers to Burundi.

Finally, the fifth objective is to preserve and
consolidate the achievements of the Arusha Agreement
by respecting both the letter and spirit ofthe Agreement.
These peace agreements serve more than ever as a
compass that should guide all stakeholders in Burundi
and the international community.

I will not go any further. I would just like to stress
our collective responsibility. France is convinced
that the Security Council must do everything it can
to help Burundians to return to the path of peace and
reconciliation. That is our responsibility as the Security
Council. That is our responsibility vis-a-vis the people
of Burundi. That is the thrust of our draft resolution.

