Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to congratulate the State of
Bolivia on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October, and we thank the
presidency for organizing this debate. We also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his valuable briefing.

Iraq aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Iraq supports efforts to achieve peace and stability
in the Middle East. All stakeholders must play a
constructive role in order to resolve differences through
negotiations and refrain from taking any unilateral or
provocative measures that lead to fuelling violence,
religious intolerance and racism. Achieving peace and
stability in the Middle East requires a comprehensive
policy to address the political, economic and social
causes of conflicts through a bold, comprehensive and
diplomatic policy to avert ominous predictions of a
possible catastrophe in the Middle East.

Iraq has always supportedthe cause of the Palestinian
people and theirjust struggle for their legitimate rights,
and we renew our consistent position vis-a-vis a just
and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question,
which will be possible only through the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State that enjoys full
rights, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with
the Arab Peace Initiative and international legitimacy.

We support the peace plan that President Mahmoud
Abbas presented in the Security Council on 20 February
(see S/PV.8183), wherein he called on international
actors to establish a multilateral international
mechanism under the umbrella of the United Nations
to sponsor the peace process, and to convene an
international conference to relaunch a credible and
time-bound peace process.

We welcome the General Assembly resolution on
the protection of the Palestinian civilian population
(resolution ES-10/20) and the latest report (A/ES-10/794)
of the Secretary-General on the subject, which includes
enforceable options to protect Palestinian civilians.
We urge all States and international organizations to
participate in the protection of Palestinian civilians
and the establishment of a practical and effective
mechanism to implement the resolution.

We call on the international community and the
members of the Security Council to guarantee real
protection for Palestinian civilians and to implement
the relevant international resolutions, in particular
resolutions 605 (1987) and 904 (1994), which stipulate
that the Fourth Geneva Convention is to be applied to
the occupied Palestinian territory and that international
protection is to be provided to the unarmed Palestinian
people. We call on all States parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention to shoulder their responsibilities
in honouring and implementing the Convention in the
occupied State of Palestine, including East Jerusalem,
by putting an end to Israeli violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

We renew our call to Member States that have
not yet recognized the State of Palestine with East
Jerusalem as its capital to do so as soon as possible in
order to invest in peace. Such a practical step would be
in line with the long-standing international consensus
and the declared commitment of the international
community in that regard.

We would like to express our grave concern about
recent developments regarding the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). We reaffirm the need to ensure
the Agency's mandate. We appreciate the positions
taken by the international community in support of
UNRWA's work and thank the countries that have
provided financial support to compensate for its deficit.
We also appreciate the efforts of countries that host
refugees, especially Lebanon and Jordan.

In conclusion, my Government values the efforts of
the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator Nikolay
Mladenov, as well as those Member States seeking to
launch comprehensive and lasting peace initiatives. We
urge international actors to engage in the peace talks,
accelerate the peace process and remove any obstacles
hindering a just and comprehensive solution.

