Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to extend my
thanks for your quick response to the call to hold a
public meeting of the Security Council to consider the
very serious developments in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

The inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
prominent among which is their legitimate right to
establish their independent State on their national
territory, with Al-Quds as its capital, cannot be
negotiated or given up. Any agreement considering the
future of the Palestinian people and its independence
must be made through negotiations by the elected
legitimate leadership of the Palestinian people under
the leadership of President Yasser Arafat.

We demand an end to the occupation and the
unconditional and immediate withdrawal of the Israeli
forces from the occupied Palestinian territories and all
Arab territories and a return to the borders of 4 June
1967 and the attaining of a just settlement of the
problem of the Palestinian refugees, to be agreed upon
on the basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

We call upon the Security Council to take all
necessary action in order to put an end to the violence,
in order not to destroy the peace process, the principle
of land for peace, the Madrid agreement and the road
map, which was adopted by this Council.

In the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, as we
express our absolute solidarity with the brotherly
people of Palestine, we call upon the Security Council
and the members of the Quartet to take up their full
responsibilities in this deteriorating situation to
preserve the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
and not to permit the peace process to be destroyed,
and to ensure that the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy are maintained.

The Council should impose the articles of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and apply those
principles strictly and vigorously.

We strongly condemn the extrajudicial
assassinations that have been executed against the
Palestinian leadership, which are represented by these
recent crimes of terrorism - horrendous crimes
perpetrated by Israel, the murders of Sheikh Ahmed
Yassin and Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi.

We condemn any attempt to legislate and
legitimize the settlements and to reject the right of
return of the Palestinian refugees. Such attempts result
from the fact that the relevant resolutions of the
Council have not been implemented. In addition,
dangerous situations have now resulted in the occupied
Palestinian territories, which makes it even more
necessary for the Council to face up to its
responsibilities and act in accordance with the United
Nations Charter.

