Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to welcome today the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and to thank them for their detailed
reports and extensive briefings. We note once again
their hard work and dedication to the cause of justice
and combating impunity. Since their establishment, the
Tribunals have represented a significant element and
one of the foundation stones on which the international
criminal justice system as we know it today is built. It
is of ever-increasing importance for us to preserve their
legacy, extend the necessary support and encourage the
efficient completion of their work as well as the timely
transition to an adequate and credible residual
mechanism.

Allow me thus to reiterate the support of my
country for the work of the Tribunals and to confirm
the steadfast dedication of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
strengthening the international criminal justice system.
We strongly believe that prosecuting those who
committed horrendous crimes in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia not only will lead our countries to
reconciliation and a better future, but, more important,
will bring justice, consolation and dignity to the
victims and their families.

We would also like to extend our appreciation to
Ambassador Mayr-Harting for Austria's firm
leadership in chairing the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals. Building on the foundation set
forth in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/258), the Group is working intensively and has
achieved significant progress in its deliberations.
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches great importance to
the Group's work and further commends the efforts of
the Austrian delegation, with the valuable assistance of
the Office of Legal Affairs, in steering the its
deliberations towards the establishment of a residual
mechanism that will reflect the Tribunals' legacy in the
most effective and appropriate manner.

As we consider the details of the reports
regarding the delays in implementing the completion
strategy, it is necessary to recognize that some factors
beyond the Tribunals' control have, to a certain extent,
contributed to these delays. We should also take into
account the heavy schedules described in the reports
and the difficulties that the judges face in dealing with
the number of cases running simultaneously, which
suggests that we need to have a more realistic
approach. Even though we regret the delays,
guaranteeing a fair trial in each individual case should
undoubtedly remain our priority. While we encourage
the Tribunals to make every effort to complete their
work, the Council remains under an obligation to
provide its further support for their undisturbed work.
Extension of the judges' mandates is certainly one of
the issues the Council needs to address.

It is also regrettable that the number of those
accused by the ICTY and the ICTR who are still at
large remains unchanged. The arrest and prosecution of
those individuals, either by the Tribunals or the
residual mechanism, should remain our priority. We
can consider their mandates fully completed only once
this is accomplished. The reality of the present moment
is that much work still remains to be done in the name
of justice.

Bearing this in mind, we once again stress our
concern that, for the ICTY, no progress has been made
in locating and arresting the two remaining fugitives,
Ratko Mladic' and Goran Hadzie. In underlining the
strong commitment of Bosnia and Herzegovina to its
obligations and firm respect and support for
international criminal justice, I urge that these fugitives
finally be made to answer for the crimes they have
committed. In this regard, the cooperation of the
countries in the region is crucial, but the further
support and involvement of the international
community are also necessary.

We also note with appreciation the details of the
report of the ICTY Prosecutor, which further reflects
the record of continued and positive cooperation
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Tribunal.
Cooperation has been particularly constructive in
regard to the rule 11 bis cases transferred by the Office
of the Prosecutor to the War Crimes Chamber of the
State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Also, the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have responded
effectively to all requests of the Prosecutor's Office,
providing documents and enabling unobstructed access
to Government archives.

In addition, further steps have been taken to
enhance cooperation between the countries in the
region. With the prospect of national prosecutions of
war crimes cases in the future and as indicated in the
report of Prosecutor Brammertz, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has entered into several agreements with
neighbouring countries aimed at improving cooperation
in judicial matters. We must agree with the
Prosecutor's assessment that these agreements serve as
a good foundation and will eventually have a positive
impact on investigations, clear communication and the
exchange of information.

As Bosnia and Herzegovina has stressed
numerous times, the work of the Tribunals has a great
impact and most direct relevance for the countries
under the Tribunals' jurisdiction. As one of those
countries, we cannot overemphasize the importance of
justice and accountability. The horrific crimes that
were committed need to be punished, individuals
responsible should be named and justice finally served.
No matter how painful the process is, it will finally
provide some comfort and dignity for victims and their
families and eventually lead to reconciliation.

