The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Denmark, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Nebojsa Covie, Deputy Prime Minister
of the Yugoslav constituent Republic of Serbia and
President of the Coordination Centre of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Covie
(Yugoslavia) took a seat at the Council table; Mr.
Nesho (Albania), Ms. Laj (Denmark) and Mr.
Nikolov (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) took the seats reserved for them at
the side ofthe Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Michael Steiner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Steiner to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/779, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Michael Steiner, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Kosovo and Head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission. I now
give the floor to Mr. Steiner.


