Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We listened
carefully to the debate yesterday and this morning,
which was convened soon after United States Secretary
of State Colin Powell returned from his important
mission to the Middle East. Here, we are pleased to
note that the Council decided to wait for his return
before resuming its discussion on the Middle East.

One of the key tasks of Secretary Powell's visit
was to work towards the implementation of Security
Council 1402 (2002). The international community,
including this Council, had given its full backing to
Secretary Powell's mission. This meeting is therefore
an opportune moment to consider how far we have
progressed towards ensuring observance of the
decisions we have adopted, including resolutions 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002), as well as our presidential
statement of 10 April 2002. We should also, of course,
consider how best the Council can work further to
ensure full compliance with its resolutions.
Singapore finds it highly regrettable that the clear
demands made by the Security Council for an
immediate cessation of violence and the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from Palestinian cities have not been
fulfilled. Instead, we find a grim humanitarian crisis in
the occupied territories, which must be reversed
straight away. In particular, we have heard alarming
reports about the horrific devastation, both human and
material, in the Jenin refugee camp. Immediate efforts
to address the humanitarian situation must be
undertaken. We note that several speakers have
highlighted the importance of addressing the situation
in Jenin. This is one clear theme that has emerged from
the debate and we hope that concrete results will also
emerge from this debate on the situation in Jenin.

In this regard, we also fully support the three
immediate requirements set out by the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, namely, the lifting of the
curfew and allowing freedom of movement for civilian
and humanitarian workers alike; expanded assistance
from the Israel Defence Forces to humanitarian
workers, in terms of both the provision of equipment
and security liaison; and the facilitation of the delivery
of large-scale water and food supplies to the population
in need.

There have been claims and counter-claims on the
nature and extent of the humanitarian crisis. We believe
that the only way objectively to assess the situation and
to dispel any unfounded rumours is for an independent
and impartial body to establish the facts. Again, we
note that several speakers have called for such an
independent inquiry.

Like many who have spoken before us, we are
gratified that Secretary Powell's visit has produced
some results. One of the key achievements is a strong
convergence of views, including in the joint statement
by the "quartet" and supported by the Security Council,
that a coherent and comprehensive long-term strategy
is needed to help the parties break the cycle of
violence. This includes ending the violence and starting
the withdrawal of Israeli forces from occupied
territories under Palestinian control, accompanied at
the same time by genuine efforts by the Palestinian
Authority to take steps against suicide bombers and
other acts of terror.

An equally important component of this
comprehensive approach is to provide the political
horizon and the hopes for peace. Long-term progress
depends on the political will of both sides to move
beyond short-term security measures to the broad
vision set out in resolution 1397 (2002), in which two
States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side within
secure and recognized borders. The Arab peace
initiative adopted at the Beirut summit is a historic
opportunity that should not be squandered. We look
forward to further initiatives to bring the process
forward.

The international community must also address
the long-term economic situation. We hope that the
donor community will respond generously to help
rebuild the destroyed Palestinian infrastructure and
economy.

As we have learned in so many other conflict
situations, progress on the security, political,
humanitarian and reconstruction tracks, within the
framework of a comprehensive strategy, are mutually
reinforcing. Yesterday, the Secretary-General also
provided convincing reasons why the deployment of an
impartial, robust and credible multinational force could
create a secure environment and political space that
will allow the comprehensive strategic framework to
take root. The Secretary-General's proposal for an
international presence merits serious consideration.

Clearly, the Secretary-General has fulfilled his
Charter obligation under Article 99 to bring to the
Council's attention

"any matter which in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security".

It is now up to the Security Council to decide whether
it can live up to its own Charter responsibility under
Article 24 as the principal organ of the United Nations
conferred with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Indeed, as we all know, this is a question that has been
widely asked around this debate: Can the Security
Council seriously meet the responsibilities that it has
on the Middle East issue?

In conclusion, we would like to stress that clear
pronouncements made by the Security Council are
being ignored and that basic principles of international
law, including international humanitarian law, are
being flouted. This will, in the long run, only damage
the credibility of the Security Council and the security
of all States. If the Security Council does not take
immediate steps to ensure full compliance with
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), we risk
eroding the Council's authority to ensure the full
implementation of its other resolutions. I believe that
the Permanent Representative of Mexico, speaking
earlier, also made the point about the credibility of the
Council.

We should therefore find effective ways of
collaborating closely with all relevant partners to
ensure compliance with Security Council decisions. We
also believe that only by harmonizing our efforts and
acting in unity can we best achieve our objectives.

