Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to highly commend the Luxembourg presidency for
convening this important meeting. There can hardly
be a topic that calls for greater attention than this one.
Our sincere appreciation also goes to the Secretary-
General, the Special Representative of the Secretary
General for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Executive Director of UNICEF for their valuable
briefings. Special gratitude goes to Mr. Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh for his personal testimony.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union, and I would like to add
the following remarks in my national capacity.

The reports of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict are a stark reminder for us of the
challenges ahead. We note with appreciation that
some progress has been made in the protection and
reintegration of children affected by armed conflict,
especially with regard to the release of children from
armed forces and armed groups in several countries.
However, we remain gravely concerned and saddened
that children in many countries continue to suffer
terribly from the physical and emotional wounds that
armed conflicts bring upon them.

Croatia fully supports all efforts aimed at the
prevention and combating of sexual violence in conflict
and at ensuring accountability for crimes committed.
Croatia has become one of the global champions of
the United Kingdom's initiative entitled Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict and has supported a
historic declaration aimed towards worldwide efforts
to eradicate that war crime. We look forward to
the elaboration of the international protocol on the
documentation and investigation of sexual violence in
conflict, which is of special relevance for children's
rights and their protection.

Croatia strictly opposes and is gravely concerned
by the use of schools for military purposes, because
it puts children in grave danger and negatively affects
their right to education. That seriouslyjeopardizes their
chances for the future. We recognize the right to access
to education as a fundamental human right. Particular
attention is being paid to its protection through Croatia's
international assistance and development cooperation
to countries in and emerging from conflicts.

Last year, following a children-sensitive approach
and supporting girls' education in particular, Croatia
funded the construction ofa library in Afghanistan used
by 5,000 children, and a high school attended by 600
children. Last year we also provided medical treatment
in Croatia to a number of Palestinian children suffering
from respiratory diseases, thereby contributing to their
psychosocial rehabilitation and well-being.

As a country that experienced war horrors that
gravely affected children, Croatia fully supports the
campaign "Children, not soldiers", which has as its
primary aim preventing the recruitment of children by
2016.

The use of child soldiers and their conscription
and enlistment into armed units is a war crime. There
can be zero tolerance for impunity. This and all other
forms of war crimes and crimes against humanity
must be prosecuted and brought to justice, primarily
before national courts but ultimately, in the absence
of capacity of States to do so, before the International
Criminal Court (ICC). With the aim of strengthening
this important principle of subsidiarity, Croatia fully
supports deepening the dialogue between the Security
Council and the ICC.

We must all increase the pressure on those who
have no heart, no shame and no conscience. Listing
violations against children as clear designation criteria
for sanctions, and making concerted efforts to sanction
responsible individuals is one way to do so.

We should spare no effort to protect those who
are the most vulnerable and those unable to protect
themselves. Croatia firmly supports the inclusion of
child protection advisers in peacekeeping operations
and the organization of predeployment targeted training
for child protection for peacekeepers. It is of paramount
importance that all the relevant peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations properly address the impact of
conflict on children, especially girls. We also advocate
that this aspect be given even greater prominence in the
relevant reports submitted to the Security Council.

Croatia ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict and calls for its universal
ratification. We also consider the Paris Principles and
Commitments a useful guide in our common efforts
to respond to the plight of children affected by armed
conflicts worldwide.

Finally, as one of the sponsors of today's resolution
(resolution 2143 (2014)), we highly commend its
unanimous adoption.

