Mr. Owada (Japan): The clashes in recent days
between Palestinians and Israeli troops in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip have aroused profound concern
throughout the international community. We in Japan are
truly shocked by the recent violence. We extend our
condolences to the families of those who have lost their
lives and our sympathies to those who have been
wounded.

 

Over the course of the past several months, the
international community has been watching the deteriorating
situation in the region with a deepening sense of crisis.
Prospects for a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
region have grown increasingly dim. There is a danger that
the viability of the peace process can be put in jeopardy.
This most recent outbreak of violence is a clear expression
of frustration at the lack of improvement in the situation in
the occupied Arab territories.

In order to salvage the peace process itself, it is
essential that the Government of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority engage without delay in direct talks to bring
about a cessation of hostilities. Improvements to the present
situation should be carried out through a double-track
approach. One task is immediate, and the other a more
fundamental approach to the basic issues at the root of the
problem.

The immediate task on which action is required is for
the parties directly involved to immediately engage in
efforts to bridge the chasm of mistrust that separates them
by refraining from any action which could do harm to the
prospects of the peace process. It is thus essential that they
devote themselves to practical confidence-building
measures. Japan urges all parties, in particular, to refrain
from any action that could provoke further violence. At the
same time, on a more fundamental level, it is imperative
that the parties directly involved intensify their efforts, in
good faith and with steadfast determination, to pursue the
peace process in order to restore peace throughout the
region. Both sides must summon the courage to take steps
to implement, without further delay, the commitments that
they have already made in Madrid, in Oslo and thereafter.

Japan has been participating actively in the multilateral
talks which have proved to be of great value in facilitating
the peace process. We have also been extending assistance
to the parties concerned, including assistance to the
Palestinians. All these efforts on the part of Japan have
been made in the context of our hope that the peace
process will be expedited by our cooperation. It is for this
reason that Japan has been following the situation as it
has evolved in recent months with a growing sense of
concern. In fact, on the occasion of the visit of our
Foreign Minister, Mr. Yukihiko Ikeda, to the Middle East
last August, Japan made an urgent appeal to the parties
concerned to engage in direct and ongoing dialogue
without delay. He conveyed that same urgent message to
Chairman Arafat when he visited Japan in September.

The international community should be seriously
concerned at the ominous trend we are witnessing in the
occupied Arab territories. Japan, for its part, is determined
to contribute in whatever way it can to the creation of an
environment conducive to peace. Indeed, it is incumbent
upon the international community and its member States
to fortify the peace process. Even more critical, however,
is the courage, supported by firm political will, of the
parties directly concerned. The Government of Japan calls
upon them in the strongest possible terms to do
everything in their power to resolve the present crisis and,
in so doing, to offer the people they represent the hope of
a more peaceful and secure future.

