Mr. Koffigoh (Togo) (spoke in French): It is a
great honour for me to speak before the Security Council
as it once again considers the situation in Africa, in the
light of the report on the state of that continent introduced
yesterday morning by the Secretary-General.

 

Allow me first to congratulate you most warmly,
Mr. President, on the most outstanding way in which your
country, the Netherlands, has been handling the presidency
of the Council at this particularly busy time.

I likewise pay special tribute to the Secretary-General
for his progress report, which tells of the steps that have
been taken in the course of a little over a year. This
exercise once again illustrates his ongoing interest in
Africa, which is unfortunately still grappling with all kinds
of difficulties.

In his first report (5/1998/318) on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa the Secretary-General set out the
great problems confronting our continent and the
fundamental principles that should provide a basis for
resolving them.

He called on African States to take the steps needed
to bring about democracy and the rule of law and to enter
into reforms to promote good governance and good
management of public affairs. He also urged the
international community to cooperate with regional and
subregional organizations by supporting their initiatives on
the maintenance and consolidation of peace.

After the report was issued, the Security Council
undertook an in-depth analysis of the recommendations
contained in it, inter alia with the assistance of a working
group set up for that purpose. That process led to some
soul-searching about various problems and to major
statements of commitment on the part of members of the
Council. Thus we welcomed the Council's backing of
regional and subregional initiatives and its strong support
for strengthening the ability of African States to combat
illicit flows of small arms and light weapons into and
within Africa.

In the presidential statement issued following its
ministerial meeting of 24 September 1998, the Council
called on all Member States and organizations concerned to
provide the necessary financial and technical support so as
to strengthen existing African regional and subregional
arrangements for conflict prevention, the maintenance of
peace and security, and the settlement of disputes.

In addition, the Council advocated strengthening the
partnerships between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. As one can see, the process that
is now under way is an encouraging one and offers some
grounds for optimism. It is to be hoped that it will lead to
concrete steps that will enable Africa resolutely to set
forth on the road to progress and development.

In this connection, we should remember that under
the provisions of its resolution 1170 (1998), the Security
Council was to assess the progress made in the promotion
of peace and security in Africa only next year. The recent
progress report of the Secretary-General and the
convening under your presidency, Sir, of this meeting, is
proof of the heightened awareness of our continent,
Africa, and we would express our appreciation.

Much has been said since yesterday about African
States, so I would like simply to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
and to its Chairman, through his representative, who
spoke yesterday on his behalf, as well as to the other
representatives who fully assessed the situation and
proposed solutions in support of initiatives currently under
way.

In many parts of Africa, democratic elections are
gradually becoming the rule, not the exception. Good
governance, transparency and a state based on the rule of
law are now slowly but surely becoming established in all
parts of our continent. African conflict-settlement
mechanisms have also developed significantly in the last
few years.

Here I would mention the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), since more authoritative
voices than mine spoke yesterday about the continent as
a whole. ECOWAS, for its part, is striving to strengthen
its Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution, whose establishment was a major milestone
in the strengthening of West Africa's capacities for
preventive diplomacy and the re-establishment and
maintenance of peace.

The ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)
enabled ECOWAS to cope - with varying degrees of
success, admittedly, but nevertheless fairly effectively -
with the crisis situations in Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau.

Let me take this opportunity to express once again
the appreciation of the current Chairman of the
Conference of Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS - the President of my country,
Mr. Gnassingbe Eyadema - for the sustained attention
given by the Security Council to the preservation of peace
and security in our subregion.

 

Managing post-conflict situations is another matter
that we should focus on, because often the post-war period
has not been managed adequately in Africa. In many cases,
parties to a conflict have stockpiled large reserves of
weapons, which are often distributed in an uncontrolled
manner and can thus contribute to the resumption of
hostilities.

It is therefore imperative that the international
community, on the basis of the relevant recommendations
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, support the
countries concerned in carrying out their programmes for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. It should
also respond immediately to their long-term needs in the
areas of reconstruction and recovery.

In this connection, I welcome the proposal by the
Secretary-General in his recent report on Sierra Leone to
establish a United Nations force in that country, pursuant to
the Lome Peace Agreement. I believe that the Security
Council will authorize the prompt deployment of that force,
which, in accordance with the mandate to be given it, will
help the Sierra Leonean Government to implement the plan
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

Let me recall that a delay in the deployment of troops
had significant repercussions on the development of the
situation last May in Guinea-Bissau. We strongly hope that,
having learned from that experience, and with the
commitments just made to strengthen, with the support of
the Security Council, the peacekeeping force in Sierra
Leone, the deployment will take place in that country as
soon as possible.

Guinea-Bissau had been expecting at least 1,500
troops. With France's help, 600 men were deployed, but
with tensions high the poorly equipped troops were not,
unfortunately, able to do anything when the situation
deteriorated. There is no doubt, therefore, that the initiative
currently under way with respect to Sierra Leone will help
to ease the justified concern recently expressed by the
Sierra Leonean Government with respect to the
implementation of that programme. Peace in Sierra Leone
is indispensable, because any delay in this respect would
have a negative impact on the situation in Guinea, which
has shouldered a heavy burden in terms of refugee flows,
and on Liberia, for which great sacrifices have already been
made.

While the efforts made to date to strengthen African
peacekeeping capacity are commendable, they of course do
not absolve the international community or the Security
Council from their responsibilities, particularly in that the
Charter of the United Nations gives the Security Council
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Public opinion in West Africa is that the
international community is tending to rely primarily on
the regional efforts that are under way and not providing
sufficient support. Our countries are still economically
and socially weak, and the burden of trying to resolve
regional conflicts has a very negative impact on our
national budgets, on our education programmes, and so
on. The international community should not use its
financial and logistical assistance to African States,
modest as it is, as a pretext to disengage from the
continent. It seems likely that Africa will continue to need
logistical support and financial resources for a long time
to come, particularly if it is to succeed in re-establishing
and maintaining peace.

Furthermore, the recent conflicts more or less
throughout Africa have shown how historical or even
linguistic considerations can complicate regional efforts to
settle conflicts. In such situations, the direct involvement
of the United Nations is sometimes essential if peace is to
be preserved.

Given these requirements, it is regrettable that equal
attention has not been given to all crises and conflict
situations. I listened with great interest yesterday to the
comment of the representative of Algeria, who said that
"suffering knows no colour".

On 21 September, President Chiluba underlined that
same point in his briefing to the Council on the situation
in the Great Lakes region when he quite rightly said that
when the international community deals with issues
relating to Africa, cost is always the decisive factor and
almost becomes an obstacle to effective United Nations
participation. It is to be hoped that the current operations
and future initiatives will help correct this tendency to
marginalize Africa, which asks only that it be
accompanied in its efforts to promote durable peace and
sustainable development.

