Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the presidency for convening
this meeting, and Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lowcock for
their briefings.

We take this opportunity to reiterate our country's
admiration for all humanitarian actors, who, in the
worst conditions of insecurity, continue to extend
assistance to save the lives of more than 11 million
vulnerable people in Syria.

With the majority of the population living in
extreme poverty, it greatly concerns us that the existing
humanitarian operation is on its knees, struggling
to meet the increasingly acute and urgent needs of
the Syrian people. In that sense, the suspension of
operations by several humanitarian partners due to
the woeful security situation constitutes an equally
alarming factor. To add insult to injury, the humanitarian
operation for the course of this year has reached only
20 per cent of its financing requirements.

Despite multiple reports by the Secretary-General
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, testimonies by people directly affected by the
conflict and ongoing words of concern expressed in this
Chamber, the Security Council has been unable to make
a unanimous demand for the cessation of hostilities
in the north-west of the country. That has produced
a disconcerting seeming indifference to the number
of deaths, injuries and attacks on civilians and civil
infrastructure and areas. The figures that Mr. Lowcock
has presented, on behalf of the United Nations and its
partners on the ground, speak for themselves. Let us not
deceive ourselves. Even now, air strikes endangering
the lives of civilians continue unabated. The number
of deaths currently stands at approximately 300, which
includes more than 80 children.

The forced displacement of civilians has reached
exorbitant levels. Many of those people flee on foot
and, as their journeys continue, they end up selling the
few belongings they possess in order to pay for some
means of transportation. Others have no choice but to
seek shelter under trees, without any form of protection
whatsoever. Women, children, the elderly and people
with disabilities continue to be the most vulnerable.

In the light of this awful situation, we must ask
ourselves: what more needs to happen? What more
needs to happen for the parties involved - and those
with influence over them - to grant a respite to a
people that have endured nine years of conflict? What
more needs to happen for the Council, with a unified
voice, to demand an immediate ceasefire to avoid
military escalation and protect the civilian population?
We must not forget that the Council, as the guarantor
of the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), is
accountable for ensuring that the conditions conducive
to a revitalized and inclusive peace process - based
on the will of the entire population, including the
millions ofrefugees scattered beyond the borders of the
country - are viable.

All of us here in the Chamber have expressed our
support for the political process. Today more than ever
before, we are compelled to shoulder our responsibility
to match the efforts being undertaken by Ambassador
Pedersen to benefit strategically from the opportunity
that lies before us. Regrettably, the fragility of the
political process as it stands today is inextricably linked
to the situation developing in the north-west of Syria,
something that is reflected in the position adopted by
the Security Council in response.

That is why we continue to call upon the parties
to move decisively towards concrete outcomes, while
making an inclusive transition their guiding principle
towards a future of hope and justice for all Syrians. It
is our moral responsibility to help make that aspiration
a reality. We cannot continue to fail those who need us.

