Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want to begin by thank
Under-Secretary-General Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his comprehensive briefing to the Council today and
express our thanks to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2017/1105) and to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mr. Annadif and his team
for their excellent work on the ground. I also want to
welcome and express my appreciation for the presence
today in the Council of Minister Coulibaly.

It has now been over two and a half years since the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali was
signed. Progress on its implementation has been mixed,
yet tangible progress in the peace process is the only
way to achieve lasting stability in Mali and indeed in
the region. This is all the more urgent in light of the
grave security situation, characterized by increased
and intense fire attacks by terrorists groups. It is clear
that only a comprehensive approach, anchored in the
peace process and which addresses is the root causes
of violence and instability, will resolve the security
situation in Mali in a lasting way.

We welcome the adoption of the revised timetable
for the implementation of the peace agreement. The
agreement represents a closing window of opportunity
which, if not grasped, would undermine the progress
already made and put into question the potential for
peace and reconciliation. It is therefore essential that
the parties honour their commitments under the peace
agreement in good faith, in a concrete and substantive
way and without further delay.

As part of this, they should engage in
confidence-building measures. This is critical not
least to prepare the ground for credible and inclusive
elections due to take place in 2018. Greater national
ownership of the key institutional reforms envisaged in
the peace agreement is essential. We call on all parties
to play their part, in particular to ensure progress in the
decentralization and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and the security sector reform
processes. We hope that the newly appointed Prime
Minister Maiga will fully assume his responsibilities
and lead the way in an inclusive manner.

With the recent appointment of the Carter Center in
the role of independent observer and the establishment
of the sanctions regime last year, all the tools needed
to support the implementation process of the peace
agreement are now in place. Albeit different in nature,
those tools all serve to assist and to help the parties in
their endeavours. We encourage them to support them
and to use them as they go about their work.

The full representation of women in the
decision-making structures related to the peace process
has been lacking. Yet women have an important role
to play in the implementation of the peace agreement.
We welcome the recent steps by the mediation group of
the Agreement's follow-up mechanism, the Agreement
Monitoring Committee, to consult more with women.
It is important that that dialogue be continued and that
the inclusion of women in the peace process be further
institutionalized.

The human rights situation in Mali continues to be
of serious concern, not least due to the expansion of
violent extremist groups. The Malian Government has
the responsibility to ensure accountability for human
rights abuses and access to justice for all, including
by prioritizing the reconciliation and justice measures
of the peace agreement. We welcome the decision of
the Secretary-General to establish the International
Commission of Inquiry to investigate the allegations
of abuse and serious violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
including the allegations of conflict-related sexual
violence committed on the territory of Mali since
1 January 2012.

We welcome the continued support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to the operationalization
of the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission
and the high number of additional statements submitted
to the Commission, although we are concerned that
progress remains slow. The severe human rights
situation also highlights the significance of a robust
compliance framework for the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), which should be
operationalized promptly.
We look forward to receiving further information
on the transition plan for MINUSMA and on the
recommendations for the upcoming strategic review.
That is an important exercise, coming five years after the
inception of the Mission, and provides an opportunity
to reflect, including by revisiting its configuration and
geographical distribution.

We join the Secretary-General in commending the
commitment of the States members of the G-5 Sahel
to addressing threats to peace and security in the
region through the establishment of the joint force.
We see the potential of the force to contribute to an
enabling environment that increases security. Given
the complementarity roles of the G-5 Sahel force and
MINUSMA, it is important that United Nations support
to the joint force through MINUSMA not affect the
Mission's capacity to implement its mandate and
strategic priorities.

By redoubling their efforts to implement the peace
agreement, the parties in Mali can help to ensure
successful elections later this year. That, in turn, has
the potential to reinvigorate the peace process and to
create the conditions for State authority to be extended
across the whole of the country. It is very important
that all parties to the Agreement remain committed and
intensify their efforts for successful implementation.

MINUSMA continues to have an important role
to play in support of national efforts inside Mali. We
are proud to support its work with our largest current
military troop contribution to any international mission,
as well as with police and civilian staff. Sweden
remains committed to supporting a peaceful, resilient
and inclusive Mali for all its citizens.

