Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Today
we mark the tenth anniversary of the attack against
the Canal Hotel. Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, lost his
life there, as did 21 other United Nations staff. Like
preceding speakers have done, I too would like to pay
tribute to all of those who have fallen in the service of
the United Nations and to express my condolences to
their bereaved families and friends.

I thank the Secretary-General and the various
speakers for their presentations today. France aligns
itself with the statements to be made by the observer
of the European Union and the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians.

The protection of civilians requires unwavering
attention on the part of the Security Council and must
be at the core of its activities. The Council has a role
to play in ensuring respect for international law by the
parties to a conflict. While the primary responsibility
for protecting civilians lies with States, the Council and
the international community have a vital role to play to
ensure that States and non-State armed groups do not
shirk their obligations. Civilians are the main victims
of armed Violence, totalling roughly half a million
deaths per year.

The Arms Trade Treaty, which has to date been
signed by 82 States, represents real progress in that
respect. Once it has entered into force, the Treaty will
ensure that States are held accountable and ensure that
arms transfers no longer contribute to the commission
of atrocities. That is more than ever necessary because
we have seen that on the ground indiscriminate
attacks against civilians and targeted attacks against
humanitarian workers have become increasingly
frequent. We note that the humanitarian domain is no
longer a safe haven and that the number of obstacles to
humanitarian access has increased.

That is the case in Syria in particular, where the
regime is systematically denying access to civilian
populations in areas besieged by it as long as combat
is ongoing, in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law. Here I am thinking in particular
of the civilians trapped in Qusayr and in the old city
of Homs. Across the country, despite the fact that the
number of people in need is increasing day by day,
totalling more than 6.8 million, the Syrian authorities
continue to refuse access by humanitarian actors to all
those in need.

The Government continues to place bureaucratic
obstacles in the way of the work of humanitarian
actors. Visas are not issued, and the number of
non-governmental organizations authorized to act
are too few. The Government's requirements for
the delivery of aid are increasingly numerous, and
attacks against humanitarian and medical personnel
are a constant threat. Several members of the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent have been killed. Ambulances and
hospitals, along with their staff, have become targets.

That is also the case in the Sudan, where access to the
civilian population remains difficult, if not impossible,
for humanitarian actors. There are a growing number of
obstacles, in spite of the appeals made by the Council
for 10 years now, because blocking humanitarian aid
has become somewhat of a Government strategy.

Such arbitrary denials of access prevent lives from
being saved and compound the numerous Violations of
international humanitarian law. We must put an end to
this arbitrary and appalling trend. The Council has the
tools to do so and must not hesitate to use them.

The Security Council must be able to react quickly
to put an end to situations where civilians are threatened.

That is the case in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, where the Council provided the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) with a robust
mandate to support the national authorities in combating
the numerous violations of human rights committed
in the eastern part of the country, in particular sexual
Violence.

The protection of civilians is a fundamental
aspect of MONUSCO's mandate. In the context of
the Framework agreement signed in Addis Ababa,
resolution 2098 (2013) is aimed at providing heads of
mission all means necessary to ensure the protection
of civilian populations threatened by non-State
armed actors. It also authorizes the deployment of
an Intervention Brigade that can carry out offensive
actions against such groups. MONUSCO is also tasked
with supporting and coordinating efforts in the area of
security sector reform, so as to enable the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure, as soon as possible,
the protection of civilians with its own rapid-reaction
forces.

In Mali, the intervention of French forces made
it possible to put an end to the attacks carried out by
terrorist groups that were threatening Bamako. The
Council followed up by authorizing the deployment
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), whose
robust mandate for the protection of civilians allowed
for the stabilization of the country and the holding
of presidential elections under good conditions. We
must now continue our efforts to support national
reconciliation in Mali so that the country can finally
find lasting peace.

In South Sudan, the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to protect civilians
is more important than ever, as sectarian Violence has
led to the displacement of more than 70,000 people
since January. That is a major concern, especially in
Jonglei state, where violence has led to the deaths of
hundreds of people.

Finally, we must also take action in the Central
African Republic. As we heard in the Council some
days ago, the security and humanitarian situation in
that country is dire and violations of human rights
widespread. Civilians are the main victims. We must
stop the crisis from worsening or the Central African
Republic could become a source of instability in the
heart of Africa. The Council must therefore support the
efforts of the African Union, which decided in July to
deploy a strengthened stabilization mission. We must
also strengthen the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic so as to provide it with the means to shed light
on human rights violations committed throughout the
country. Human rights observers must also be deployed.

Allow me in conclusion to underscore that the
Council's reaction must also include actions to fight
impunity for those who perpetrate acts of Violence
against civilians. Justice is required for lasting peace, the
reweaving of the social fabric and reconciliation among
communities. In Darfur and Libya, the Council did what
it had to do by referring the atrocities committed to the
International Criminal Court. Despite the obstacles in
its path, the Court remains the guarantee of effective
and impartial justice. That should be the case in Syria
as well today.
For more than two years now, turning a deaf ear
to the international community's appeals, Bashar
Al-Assad has been murdering his people. More than
100,000 people have died, mostly civilians. Given the
seeming impunity reigning in the country today, the
Council must send a clear message to the effect that
those responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity will be brought to justice. The Syrian National
Coalition has taken a stance in favour ofa referral to the
ICC; we should take it at its word and seriously consider
the possibility of a referral to the ICC that would finally
neutralize the perpetrators of crimes in Syria.

