Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your initiative to convene this
high-level meeting, which attests to Iraq's pivotal role
in the Arab and Muslim worlds. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his reports and detailed
comments. I would like to praise the role of the
Ministers and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ad Melkert, and thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Hoshyar
Zebari, in particular for his important statement.

We all know that Iraq was the cradle of
civilization and history and a source of scientific and
legislative knowledge for the world. It is now
recovering that role, despite the wars of the past three
decades. Today, Iraq, whose Arab, ethnic and religious
diversity makes it strong, is on its way to building a
sovereign, independent and united and democratic
State - the only one in the Middle East with a
Constitution that stipulates a minimum 25 per cent
participation of women in Parliament; that reaffirms
that the nation's natural resources belong to its people
and should be shared equally and fairly throughout the
country and among all the people; and whose laws
state that all Iraqis have the right to parliamentary
representation.

Lebanon welcomes the agreement to form a new
Government in Iraq that will incorporate all political
viewpoints, strengthen national reconciliation and
resolve the pending political issues in a manner
conducive to preserving its unity and territorial
integrity. We support the efforts of the Iraqi people to
consolidate security and stability in their country and
call on States in the region and the international
community to support them in those efforts.

Lebanon strongly condemns all suicide attacks
and acts of aggression against Iraqis, especially recent
faith-based assaults. We know that Iraqis will confront
such attacks, and we welcome the growing capacity of
the Iraqi armed forces to assume responsibility for
security following the complete drawdown of United
States troops. The measures undertaken by Iraq so far,
as noted in the letter from the Foreign Minister (see S/2010/567), demonstrate its commitment to the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
confirm that Iraq is not a threat to international peace
and security. The Council's decision today to lift
sanctions is proof of that.

Iraq's efforts to honour its commitments and
obligations under resolution 1905 (2009), despite
difficult circumstances, are worthy of praise. The
transitional Government now has a successor to the
Development Fund for Iraq, which is further proof that
it can protect Iraqi assets, despite the delay caused by
the slow formation of the new Government. The
Security Council understands Iraq's circumstances and
has extended the mandate for another six months. We
fully support the reconstruction of Iraq, and call for the
cancellation or mitigation of its foreign debt. We
respect Iraq's commitment to implementing resolution
1483 (2003) regarding the United Nations
Compensation Fund and its acknowledgement of that
commitment. We also welcome Iraq's efforts to resolve
the pending issues concerning the oil-for-food
programme, which contributed to our decision today to
terminate the programme completely.

Progress on Chapter VII mandates concerning
Iraq and Kuwait has injected new momentum into the
process and brought Iraq back into the international
fold. We welcome the cooperation of the Governments
of Iraq and Kuwait in uncovering the fate of
disappeared Kuwaiti persons and prisoners, Kuwaiti
property and the Kuwaiti national archives, and
welcome the positive atmosphere in that regard. We
invite the Iraqi Government to honour its obligations
with respect to the Iraq-Kuwait border, in line with
resolution 833 (1993). We praise the role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, and welcome
today's presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/27)
confirming that the international community trusts in
Iraq and its future.

