Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Let me join previous
speakers in congratulating the Pakistani presidency on
the convening of today's open debate on this crucial
issue. We would also like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for opening the discussion and to
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
participation.

Millions of people in many regions of the world
continue to pin their hopes on United Nations
peacekeeping efforts to help overcome conflicts and
achieve peace. Moreover, the changing nature of
conflicts has substantially broadened the scope of
United Nations peacekeeping activities and has made
them far more complex. This underscores the vital
importance of ensuring that the United Nations has the
necessary potential to effectively meet those
expectations and challenges, on which, to a great
extent, its credibility is - and will be -judged.

Thanks to the peacekeeping reform initiated by
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), the United Nations
today has the capacity to act more rapidly and
efficiently then ever before. Both Member States and
the Secretariat have contributed to this process. Today I
would like to particularly acknowledge the role of the
Security Council. Having affirmed at its summit
meeting in September 2000 its determination to
strengthen United Nations peacekeeping operations,
the Security Council adopted a number of important
follow-up decisions to implement the recommendations
of the Brahimi report. Undoubtedly, a lot has been
achieved in many areas. But we consider this reform to
be a dynamic and continuous process, which should
build on its results and adapt to new realities.

The notable recent increase in peacekeeping
activities, particularly the deployment of the first post-
Brahimi United Nations mission, in Liberia, provides
us with the opportunity to take stock of how the gains
of the reform work in reality and what needs to be
adjusted and improved. This is even more important in
the light of the ongoing and expected deployments of
several new missions. As has been underlined by a
number of previous speakers, the international
community is now at a critical juncture in its
peacekeeping efforts. We are facing significant
challenges in meeting the growing requirements for
peacekeeping personnel, logistical support and
financial resources, to name a few problems. If
peacekeeping is to remain an effective instrument of
the United Nations, Member States, the Security
Council and the Secretariat have to work together
closely to meet those challenges and to find the right
answers to critical questions.

Ukraine has always supported United Nations
peacekeeping, both politically and practically. Over the
past four years, Ukraine has been among the major
troop-contributing countries to United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the single largest troop-
contributing country in Europe. I would like to
reiterate our readiness to continue to remain a reliable
partner of the United Nations in this area. Our response
to the recent surge in peacekeeping vividly testifies to
that. My country has deployed a significant helicopter
detachment to the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and reiterates its readiness to contribute a helicopter
detachment to the new mission in Cote d'Ivoire, as
well as a special police unit to Haiti.

While welcoming the progress made in enhancing
the United Nations rapid deployment capability, our
latest experience shows that we are still far from
meeting the agreed objectives of a 30-day to 90-day
period. Among the major obstacles to the rapid
deployment of troops in the field remain financial and
logistical problems. While noting the considerable
improvement in financial issues, further progress is
necessary to meet the growing demand for personnel
and equipment. We support the proposal to establish a
working group aimed at considering the funding
difficulties of troop-contributing countries and looking
for ways to ensure timely reimbursements for troops
and contingent-owned equipment.

We recognize the role of strategic deployment
stocks in reducing the deployment timeline for
peacekeeping operations and believe that the
functioning of this mechanism should be optimized,
especially in view of the lessons learned from the
recent deployment in Liberia. With respect to
overcoming the equipment shortfalls faced by some
troop-contributing countries, I would like to inform the
Council of Ukraine's unique experience. For over three
years, we have been providing hundreds of armoured
personnel carriers and heavy cargo trucks, as well as
maintaining them and providing training in their
operation to the peacekeeping contingents of other
countries in the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL). My country is ready to provide
such equipment to other new and forthcoming
peacekeeping operations.

Ukraine believes that the development of new
types of partnerships and arrangements between the
United Nations and a number of regional and
subregional organizations could help the United
Nations to meet the new challenges. Over the last
decade and most recently, there have been quite a few
encouraging examples of how United Nations
peacekeeping operations can be effectively supported
and complemented by United Nations-mandated
operations of other organizations or ad hoc coalitions
bringing their comparative strengths and expertise. We
therefore encourage the Secretariat, in cooperation with
respective organizations, to study such recent
experiences with the aim of working out the modalities
for the future. We also call on the international
community to continue to support the efforts of the
African Union to strengthen its peacekeeping
capacities.

Despite the progress to date, which we welcome,
there is still a need to further strengthen the
relationship between the major bodies: the Security
Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries. We look forward to the full and effective
implementation of the respective decisions of the
Council in that area. We also see merits in increased
consultations between the Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and troop-contributing
countries on specific peacekeeping issues and on
individual missions. We also expect the Security
Council to consider giving new breadth to the activities
of the Group.

The importance of ensuring the appropriate level
of security and safety of peacekeeping personnel
cannot be underestimated, as has been stressed by
many previous speakers. As one of the initiators of the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, we call upon the States that have
not done so to ratify or accede to the Convention as
soon as possible. Ukraine supports the efforts aimed at
strengthening and expanding the legal regime of
protection of United Nations and associated personnel
under the Convention. We also support the need for
better information-gathering and analysis in the field
aimed at preventing and managing the threats to
peacekeeping personnel.

In conclusion, I would like to draw the attention
of the Council to a very important upcoming event that
has special significance, both in moral and political
terms, for the majority of United Nations Member
States and for tens of thousands of their nationals.
Every year on 29 May, the International Day of United
Nations Peacekeepers is now observed as a tribute to
all the men and women who have served and continue
to serve in United Nations peacekeeping operations for
their high level of professionalism, dedication and
courage and in honour of the memory of those who
have lost their lives in the cause of peace. In our view,
on that Day the Security Council could send its
message recognizing the role and sacrifice of United
Nations peacekeepers, to whom we owe every success
the United Nations has achieved in its peacekeeping
endeavours.

