Mr. Nejad-Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting of the Security Council. We have full confidence
in your leadership and in your efforts to steer the Council's
deliberations in such a way that the result will reflect the
true view of the international community as a whole on the
issue at hand.

History is now repeating itself before our eyes and in
our lifetime. Little more than 50 years ego, the Zionists
began to move into Palestinian lands. Using every
imaginable tactic, including confiscation, intimidation, force
and terrorism, they occupied and began to change the status
of Palestinian land. The same obstinate policy is now at
work against the Holy City of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. There is
absolutely no change in their policy or the manner in which
they implement it. The Israeli leaders continue to have utter
disregard for the agony, sorrow, homelessness and
bloodshed that their policies and practices have caused
millions of innocent Palestinians for more than five
decades, and for the volumes of reprimand and
condemnation of their policies and practices by international
organizations, particularly by the United Nations.

They robbed the Palestinian people of their land some
50 years ago. Now they are in the process of robbing the
Palestinians and the entire Muslim nation of their heritage
and what they hold to be divine and sacred. The current
Israeli programme envisions strengthening and perpetuating
Israel's illegal occupation of the Holy City. This
programme includes the creation of an umbrella
municipality with administrative power over the Holy City
and nearby towns in the occupied territories, as well as over
some Jewish settlements in the West Bank. It also includes
the speedy construction of roads and other infrastructure in
those settlements. This programme is engineered to alter the
status of the Holy City by changing its demographic
composition. It is a practical move to annex illegally more

 

of the occupied Palestinian territories to the municipality
covering the Holy City, which had already been expanded
illegally and in violation of the rules of international law
and of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council.

In this connection, the President of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, issued a
statement on 25 June warning about the repercussions of
this Israeli plan, which reads in part:

"Undoubtedly, this latest act by Israel will
further exacerbate the Middle East crisis, for, among
other implications, it desecrates the sanctity of A1-
Quds Al-Sharif, a sanctity which, because of the
depth of psychological attachment and spiritual
affinity of Muslims to this land of Divine Prophets,
has its roots entrenched in their souls."

The international community in general and the
Islamic world in particular are deeply concerned about
this new Israeli plan, and about the new decision to
initiate new settlement activities in Jabal Abu Ghneim.
Last year the Security Council was called upon to
shoulder its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security by putting an end to the
construction of Jewish settlements there. The Council met
on 5 and 6 March 1997 to consider the situation created
by Israeli plans for new settlement activities in J abal Abu
Ghneim.
But regrettably, the draft resolution was subjected to
a veto, and the Council was thus prevented from
discharging its constitutional responsibility on this crucial
issue. The inaction of the Security Council emboldened
Israel to defy the wish of the international community,
reflected in General Assembly resolution 51/223, which
was adopted after the frustration of the case before the
Security Council. The matter was put before the Security
Council once more, on 21 March 1997, when the exercise
of the veto again barred the Security Council from taking
a decision, thus giving rise to profound international
disappointment.

Lastly, the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly was convened on the basis of General
Assembly resolution 377 (V) of 3 November 1950,
entitled "Uniting for peace". At the tenth emergency
special session, the Assembly adopted four resolutions on
illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the
rest of the occupied Palestinian territory in 1997 and

 

1998. These resolutions, like others, have been totally
disregarded by the Israeli regime, as if they did not exist
and as if the international community was indifferent to its
illegal activities.

Despite such intensive developments and the series of
new resolutions on this subject, the announcement of the
aforementioned programme by the highest-level Israeli
official clearly illustrates Israel's total defiance of the
international community and the contempt in which the
community's views are held by the Israeli regime. The
disdain of the Israeli leaders for the principles of
international law and the decisions of the United Nations is
no secret to anyone in this Chamber. It is commonly
acknowledged, deplored and condemned, but very little, if
anything, is done about it.

The present deliberation in the Council of this latest
Israeli act of lawlessness, which has spurred international
outrage, is another test to determine whether the Security
Council will discharge its obligation on behalf of the
general membership of the Organization and thus gain the
credibility that it constitutionally deserves. The international
community expects the Security Council to condemn the
Israeli decision of 21 June 1998, demand that it be
rescinded and adopt practical measures to counter the
organized Israeli steps to alter the historical and
demographic status of the Holy City, so as to enable the
adherents of Judaism, Christianity and Islam to have
unhindered and free access to it.
