Mr. Cevik (Turkey): Let me start by joining
other delegations in congratulating Pakistan on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We are pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over today's
meeting.

It is noteworthy that the Security Council has
devoted its first open debate in the year 2013 to the
issue of terrorism. That reflects not only an expression
of determination on the part of the Security Council to
counter the scourge of terrorism, but also underlines
the continued threat that terrorism poses for all of us.

Terrorist attacks are being perpetrated around
the world on an almost daily basis, claiming the lives
of innocent civilians. Recent months have been no
exception. Due to unabated terrorist acts, many people
have been killed or wounded in different parts of the
world, causing immense pain and suffering to the
families of the victims, their nations and humankind
as a whole.

Most recently, we learned with deep sorrow and
concern that three different terrorist attacks had taken
place in Pakistan, killing or injuring scores of people.
We strongly condemn all kinds of terrorist acts, convey
our condolences to the grieving families and wish a
speedy recovery to the wounded. We also would like
to express our solidarity with all victims of terrorism
around the world.

Numerous social, economic, political and other
factors exist that engender the conditions that terrorist
organizations exploit for recruitment and support.
Since it is a complex and multifaceted phenomenon,
countering terrorism can be effective only if efforts
and measures address a wide spectrum of activities,
ranging from international cooperation to national
action. In that sense, we need to redouble our efforts
to enhance cooperation and coordination, both at the
United Nations and among Member States, as well as
at the relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations. For that very reason, we consider today's
debate extremely useful and we look forward to its
outcome in an effort to contributing to a comprehensive
approach to countering terrorism.

Terrorism and violent extremism continue to pose
serious threats and impediments to global security,
stability and prosperity. In the face of increased
efforts to counter terrorism, terrorists simply change
their methods and means, adapting themselves to
circumstances while in most instances abusing
legislative and implementation loopholes. The threat
perceptions and national interests of Member States
may vary, but we should make no mistake: no country
is immune from terrorism, and we cannot win this fight
unless we join hands and hearts.
We cannot counter terrorism solely through law-
enforcement measures. We have to preserve the critical
balance between security requirements, on the one
hand, and democratic freedoms and basic human rights,
on the other. However, while protecting fundamental
rights and freedoms, acts of incitement to terrorism,
violence, racial or ethnic hatred and discrimination,
or glorifying such acts, should not be tolerated. We
have to bear in mind that no counter-terrorism strategy,
regardless of how successful on its own merits, can
lead to tangible results in the absence of international
cooperation and true support from other nations.

The lack of capacity, in particular the lack of
expertise and resources, constitutes the greatest
challenge for many countries. Enhancing capacity-
building and law enforcement in all Member States
requires specific attention. Cooperation at the regional
and subregional levels is particularly significant to
countering terrorism. In that context, it is important to
build new partnerships, enhance institutional capacities
and develop cooperative networks. That will have an
enduring impact on our collective efforts. The effective
implementation of the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and of Security Council resolutions
remains essential to succeed in our endeavour to combat
terrorism. In that regard, it is also crucial to create
public awareness about United Nations resolutions.

The United Nations has been the linchpin in
counter-terrorism efforts. Through the adoption of
the Global Counter-terrorism Strategy, the General
Assembly created a sound framework in which to fight
this challenge. Today, Turkey strongly supports the
promotion and implementation of the Strategy at the
global level.

We are of the opinion that continuing international
efforts to enhance dialogue and broaden understanding
among civilizations, in an effort to prevent the
indiscriminate targeting of different religions and
cultures, can help to counter the forces that fuel
polarization and extremism, and will contribute to
strengthening the international fight against terrorism.
In that respect, the Alliance of Civilizations, which
was launched by Turkey and Spain under the auspices
of the Secretary-General, aims to facilitate harmony
and dialogue by emphasizing the common values of
different cultures and religions.

Before I conclude, I would like to emphasize
Turkey's full commitment in this regard. Turkey,
as a victim of terrorism and staunch ally of counter-
terrorism initiatives, shall continue its efforts at all
levels, with the aim of mitigating the effects of terrorist
acts and eradicating the scourge of terrorism.

