The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity as Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.

I would like to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and to acknowledge his statement. In particular, I
would like to highlight the broad participation of
countries in this debate, which points to the relevance
and timeliness of our exchange of views and ideas on
this subject. We are aware of the relevance of the issue
and of the responsibility with which we assume the
task of presiding over this open debate, just a few days
after having taken our seat on the Security Council, 50
years after our first participation as a Council member.
In that regard, we thought it both timely and relevant
to convene this open debate at the ministerial level,
following the example set in October (see S/PV.7540).

Given their seriousness, these high-level
discussions on the issue also indicate a high level of
political commitment. The Middle East is facing a
number of complex challenges, which have resulted
in stagnation and the resurgence of various conflicts,
the emergence of new threats and the suffering of
thousands of innocent victims. Our country notes with
great concern the paralysis of the peace process in
the Middle East, the current situation in Syria and the
expansion of terrorism in the region.

With regard to the Middle East peace process, the
General Assembly, nearly seven decades ago, adopted
resolution 181 (II) A-B, whereby it resolved to create
two States. Uruguay firmly supported that resolution,
convinced that it would allow the Israelis and the
Palestinians to live in peace and within secure borders.
In that regard, the then Permanent Representative of
Uruguay to the United Nations, Ambassador Enrique
Rodriguez Fabregat, said:

"Those of us who are voting for partition are not
voting against either of these two peoples. We
are voting for both of them, for their progress,
their civic development, their advancement in the
community of nations." (A/PV125, p. 1350)

This year will mark 25 years since the historic
Madrid Peace Conference, where a series of bilateral
and multilateral negotiations began, which led to the
Oslo Accords. Despite various efforts and initiatives
made since that time, peace between the parties still
seems distant. We find ourselves in a situation where it
does not appear possible that peace negotiations will be
resumed in the short term. There have been increasing
doubts even about the viability of a two-State solution.
Furthermore, we also face an alarming upsurge in
violence.

In that regard, Uruguay has maintained its firm
support for the two-State solution, two independent
States and the right of Israel and Palestine to live in
peace within secure and recognized borders in an
atmosphere of renewed cooperation - two States free
of any threats or acts that undermine peace, including
acts of terrorism, and with agreements with regard to
Jerusalem and other aspects, such as equitable access
to safe drinking water and respect for holy sites. In
that conviction, Uruguay recognized the State of
Israel early on, and much later, when we accepted
that the inconclusive process could not be prolonged,
we recognized the State of Palestine, as did that many
other Latin American States. Today, our country has
embassies in Israel and in Palestine. Both countries
have embassies in Uruguay.

We are aware that the solution to the conflict must
be found through bilateral talks. We also recognize that
the situation is currently characterized by paralysis,
which only dispels the possibility of achieving peace.
For that reason, we share the vision of numerous
countries that love peace, have a democratic tradition
and promote human rights. We believe that the
international community must increase its efforts to
support the process. We also encourage the parties to
return to the negotiating table to achieve a peaceful,
just, negotiated and lasting solution to the conflict in
accordance with international law, a solution that also
provides for the interests and meets the needs of both
parties.

My country believes that by helping the parties to
return to the negotiating table to reach an agreement
is a moral obligation and a strategic imperative for
the Organization and the Council. Compliance with
international law and international humanitarian law,
in particular obligations with regard to the protection of
civilians, as well as the immediate cessation of violence
and illegal settlement activity, which has been mentioned
in a number of Security Council resolutions - all of
these constitute serious challenges to achieving a just
and lasting peace and appear to be fundamental, if we
are to overcome the current situation and re-establish a
climate of confidence that enables sustainable progress.

Furthermore, the parties have the obligation
and the responsibility to advance towards mutual
understanding and should refrain from adopting
unilateral decisions that interfere with dialogue. We also
reiterate the importance of international cooperation
in efforts to support the socioeconomic development
of the Palestinian people. The strengthening and
establishment of national institutions and basic
infrastructure are essential to efforts to ensure the
viability of the Palestinian State, which has travelled
far along the road towards being able to affirm its
status as a full State. Such full statehood should also be
capable of eliminating terrorism.

Uruguay maintains deep ties of friendship with the
State of Israel and has forged similar links with the State
of Palestine, which is why we express our willingness
to collaborate and support, to the extent we are able, in
the search for solutions that can finally and successfully
conclude this nearly 70-year process, which, despite
significant efforts, has yet to be concluded. Uruguay
will persist in its constructive and balanced approach
to facilitate the process. We will support actions that
call for a cessation of hostilities and the initiation of
peace talks.

We cannot discuss the Middle East issue without
mentioning the ongoing conflict in Syria. It has a
devastating impact, not only on the Syrian people, but
also on the entire region and around the world. Uruguay
is extremely concerned at the increasing severity of
the conflict, which is causing irreversible damage to
millions ofpeople and has taken a heavy toll in terms of
fatalities, refugees and displaced persons. The civilian
population remains the main victims of the conflict
and the consequences of war. In that sense, Uruguay
unequivocally condemns the systematic violations of
human rights committed by all actors in the conflict,
both the Government and the non-State entities. That
is why Uruguay strongly calls upon the parties to fulfil
their obligations under international human rights law
and international humanitarian law.

In that same conviction, we also condemn
the obstruction blocking rapid and safe access of
humanitarian aid to the affected territories, particularly
in the areas under siege. We strongly reject the use of
hunger as a weapon of war, which by any measure
constitutes a war crime.

It is unacceptable that people are still dying while
the international community has the resources to help
those who need it most by ensuring that they have food,
medicines and basic supplies. At the same time, the
international community's efforts to reach a political
solution to the conflict are fundamental, a solution
based on a broad, inclusive and transparent national
dialogue that represents all sectors of society and can
enable Syrians to decide their own future. We welcomed
and supported the major decision the Council made in
December when, for the first time since the conflict
began five years ago, the members managed to put
aside their differences in order to agree on a road map
for Syria with the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015).

The country has been devastated by all the
actions of armed groups - among whom terrorists
are increasingly prominent - invading territories,
wielding banned weapons, recruiting and enslaving
children, using schools and hospitals for military
purposes and systematically Violating the human
rights of the population, especially women and girls.
Extremist groups run joint training and recruitment
camps for coordinating atrocities that have nothing to
do with defending any religion or ideology. For such
groups, the concept of sovereignty has no meaning; it
knows no bounds or borders. Their threat is spreading
like a pandemic across areas where civilians are the
main victims. Thus, upon entering the twenty-first
century we have witnessed a regression to the most
disgusting forms of brutality.

These kinds of conflicts and violence call into
question the capacity of the international system and
the Security Council to fulfil their mandate, but we
must act to combat the criminal scourge of terrorism.
Through its efforts, the United Nations has succeeded
in avoiding a new world war, but not the fragmentation
and multiplication of these sorts of conflicts, whose
transnational nature compels us to seek new strategies.
Iraq and Afghanistan represent two other examples of
humanitarian hells where failed interventions have left
a vacuum that radical extremism has filled. It is crucial
that we prevent this from happening in Syria.

We are also alarmed by what is going on in Yemen,
North Africa, Somalia and northern Nigeria, in all of
which there are close connections between terrorist
organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram. In that
regard, we emphasize how urgent it is that we confront
the terrorist scourge effectively, within the framework
of international law and coordinated through the United
Nations. We also call for greater efforts to combat the
financing of terrorist groups, through a comprehensive
and large-scale approach based on political and
socioeconomic strategies that can promote social
inclusion, political participation and equality aimed at
enabling us to deal with the underlying causes of this
problem.

It is essential that we continue to do as much as
possible to reach a broad political consensus on these
continuing conflicts. We believe in diplomacy and
the type of inclusive political solution that is vital to
ensuring that there is trust between the parties to a
conflict and that a peace can be a lasting one. We are
encouraged by some positive recent examples, such as
the P5+1 agreement with Iran, resolution 2254 (2015)
and the inclusive talks in Vienna. Among others, they
give us hope that there are better days to come for the
peoples of this region, who want exactly the same thing
as all the rest of us - to live in peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

