Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation expresses its condolences to China and
Myanmar on the disasters that have so gravely affected
them. We also associate ourselves with the statement
made by the representative of Jamaica on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

My delegation congratulates you, Madam, on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. We welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
United Kingdom, which lends particular dignity to this
meeting. It is proof~ as if that were needed - of your
country's commitment to United Nations activities in
the area of peacebuilding and to strengthening the
Commission established to promote it.

The Peacebuilding Commission provides a forum
not only for consultation and coordination, but also for
reflection to come up with integrated strategies setting
out priorities for coherent support to be provided to
countries emerging from conflict. In that regard, the
Commission can help the Security Council define, in
direct dialogue with the parties to peace agreements,
the configurations of missions to be deployed and of
integrated mandates likely to promote synergies for
coherent action on the ground.

The Working Group established by the
Commission to capitalize on lessons learned can play

an effective role in that context. The Commission can
enter into contact with national actors, regional
organizations, bilateral and multilateral partners and
interested civil society actors so as to put in place
coherent support programmes aimed at helping prevent
a relapse into conflict and putting the country
concerned back on the path towards peace.

Mandates can no longer be established without
such prior consultation. Once the mandates have been
defined, the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General should fully utilize their influence and the
civil and military means at their disposal to ensure that
the parties participate in good faith in normalization
processes.

The United Nations should help countries to
mobilize the expertise that is needed to establish the
institutions to meet national needs. If a critical mass of
human resources is lacking in the country, then one
should call on the diaspora. Nationals should be put
back in charge who can work together with United
Nations experts on defining recovery processes. In
order to play its role as guarantor of universal norms,
the United Nations must develop the competent and
neutral international expertise to meet technical
assistance needed in post-conflict situations.

In the specific area of security sector reform, the
United Nations should increase its operational capacity,
drawing up rosters of experts standing by for
deployment, with a certification system based on
competencies defined in agreement with Member
States. Particularly in the field of the police, the United
Nations should develop partnerships with countries
that have regional training centres so that their
curricula can include material relevant to participation
in integrated operations. Special attention should be
given to those areas where it is a matter of
re-establishing law-enforcement functions, since the
whole State apparatus has to start working again so that
the rule of law, which is crucial to normalization in all
other areas of life, can be re-established.

My country, Benin, experienced a national crisis
in the late 1980s. It was able to recover through a
national initiative, but it could not have succeeded
without the multifaceted support we received as we
emerged from crisis. Our development partners agreed
to pay civil servants so that the public services could
resume. The transitional Government received
substantial budgetary assistance and focused technical
assistance from bilateral and multilateral partners. This
enabled us to revive the economy on a new basis and,
above all, it enabled us to establish institutions that
were effective in taking up the challenges facing us in
the area of maintaining political stability and managing
development efforts.

Especially in the political arena, as one
Government democratically succeeded another, Benin
acquired some expertise in the area of how to
strengthen national institutions and manage the rule of
law. We are ready to share our experience with other
countries facing difficulties in that sphere. Indeed, we
are already sharing our experiences within the
International Organization of la Francophonie, the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States.

One lesson learned from the experience of
countries emerging from conflict is that lack of
resources to consolidate achievements and the
consequent inability to function are among the reasons
for the failure of peace agreements. New institutions
can be credible only if they are able to perform in a
way that will command respect and establish their
legitimacy in the eyes of the citizens. This, of course,
means fully respecting human rights, establishing
mechanisms that will ensure good governance, looking
after those who have been victims and establishing
transitional justice that reconciles the need to combat
impunity with the aspirations for national
reconciliation. Security sector and judicial reform are
of paramount importance and should be given special
attention and careful follow-up.

Another prerequisite for peacebuilding is having
a peacetime economy replace the wartime economy by
creating the conditions for the resumption of healthy
economic activity, combating all kinds of trafficking
and ensuring that the country can rejoin the world
economy and move towards sustainable human
development. This requires proper management of
available resources, fair regulation of peaceful
economic activities, whether it be the exploitation of
natural resources or in the service sector.

In this connection, my delegation has always had
reservations about long-term embargoes on the
exploitation of the natural resources of countries
emerging from conflict. The enormous need for
financing for recovery and reconstruction can be met
only if the domestic resources of the country are

mobilized and transparently and sensibly used.
Particularly in countries where inequitable distribution
of income from the exploitation of natural resources
was one of the causes of conflict, peace agreements
must be crystal clear on the conditions for exploitation
of natural resources and on the modalities of
redistribution.

The international community should use its
influence to help put in place agreed management
machinery, as it did in the case of Liberia with the
Governance and Economic Management Assistance
Programme. The cooperation framework set up for the
implementation of the Peacebuilding Fund's support to
beneficiary countries must take account of the need to
guide them quickly towards mobilizing their domestic
resources so that they can make better use of the
available outside assistance. The resources allocated by
the Fund should give rise to catalytic activities that can
later be assisted by financing from bilateral and
multilateral partners and private-sector investment.

A third and last area that my delegation thinks is
of paramount importance is establishing a culture of
peace. This means the setting up of systems to identify
and address problems that could undermine the
national consensus - which means agreement on how
to preserve the fabric and unity of the country.
Government mediators have a role to play: they can
help Governments to quickly defuse any disputes that
may arise in the management of public affairs. In
addition to a mediator, Benin now has a new body
called the Office of the High Commissioner on
Participatory Governance. This was established
together with the United Nations Democracy Fund. Its
job is to lead the national dialogue on substantive
matters relating to national life and to seek agreed
solutions.

Those are just a few examples of how to meet the
need of every country emerging from conflict to find
practical ways of peacefully resolving national disputes
so that they can bolster their citizens' desire to live
together in peace and strengthen national cohesion.
This must involve all players in the life of the nation.
Development partners should also offer the necessary
support to the countries concerned.

