Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
am pleased to address the Security Council, on behalf
of the 19 States members of the Rio Group, during its
consideration of the third quarterly report of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) established by
resolution 1373 (2001). I wish to begin by thanking Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the Committee, for
his briefing and for his excellent work at the head of
that body. I wish also to congratulate the Vice-
Chairmen of the CTC.

The States members of the Rio Group condemn
and reject terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
At the same time, we firmly support all cooperation
and coordination measures adopted internationally and
regionally and within a framework of strict observance
of human rights, the rule of law, international
humanitarian law and other norms and principles of
international law, with a view to combating terrorism.
In that context, as the representatives of Mexico and
Colombia have stated, the 3 June 2002 adoption of the
Inter-American Convention against Terrorism by the
Organization of American States significantly bolsters
regional mechanisms to combat this scourge.

The Rio Group is particularly pleased to note the
submission of more than 160 national reports, in
compliance with the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001). We appreciate the vast work of the Committee,
which has enabled it, with professionalism and
transparency, to consider the vast majority of those
reports. We hope that the Committee will soon be able
to consider the reports it has not yet been able to
examine. However, we note that a small number of
States have still not submitted their first reports, in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001), and we call on them to submit them as soon as
possible. In that regard, we believe that the Committee
experts on the provision of assistance could help them
resolve any practical difficulties they may face.

The Rio Group welcomes the opportunity for
constructive dialogue between the Security Council and
United Nations Member States provided through the
submission and consideration of national reports. We
believe that the Committee's success depends on its
capacity to generate and maintain ongoing
communication among the Organization, its Member
States and regional organizations, with a view to
strengthening intergovernmental and inter-institutional
assistance and cooperation to combat terrorism.

In that context, we believe that the Committee
must facilitate the provision of technical assistance and
financial cooperation to those States requiring it to
strengthen their justice systems and their legislative
frameworks. Therefore, we welcome the Committee's
intention to serve as a contact point between countries
and bodies providing assistance and the States
requesting assistance. The States members of the Rio
Group hope that, in the coming months, in accordance
with its programme of work, the Committee will
consider the second round of reports and the
clarifications requested of States. Similarly, we trust
that in the coming months the Committee will pursue
dialogue with all countries in order to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to
strengthen the capacity of States to combat terrorism.
That is the Committee's mandate.

We endorse the understanding within the
Committee that it need not assume quasi-judicial
functions or declare that some States have complied
with resolution 1373 (2001) while others have not. We
agree with Ambassador Greenstock's assessment that
continuous efforts are required to achieve the
objectives enshrined in the resolution and that therefore
no State can consider its work complete. We trust that
during the next phase the Committee will continue to
work transparently and to be impartial in its results.

In the next three months the Committee should
also increase contacts with regional organizations in
order to coordinate its counter-terrorism efforts. We
note that those organizations can act only within their
respective mandates and in accordance with their
statutes. In this framework, cooperation between those
organizations and the Committee must be in strict
compliance with those mandates. At the same time, we
believe it is necessary for States members of those
bodies to consider the role that each of them can play
within their respective spheres of competence.

During the upcoming period the Committee will
also have to meet the challenge of its growing practical
and financial requirements. The work of that body is
consuming significant quantities of the limited
resources of the Organization. To date, its needs have
been met with resources earmarked for other
programmes and mandates. This is not a sustainable
solution, given that other programmes are equally
necessary for the international community. We
therefore consider it essential to allocate resources to
the Committee within the Organization's budget.

We the members of the Rio Group are aware that
combating terrorism should lead us to build more open
and tolerant societies. As clearly stated by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, combating terrorism
requires that the root of the problems that cause
insecurity be attacked. In this context, we know that
the best protection against terrorism is respect for
human rights and democracy in all spheres. Therefore,
combating this scourge should lead to the
establishment of a true culture of peace, tolerance and
solidarity. These are the values that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee must promote.

