Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing.

We have seen historic developments in the Sudan in
the past few months. It was against that backdrop that in
June, at the previous Council briefing (see S/PV.8554)
on the situation in Darfur by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), my delegation
called for opening a new chapter in the history of the
relations between the ICC and the Sudan. We should
welcome the latest encouraging developments. In
his statement here in New York during the General
Assembly's high-level week (see A/74/PV.10), Prime
Minister Hamdok included among his priorities respect
for human rights, the strengthening of the rule of law
and the development of transitional justice processes.
In addition, several of the suspects subject to arrest
warrants issued by the ICC have been arrested and
are now under investigation, and the Sudan's former
President, Omer Al-Bashir, has just been convicted
of financial crimes. However, we note that there is no
indication that the investigations concern the crimes for
which the suspects in question are wanted by the ICC.

Belgium continues to believe that the transitional
Government has a unique opportunity to finally render
justice for the victims. As the Prosecutor just noted,
in accordance with the principle of complementarity
enshrined in the Rome Statute, there are two options
available to the Sudanese authorities in complying with
their international obligations. They can decide either
that they will prosecute the five suspects themselves
or that they are unable to do so and must therefore
take the necessary measures to arrest and transfer the
individuals concerned to the Court.

In the immediate term, we call on the transitional
Government to respond positively to the request for
cooperation from the Office of the Prosecutor. The
aim is to initiate a dialogue to ensure that a judicial
process can take place effectively, whether in The
Hague or in the Sudan with the support of the ICC, if
necessary. In addition, the Sudanese authorities should
facilitate the access of the Office of the Prosecutor to
their territory to enable it to contact key witnesses and
collect additional evidence. We should point out that in
accordance with Council resolution 1593 (2005) and as
confirmed by the Court's Appeals Chamber in May, the
Sudan is still obliged to cooperate fully with the ICC
and its Prosecutor.

In our view, the situations in Darfur and in the
rest of the Sudan are inextricably linked. We deplore
the persistence of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, especially sexual and
gender-based violence and violence against children.
Given the current context, the Council's support for the
Court, which still has jurisdiction over the most serious
crimes committed in Darfur since 1 July 2002, is more
essential than ever. The calls from the people and civil
society of Darfur for justice for the victims of the
crimes committed there have increased greatly since the
transition began. They are full of hope, and we cannot
ignore the fact that justice will be an indispensable part
of any lasting peace solution in Darfur, as in the rest of
the Sudan.

