The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I wish to thank Joint Special Representative
Mamabolo for his update on the activities of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The Darfur mission was a lifeline
when its peacekeepers deployed 10 years ago. In 2007,
Darfur was one of the most brutal places on Earth.
After four years of Violence, more than 200,000 people
were already dead, and 2.4 million people had fled
their homes. Many people were stuck in refugee camps,
petrified that Government-backed militias would
murder them if they ventured out. The world looked
to the Security Council to save lives. The mission
answered the call.

The mission was never perfect; it was by far the most
complex and most expensive peacekeeping mission in
United Nations history, and the Sudanese Government
has tried to obstruct it from day one. But against all of
these odds, the mission has helped to protect civilians.
Its peacekeepers deployed with great courage and
bravery, and 63 UNAMID troops and police have paid
the ultimate price. The United States is deeply grateful
for the sacrifices that all of the mission's troop and
police contributors have made.

But 10 years after the Darfur mission began its
work, it is time to consider where Darfur stands today
and what comes next. The Sudanese Government is still
failing to protect its people in Darfur. In some areas,
civilians are still at grave risk of widespread Violence
from Government-backed militias and armed groups.
In other places, the Government does almost nothing to
provide security when local disputes turn bloody.
The Council needs to see the Sudanese Government
do far more to provide for its people by meeting the
agreed-upon benchmarks for Darfur, supporting an
inclusive peace process, protecting civilians and
preventing community Violence. It is not enough for
the Government to promise to do better; we need to
see proof.

It is also disheartening that the Sudanese
Government is still obstructing the mission after all of
these years. Over the past year, the Government held
back hundreds of shipping containers of food, and the
Darfur mission is still waiting for no fewer than 182
containers of its equipment to be released.

It is true that the Sudan has started processing
United Nations paperwork faster and that it has
improved humanitarian access for the United Nations
and its partners. We welcome those changes. But the
Government is not doing enough. The Government
must grant freedom of movement to all peacekeepers
and all aid workers. The Government must release all of
the mission's equipment. It also has to grant visas for all
United Nations officials, including human rights staff.
These are all demands the Council has made many
times before. Council members need to stand by them.

Our long-term goal for Darfur is still the same: a
negotiated, lasting peace. The United States welcomes
the fact that both the Government and opposition groups
have announced unilateral ceasefires. Both sides now
need to turn these ceasefires into real progress towards
peace talks, based on the road map that the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel has laid out.
We call on the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid to
immediately declare a unilateral cessation of hostilities
andjoin the negotiations.

We also need to look at the Darfur mission's future.
The situation in Darfur is still far from what we had
hoped it would be 10 years ago, but Darfur today is
changing. In many areas, the immediate threat of
violence from Government confrontations with the
armed opposition has passed. The people need the rule
of law; they need police who will respect their human
rights and protect them from criminals and militias;
and they need help to mediate local disputes so that
they do not flare up and spread.

So as the situation changes, the tools to prevent
violence must change too. We need to ask ifthe mission
to Darfur's current force structure and size are still
appropriate. We might not need 17,000 uniformed troops
to tackle these challenges. We need the United Nations
to start using new tools, and we need the Government
of the Sudan to step up.

So UNAMID should review its mission to ensure
it still matches the conditions on the ground. This
includes how the mission can reposition its forces to
stop recurring Violence and to quickly get to the areas
where people need the help the most.

The mission's restructuring will also require the
Sudanese Government to show that it is ready to govern
all areas of its territory and protect all of its citizens.
The Government will need to work with the United
Nations as a partner to build local institutions and to
provide basic services.

We have the benchmarks, so we need to assess the
Government's progress based on them and be honest
in our evaluation. If the Government believes that it is
ready to govern, it needs to show us. The expectations
are well known. We need progress on an inclusive peace
process. Civilians must be protected and humanitarian
access unhindered, and we need to see conflict within
communities addressed through mediation.

For each one, we expect that the Secretary-
General's reports will clearly spell out where Sudan
meets these benchmarks and where it does not, and
we expect that all of us on the Council will be just as
diligent in tracking that progress. If the Government
falls short, the Council has a responsibility to act. The
Council has to be willing to criticize and call out the
Government in our statements and when we review the
peacekeeping mission's mandate, in June.

Helping the people of Darfur means that we need to
see change. Above all, the responsibility rests with the
Sudan's Government. We can and should reconfigure
the mission to Darfur to make it more effective, but
what will really bring peace to Darfur is holding the
Government accountable. The Sudan's leaders must
disarm the militias that still terrorize Darfur's people.
They must support United Nations peacekeepers and
staff in accomplishing their missions, and they must
commit not just in words but in deeds to building
sustainable peace for Darfur's people. I look forward to
working with all participants in the coming months to
help bring about these changes.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.
