Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her objective
and comprehensive briefing and for her valuable
contribution to today's deliberations. We also commend
her able team for its effective work. We welcome the
Prime Minister of Sint Maarten and the Permanent
Representative of Haiti to the Chamber.

Back in April, the Security Council voted to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) for one year (see S/PV.8226). We would like to take this opportunity
to commend the Mission's work in launching a
number of important projects and initiatives, inter
alia, supporting the rule of law, contributing to the
continuing development of the Haitian National Police
and protecting human rights.

Kazakhstan commends the efforts undertaken
by President Moise and his Government to promote
stability, security, economic development and social
changes in the country. The Haitian Government's
reiterated call for the need to more closely align
international development assistance with those
national priorities is commendable.

At the same time, while recognizing the significant
progress achieved in improving the political and security
environment, some key issues have yet to be addressed
in a number of priority areas, such as fighting against
cholera, the severe overcrowding of prisons, enacting
anti-corruption measures and ensuring financial and
economic stability, food security and the stabilization
of the humanitarian situation.

We fully support the Secretary-General's observation
in his latest report (S/2018/795) that the violent events
of July underscored the importance of building broad-
based political support to implement key economic
reforms, which are basic prerequisites for the long-term
stability of Haiti.

Against that background, the joint efforts of the
international community to achieve progress will
be essential to consolidating the stability gains and
establishing a strong foundation for long-term political
stability, security and development. Kazakhstan
encourages the Government to foster greater
cooperation with regional organizations, particularly
the Caribbean Community and the Organization
of American States, with a View to identifying and
leveraging new opportunities for partnership.

As the United Nations system prepares for a
smooth and effective transition towards sustainable
development, we also call for the different United
Nations entities on the ground and the Headquarters
to continue working as One United Nations through a
more integrated and coordinated approach.

In conclusion, we strongly believe that the
Government, the Mission, the United Nations country
team and all international and regional partners must
continue to work together to plan for the transition
and beyond. It will be essential to anticipate, address
and mitigate all challenges that may emerge from
the transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence in Haiti.

