Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to take the floor on behalf of the 15
States members of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). In turn, I wish to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on Rwanda's assumption of
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. My country, C6te d'Ivoire, which maintains
friendly and brotherly relations with Rwanda, naturally
wishes you every success in fulfilling your mandate.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his excellent
report on the situation in Mali (S/2013/189) and express
my delegation's appreciation for the briefing provided
by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs.

As has been underscored by the previous speakers,
the situation in Mali has enjoyed positive developments
since the launching of Operation Serval, In the military
and security domains, the counter-offensive waged by
the allied forces was decisive, enabling rapid northward
progress to Tessalit. Current efforts seek to launch
offensives against the jihadist havens, particularly
those located in the Adrars des Ifhogas region and the
Niger Strip.

That is why, at its extraordinary meeting held on
25 and 26 March in Yamoussoukro, Cote d'Ivoire, the
General Committee of Chiefs of Staff of ECOWAS
concluded that it was indispensible that the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) be
provided as soon as possible with all necessary financial
and material resources for its further upscaling and
upgrading, in order to enable it to take over from the
French forces, which are scheduled to withdraw in the
near future. Accordingly, the current transition is of
crucial importance, particularly in terms of AFISMA's
transformation into a United Nations stabilization
operation under Chapter VII of the Charter. In that
respect, estimates indicate a need for 11,200 military
troops and 1,440 police officers. There is an urgent
need to immediately implement the measures necessary
to ensure the effective deployment of those troops.

With regard to force generation, and based on
the work of a battalion comprising 850 elements, the
following countries have committed to providing

infantry battalions: Burkina Faso - one battalion;
the Niger - one battalion; Togo - one battalion;
Nigeria - one battalion; Chad -two battalions;
Sierra Leone 4 onebattalion; Senegal and Guinea,

jointly - one battalion; Cote d'Ivoire - one battalion;
and the Gambia - one company for the protection of
the force's civilian police. Moreover, we note paragraph
45 of the report of the Secretary-General, that as of
22 March, 6,288 military personnel had been deployed.
Therefore, additional efforts are necessary in order to
attain 100 per cent deployment as soon as possible in
order to ensure AFISMA's efficient transformation into
a United Nations stabilization operation under Chapter
VII of the Charter.

As we all know, every United Nations peacekeeping
operation requires the prior consent of the host State. We
are therefore pleased that, in a letter dated 12 February
(S/2013/ 113, annex), addressed to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, the Government of Mali requested the
deployment of a United Nations operation in Mali in
order to restore the stability, authority and sovereignty
of the Malian State throughout its territory. Based on
the consent of the Government of Mali, ECOWAS also
addressed a letter dated 26 March to the Secretary-
General, highly recommending the transformation of
AFISMA into a United Nations stabilization operation
equipped with a robust mandate. Furthermore,
ECOWAS highly recommends, in the framework of the
future United Nations force in Mali, the presence of a
parallel force equipped with the capacity necessary to
rapidly dislodge the groups of terrorists and insurgents.

The objectives contained in resolution 2085 (2012)
are still fully relevant, but in the light of recent
developments in the situation in Mali their effective
achievement now requires us to consider the rapid
transformation of AFISMA into a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. That is an an inescapable
reality. Indeed, ECOWAS believes that Mali urgently
needs multidimensional assistance covering the areas
of security, peace, humanitarian assistance, support for
human rights, support for political dialogue, and the
electoral process - all of which can be provided only
by a United Nations peacekeeping operation. ECOWAS
believes that this option is the most appropriate formula
for stabilizing the security situation in Mali in order to
create conditions conducive to the swift implementation
of the transition road map, including presidential and
legislative elections.

With the same concern of stabilizing security in
Mali, ECOWAS emphasizes the need to address urgently
the issue of the status of the Mouvement national pour
la liberation de l'Azawad (MNLA). In any event,
ECOWAS believes that the MNLA should be disarmed
and that the National Commission for Dialogue and
Reconciliation, established on 6 March, is the ideal
setting for addressing the claims of the MNLA. To
that end, the rapid deployment of civil administration
in Mali, including judicial and prison services, could
contribute significantly to strengthening the rule of
law, fighting impunity and installing Government
interlocutors in northern Mali who are acceptable both
to the international community and to the new peace
mission to be established.

In conclusion, and in the light of the foregoing,
ECOWAS recommends that the Security Council
authorize under Chapter VII of the Charter the
transformation of AFISMA into a United Nations
stabilization operation, with a robust mandate and a
parallel rapid reaction force.

