Ms. Power (United States of America): Iwould like
to thank Special Representative Zarif for his briefing.
I would also like to take a moment to welcome the
new Permanent Representative of China, Ambassador
Liu Jieyi. And, of course, we welcome the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo and Serbia, Mr. Hoxhaj
and Mr. Mrkie, back to the Council, and thank them
both very much for their briefings. I commend both
Governments, and in particular Prime Minister Thaci
and Prime Minister Daeie, for their leadership, which
has led to agreement on principles for normalizing
relations and has advanced their countries' respective
paths towards European integration.

Today I would like to make three points, regarding
the opportunities presented by the dialogue process
facilitated by the European Union (EU), upcoming
elections and progress on issues important to advancing
normalization and understanding.

First, the United States congratulates Serbia
and Kosovo on the important steps taken towards
implementing the 19 April agreement to normalize
relations. Our EU partners recognize the significant
steps taken by both Governments, and we welcome the
European Council decisions on 28 June to open accession
negotiations with Serbia and to open negotiations with
Kosovo on a stabilization and association agreement.
The dialogue has created opportunities to enhance
stability in the region for both the security and the
economic prosperity of the people of Kosovo and
Serbia.

The Prime Ministers and EU High Representative
Ashton deserve our strong praise and continued
support for their efforts. We commend the Government
of Serbia's work towards integrating the police into
a unitary framework and chain of command by
closing parallel stations in northern Kosovo. Equally
important, Kosovo has taken steps to amend its laws so
that implementation can move forward.

The fact that both Governments have posted
liaison officers in each other's capitals will also help
improve relations and further dialogue. We also thank
the European Union Rule of Law Mission and NATO
for their continuing support in the implementation of
the dialogue agreements. As both Foreign Ministers
have acknowledged, much remains to be done to
fulfil the commitments they have made. We hope
to see soon the finalization of agreements on energy
and telecommunication, progress in the working
groups in Brussels to consolidate legitimate and
effective judicial and police structures in the north,
and the full implementation of all previous dialogue
agreements, including on customs and integrated
border management.

Secondly, we look forward to the 3 November
municipal elections in Kosovo and appreciate the
integral role that the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has been playing to
help facilitate what should be free, fair and transparent
elections. The United States urges eligible voters
throughout Kosovo to exercise their right to participate
in the democratic process. We especially urge minority
communities, including Kosovo Serbs, to participate
and make their voices heard. By voting, they have the
opportunity not only to choose their leaders but also
to hold them accountable and ensure effective and
responsive local governance.

Thirdly, I want to highlight opportunities to
overcome the violence of the past and promote
reconciliation between communities in Kosovo.
The United States welcomes Kosovo's efforts on the
protection of religious and cultural heritage, including
the establishment ofa new multi-ethnic unit within the
Kosovo Police to protect sites throughout the country,
as agreed in the dialogue. That unit is in the process
now of working with the Kosovo Force to assume
primary responsibility for the protection of the Peje/
Pee Patriarchate. The United States encourages the
Government of Kosovo to continue to work with its
international partners, including NATO, the OSCE, the
EU and UNESCO, to ensure that the holy sites of all
religions are restored and protected.

As noted again in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/444), missing persons are an important and
unresolved issue that demands critical attention from
all parties. We reiterate the call on all concerned,
particularly the Governments of Kosovo and Serbia,
to intensify collaborative efforts to locate missing
persons, so that families can finally obtain answers
and, hopefully, some personal resolution. Ensuring
safe, stable and sustainable conditions for returnees is
another critical aspect of moving forward that requires
further attention and much work.

Let me conclude by encouraging the Governments
to maintain the momentum of the past few months. We
want Kosovo and Serbia to succeed and thrive, so it is up
to their leaders and the people of Kosovo and Serbia to
seize the opportunities created by the dialogue and the
European Union negotiations to build the foundations
for a secure and prosperous future. We stand ready to
assist in any way.

