Mr. Trovoada (spoke in French): I have the honour
and privilege to address the Security Council as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). My statement follows
the letter of the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council on 11 November
2014 (S/2014/805) on the latest political and security
developments in the country since his last report
(S/2014/603), in August.

Constitutional order has been fully restored in
Guinea-Bissau. Its principal institutions are once
again legitimate and representative. Moreover, an
inclusive Government incorporating all of the political
persuasions represented in Parliament has been formed.
With the support of the international community,
regional and subregional organizations and partners,
the country is striving to continue its transition from
a state of fragility to one of peace and stability. In
that context, I must emphasize the important role
played by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), especially the ECOWAS Mission
in Guinea-Bissau, as well as that of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.

Today, Guinea-Bissau has reached a critical stage
in its evolution. The country cannot afford the luxury
of the status quo, at the risk of losing its significant
democratic gains and slipping backwards.

There is apoint on which all stakeholders - including
the authorities, the political class and the population of
Guinea-Bissau as a whole - seem to agree. It is the
need for reform, in particular in the areas of defence and
security, justice and public administration. Given the
sensitivity and importance of the issues at stake, such
reforms will require commitment at the national level
and concerted action to achieve consensus. With regard
the specific case of defence and security, the change at
the head of the General Staff of the Armed Forces was
just the first step. Reform must be a comprehensive,
inclusive, pragmatic and integrated in order to achieve
a solution that is technically feasible, economically
viable and politically acceptable to all stakeholders.

Guinea-Bissau is a country where inequalities
persist between the various layers of society, in which a
handful ofpeople have a lot and the vast majority of the
population does not have enough. The infrastructure
required for the development of agriculture and the
exploitation of natural resources are almost non-existent.
The same goes for the areas of health care, education,
water, electricity, transportation and communications,
to name just a few.

Faced with these many challenges, the authorities
spare no effort in seeking to meet the needs of the
population. They are working hard to find ways to
ensure the regular payment of salaries and arrears, to
implement preventative measures against Ebola and to
improve the delivery of basic services.

As Council members will be aware, the Government
developed, and presented in September, a programme
setting out its priorities for the short, medium and
long terms. In that context, the authorities identified
stability, the strengthening of the rule of law and
of public institutions, good governance, justice and
development as overarching priorities.

The process of transformation and democratization
under way in Guinea-Bissau is on the right track, but
there is still a long way to go and the resources at the
country's disposal are extremely limited and, at times,
unpredictable. It is therefore not the time to withdraw;
on the contrary, the international community must
remain mobilized in solidarity alongside the people of
Guinea-Bissau in support of their efforts to build peace,
stability, justice and a better future for their children.

It is important to ensure that the progress achieved
so far be consolidated, and not eroded by corruption, the
use of the country as a transit point for drug trafficking
or a base for organized crime, or by lack of respect for
the rule of law and human rights. The judicial system
must be strong enough to avoid any major breakdown
in law and order. In other words, impunity cannot be
eradicated until those who interpret and apply the law
have the freedom to act without constraints and the
necessary tools to enforce judicial decisions.

On 17 and 18 October, the Government held a
retreat in preparation for the donor round table to be
held in early 2015. Its findings were very encouraging.
The retreat defined a vision for economic recovery
based on the agro-food industry and investment in the
areas of energy, infrastructure and capitalizing of the
wealth of biodiversity.

The latest Human Development Report ranks
Guinea-Bissau's at 177 out of 187 countries. We hope
and believe that the country will be able to attain better
results on the Human Development Index next year.
The will to do so is clear and the resources are being
mobilized.

Following the request of the Security Council in
resolution 2157 (2014), the Secretary-General deployed
a strategic assessment mission in Guinea-Bissau
from 3 to 14 November. The objective of the mission
was to review the mandate of UNIOGBIS and make
recommendations to align its activities with national
priorities identified by the Government. The mission
has completed its work and is finalizing its report.
Its findings will be included in the next report of the
Secretary-General on UNIOGBIS, which will be
published in January 2015.

