Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French): In honour of your presidency, Sir, allow me to
thank you in French for the opportunity to speak at this
debate on behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

(spoke in English)

I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his detailed and thorough report (S/2016/532), Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom for
his briefing, and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for his statement. I express particular
appreciation for the efforts, dedication, and
commitment of Special Representative Haysom in
support of the people of Afghanistan under sometimes
very challenging conditions. We wish him all the
best in Africa and will welcome incoming Special
Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto in due course.

Let me address three issues: security, peace and the
way ahead.

On security, the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Afghanistan states unequivocally that
the overall security situation has deteriorated since
the beginning of the year. Only yesterday, as others
have noted, at least 20 people were killed and many
more wounded in attacks in Kabul and Badakhshan.
Our thoughts are with the victims and their families,
and we offer our condolences to Nepal, Canada
and Afghanistan.

The increase in casualties among the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces is worrisome.
I would therefore like to commend the courage of the
Government and the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces in their efforts to provide security
to the Afghan people. The continued support of the
international community, including that of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, remains necessary in view of the
threat. In this context, we recall the 20 May decision
of the Foreign Ministers of participating countries to
extend the Resolute Support Mission beyond 2016.

With regard to the peace process, recent civilian
casualties have increased. This demonstrates the urgent
need for a peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
Durable peace can be achieved only through Afghan-
led reconciliation supported by an inclusive regional
process. We therefore commend the continued
commitment shown by the region to the Heart of Asia
process. We welcome the fact that the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group reiterated its commitment to the
peace process on 18 May. The Netherlands stands ready
to support reconciliation efforts if so desired.

On the way ahead, the international community
has been engaged in Afghanistan, in collaboration with
the Afghan Government, for over a decade. Together,
we have seen some very positive results in terms of
development. Service delivery of health care and
education has improved drastically since 2001. Women
and girls actively take part in social life, and Afghanistan
has witnessed a sharp increase in girls enrolling in
schools. The Government of National Unity has shown
its commitment to advancing its anti-corruption agenda.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands especially welcomes
the creation of a high council on governance, justice
and anti-corruption, and particularly the establishment
of a specialized anti-corruption court. The formation
of these new bodies will strengthen Afghanistan's
anti-corruption investigations.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has been a long-
time partner of Afghanistan, and has contributed
significantly in the fields of peace, justice and
development. We remain committed to supporting
Afghanistan throughout the transformation decade. In
the run-up to the NATO Summit in Warsaw and the
Brussels conference, the Netherlands is planning its
post-2016 engagements, combining the three D5 of
defence, development and diplomacy.

The Secretary-General's report notes that both the
Afghan Government and the international community
should sustain their attention and commitment,
and work towards a better future for the people of
Afghanistan. There needs to be a clear commitment on
the part of the Afghan Government to implementing
the necessary reforms. The international community
must offer the required support, taking into account
the challenges facing Afghanistan. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands will continue to cooperate with its Afghan
and international partners, as agreed in the Self-
reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework.
We welcome the first draft of athe new Afghan National
Peace and Development Framework, which we consider
to be encouraging.

In conclusion, we, the international community,
have a collective responsibility for stability and
development in Afghanistan. The Netherlands will
remain committed to Afghanistan throughout the
transformation decade, in the context of increased
Afghan ownership and leadership. In this spirit, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to support
Afghanistan and its people as their partner for peace,
justice and development.

