Ms. Azoulay: I am honoured to address the
Security Council today. I wish thank Secretary-
General Guterres for his report on the implementation
of resolution 2347 (2017), and the Italian presidency for
organizing this meeting.

UNESCO is proud to have supported the Secretary-
General in drafting his report, in close collaboration
with all partners. I wish to thank the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the sanctions
Monitoring Team, as well as the World Customs
Organization (WCO), INTERPOL, the International
Institute for the Unification of Private Law and the
International Council of Museums for their cooperation.

The adoption of resolution 2347 (2017) represents
a major breakthrough and testifies to a new awareness
of the importance of culture not only to respond to
conflicts but also to prevent radicalization and fight
violent extremism. It represents a paradigm shift in the
way the international community approaches cultural
heritage protection. The report shows that resolution
2347 (2017) has already resulted in the adoption of
strong regulations and growing efforts to document,
preserve and safeguard cultural heritage at risk. In
a very short span of time, since April, 29 Member
States have already shared information on new actions
taken to protect cultural heritage, strengthen tools,
train specialized personnel, reinforce international
cooperation and share information.

Eight out of 15 members of the Council are
among these Member States, which demonstrates
the importance of protecting cultural heritage also
as a security imperative. Italy has launched the
Unite4heritage Task Force and developed a database of
illegally removed cultural heritage that is the largest
of its kind. France, the United Arab Emirates and their
partners are implementing the International Alliance
for the Protection of Heritage in Conflict Areas fund
initiative. Japan, France, Slovakia and the Russian
Federation have reported new improvements in their own
records of stolen objects, with national customs officers
in Canada and Russia receiving training on the import/
export control aspects of cultural property. Uruguay
reported on the creation of an international committee
against illicit trafficking within the Southern Common
Market in April, and Sweden established a wildlife and
cultural heritage crime unit within its national police.
These are positive signals of deep change, but we need
to do more.

Out of the 82 UNESCO World Heritage sites in the
Arab region, 17 are on the List of World Heritage in
Danger owing to armed conflict. More than 100 cultural
heritage sites across Iraq have been damaged. All six
Syrian World Heritage sites have been severely affected,
including Palmyra and the fabled city of Aleppo, one of
the oldest cities in the world, now reduced to rubble. To
respond, we must step up efforts in several key areas,
outlined in the implementation report.
First, we must raise awareness about the resolution
to strengthen its implementation by all Member States.
Secondly, we need to facilitate data collection and
information-sharing on trafficking routes and damage
assessment. That is why, in recent months, UNESCO
has sent rapid-assessment missions to Palmyra, Nimrud,
Ashur and, most recently, Mosul to define emergency
protection measures and evaluate possible restorations.
Thirdly, we must train peacekeepers in the protection
of cultural heritage and integrate this issue into
peacekeeping mandates and missions. The successful
example of the cooperation between UNESCO and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali is a very encouraging
step forward and can be taken as an example. In all this,
I pledge today once again UNESCO's determination to
support Member States with the necessary tools and
policy advice.

(spoke in French)

The implementation of resolution 2347 (2017)
provides UNESCO with some basic guidelines. The
first, which we must not forget, is respect for the
fundamental link between cultural diversity and human
rights. The two are linked. Recent history shows us
that the enemies of human rights are the enemies of
diversity, and this truth must guide our action. The
second guideline, which is highlighted in the report, is
to take a holistic approach to heritage protection issues.
Illicit trafficking, the destruction of sites, extremist
propaganda and the denial of history are parts of a
comprehensive strategy that the community of nations
must respond to in a holistic way.

We must do that, first, by stepping up the fight
against the trafficking that finances terrorism and
criminal activities. That is the meaning behind our work
with UNODC, the WCO and INTERPOL, and also in
cooperation with the private sector, auction houses and
antiquities dealers.

Secondly, we must ensure the protection of sites,
which represent physical and historical landmarks that
are important to the cohesion and identity of peoples
and therefore to their ability to live in peace.

Thirdly - and this is fundamental - stronger
action should be taken to promotion education, the
raising of awareness and the dissemination of values
that are rooted in the history of these heritages, and
which are levers of dialogue and prevention. When
extremist propaganda claims that Palmyra must be
destroyed because it is a symbol of Roman occupation,
which would be alien to the Syrian identity, everyone
must be able to denounce these lies and to understand
the history of the Palmyrene identity and the role of
Palmyra as a crossroads of cultures. That is the role
of museums, stakeholders in education, publishers,
historians and scientists, who play a central role in
this sharing of knowledge and are at the forefront
of the struggle against hate propaganda and for the
prevention of extremism. That is why UNESCO's
heritage-protection work is part of a broader effort to
educate people about citizenship and respect for others.
We need to speak to young people through education,
culture, media literacy and inclusive access to science.
That is how we will succeed. That role is highly
topical in the educational and cultural battle against
hatred, and I want to convey to States the complete
determination of UNESCO to fully play its role in the
United Nations system.

The results of recent months are encouraging;
that includes the ruling of the International Criminal
Court condemning the destruction of the mausoleums
of Timbuktu, which UNESCO helped to rebuild in
part with the Malian people. I also welcome the recent
ratification by France and the United Kingdom of the
Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict, as well as the ratification by the United Arab
Emirates of the 1970 Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property. We
must extend the scope of these normative instruments
even further.

We also have the opportunity, through new digital
technologies, to access new potential for knowledge,
heritage documentation and damage assessment.

Finally, this global awareness has led to the creation
of several financial and political initiatives on the
protection of heritage, and UNESCO aims to provide
the expertise in that area with its major partners, and
to be the main agent for the implementation of these
initiatives. We have the capacity to do so, we have the
tools, as well as the international legitimacy, thanks
to the United Nations, with further reinforcement by
resolution 2347 (2017). I believe that by integrating
heritage protection into security considerations,
particularly through the mandate of peacekeeping
operations, the Security Council is investing in a global
approach that is based on heritage but that goes well
beyond that to promote social cohesion, a sense of
belonging, as well as the possibility - once peace is
restored - for economic development. I believe that is
useful work that we can do for those hit hard by conflict.

