Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The

candidate countries of Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

Let me begin by expressing our appreciation for
the opportunity to participate in today's debate on
behalf of the European Union. I would also like to
thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing and
for his excellent ongoing work in leading the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

As highlighted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/323), there have recently been positive
developments of great significance in Afghanistan. The
work of UNAMA has contributed to that progress. At
the same time, daunting challenges remain. The EU
strongly encourages the Afghan Government to sustain
the positive efforts, so as to ensure a major
improvement of the situation, with assistance provided
by the multinational presence on the ground. In that
respect, the European Union would like to reiterate its
unwavering dedication to assisting Afghan authorities
in maintaining the current positive momentum during
the complex period ahead. That is of crucial
importance with regard to the upcoming presidential
and provincial elections, which will have significant
effects on the development of the situation in
Afghanistan.

The upcoming elections, to be held on 20 August,
will be a major stepping stone for the further political
development of Afghanistan. It is important that the
elections serve to ensure the political legitimacy of the
next Government and provide it with a strong mandate.
The European Union attaches the greatest importance
to the holding of legitimate, inclusive and secure
presidential elections, in line with international
standards, which would strengthen the support of the
Afghan people for their institutions. To that end, it is
particularly important that the Afghan Government
exercises its authority with impartiality and integrity,
ensuring a level playing field for all candidates.

The election process should be managed in close
cooperation with the Afghanistan Independent Election
Commission. The updating of the voter registration list,
the completion of the candidate nomination process
and the publication of the final list of candidates, while
not without their problems, represent important
preliminary developments in relation to the upcoming
elections. However, it is vital that sound mechanisms
be in place to avoid large-scale irregularities occurring
at the time of the vote. The European Union has
decided to deploy an electoral observation mission to
observe the elections. Clearly, UNAMA will also have
a crucial role to play in that regard.

The enhanced international presence in
Afghanistan in connection with the elections should
focus on safeguarding a stable security situation, and
thereby make development possible. Maintaining
security during the election period is a shared
responsibility between the Afghan national security
forces and the international community. The European
Union concurs with the Secretary-General's report that
increased levels of security-related operations should,
however, do everything possible to avoid the risk of
more civilian casualties, and that we should continue
looking at ways of promoting wider "Afghanization" of
relevant operations.

The European Union actively supports the
improvement of good governance and the rule of law in
Afghanistan, as well as the fight against corruption and
promoting respect for human rights. Building Afghan
capacity and ownership in the police and civil sectors
remains at the core of the EU's engagement in
Afghanistan. In that regard, the EU urges the
Government of Afghanistan to give the utmost priority
to the achievement of significant progress in those
areas, especially at the subnational level.

The European Union Police Mission in
Afghanistan is clear proof of such an active and
continued engagement. The EU Mission aims at
contributing to the establishment of sustainable and
effective civilian policing arrangements under Afghan
ownership. Its mandate encompasses the monitoring,
mentoring, advising and training of national police
forces.

As a complementary initiative to building up
police capacity, the EU underlines the importance of
the prospect of a deployment of the European
Gendarmerie Force to Afghanistan. Recognizing the
Afghan Compact and the Afghan National
Development Strategy and the principles agreed to in
The Hague at the conference on Afghanistan as the
framework for the country's political, social and

economic development, the EU intends to further
enhance and consolidate its commitment to
Afghanistan's reconstruction and development through
a common approach and bilaterally by individual
member States.

Without a doubt, stability, security and
development in Afghanistan are closely linked to the
overall situation in the region. The European Union
strongly supports the development of a coordinated
approach at the regional level and an enhanced
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours,
especially Pakistan. The EU particularly acknowledges
the key role of Pakistan for stability in the region and
therefore welcomes the fact that further progress that
has been achieved in the bilateral dialogue between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, as indicated in the
Secretary-General's report. As highlighted in the joint
statement of the first EU-Pakistan summit held in
Brussels on 17 June 2009, where Pakistan was
represented by President Asif Ali Zardari, the EU, in
close cooperation with Pakistan, is committed to
strengthening security and stability in Afghanistan and
the wider region, including through enhanced
cooperation on combating terrorism.

The EU appreciates the increased attention of the
Group of Eight (G8) countries to Afghanistan and
regional cooperation, as also demonstrated by the
meeting of the G8 Foreign Ministers on Afghanistan
and the region, which took place in Trieste, Italy, on
26 and 27 June 2009.

The EU strongly supports the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in its important role
as the coordinator of international efforts, while
recognizing Member States' responsibility to assist
UNAMA in performing this task. The new provincial
offices are a welcome contribution, and the EU hopes
that this expansion can continue. The EU welcomes the
intention of the Secretary-General to propose in his
report due in September 2009 a finalized set of
benchmarks designed to contribute to measuring
progress in the implementation of the mandates and
priorities of UNAMA.

In conclusion, allow me to recall that the
European Union reiterates its full recognition that the
primary responsibility for the development of the
country lies with the Afghan Government and people
themselves. I would like to assure you that the
European Union will continue to play an active role in
assisting Afghanistan on its road to security, stability
and prosperity, in close cooperation and coordination
with UNAMA and other international actors.

