Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Joint Special Representative for
Darfur and Head of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, for his comprehensive introduction of the
Secretary-General's bimonthly report Organization
(S/2018/154). Through him, we also commend the work
that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur is conducting on the ground. Finally, we thank
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka for her 90-day report on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan. As this
is the first time she has spoken in the Chamber in her
capacity as Chair, we wish her every success in her
duties, and we express our support for this session of
the Committee's work.

At the outset, we stress the positive aspects
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report, mainly
in the field of security, which has remained stable,
as in past reporting periods. The fact that no major
confrontations have occurred between the Sudanese
Government and the rebel groups of Darfur is essential
to maintaining stability and focusing the efforts of the
Government and UNAMID on consolidating peace and
advancing the political process in order to address the
root causes of the conflict, including land ownership,
and driving development in Darfur.

We also note the progress made in the Government-
led weapons-collection campaign. We believe that
this process helps to improve the security situation
in Darfur. Its success is critical to bolstering security
in communities and to stable and sustainable
peacebuilding. To that end, we must avoid division and
promote the commitment of the civilian population and
the militias. This Government campaign, which is in
line with UNAMID's peacebuilding process, requires
the decisive support of the international community

In that regard, we welcome the timely visit of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict to Darfur, Ms. Virginia Gamba. We join her in
recognizing the encouraging efforts of the Government
of the Sudan in the implementation of the action plan to
end and prevent the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflicts. We are aware that there is still a lot of
work to be done, but there has been significant progress.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, we regret
that clashes between factions of the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid have produced new displacements
in Jebel Marra. However, we note improved access
of humanitarian assistance to this area, which was
previously inaccessible. Nevertheless, it is evident that
the situation of internally displaced persons in general
is worrisome and, despite the intense efforts of the
Government, UNAMID and humanitarian workers, it
still presents several challenges. It is urgent that the
international community support the development
of projects that enable internally displaced persons
to access basic services and to improve their quality
of life.

We note that no new cases of obstruction of
humanitarian assistance have been reported, which
reflects the good relationship between and joint
work of the Government and the various United
Nations agencies. We hope to continue improving
the operational environment of UNAMID. We also
express our appreciation for the work carried out by the
World Health Organization, UNICEF, the World Food
Programme and other humanitarian agencies.

On the other hand, although human rights violations
and other types of crimes have decreased compared to
the previous period, we must redouble efforts to put an
end to illegal detention and violence against women
and girls, particularly sexual gender-based violence,
and must bring those responsible to justice.

Bolivia believes that the political situation remains
one of the main challenges facing the Sudan. We welcome
Government efforts to promote the implementation of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We stress that
the only possible solution to the situation in that area is
a political process that can address the root issues ofthe
conflict and its attendant consequences.

We must enhance efforts to resolve differences over
the Doha Document and we call on the non-signatory
movements to engage constructively in dialogue with
the Government with a view to achieving a definitive
cessation of hostilities. In that connection, we welcome
the efforts of the Joint Special Representative for Darfur,
Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, UNAMID and the members
of the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel responsible for the implementation of the
recommendations for the Sudan and South Sudan.

We also commend the progress made in the
reconfiguration process of UNAMID, the successful
completion of the phase one and the launch of phase
two. We must make sure to strengthen the capabilities
of the United Nations country team in order to ensure a
successful withdrawal from the Hybrid Operation.

In conclusion, we look forward to the next visit
of the Chairman of the 1591 Committee. We would do
well to review the measures imposed by the Council on
that country to ensure that they are suited to the current
situation on the ground.

