Mr. Sial (Pakistan): Mr. President, I would like to
avail myself of this opportunity to express our
appreciation for your able presidency of the Council
this month.

We listened attentively to the briefings by the
Under-Secretaries-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Peacekeeping Operations, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
The Government of Pakistan strongly condemns
attacks on civilians under all circumstances. Pakistan
has been a strong and active supporter of the protection

of civilians in armed conflict. Over the years, Pakistan
has contributed to international efforts, particularly
those led by the United Nations, for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The most tangible
demonstration of this, as the Council is well aware, is
our participation as the top troop contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We are very keen to
make this debate more useful and to work together in
focusing our energies to enhance implementation
capacity to ensure more effective protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

Objective reporting is a basic prerequisite for the
consideration of this important issue. Systematic and
consistent violations of the rights of civilians are
frequent and pervasive around the world, especially in
situations of foreign occupation. In our view, the report
(S/2010/579) should have informed us more
objectively about parts of the world where innocent
people continue to suffer every day, including in
situations that are on the agenda of the Council.

The report contains unwarranted and
unacceptable references to Pakistan, for which there is
no justification whatsoever. The assertions made
therein are completely misplaced and factually
incorrect. Pakistan is a vibrant democracy. By no
stretch of imagination can the situation in Pakistan be
described as an internal armed conflict. Pakistan has
successfully confronted terrorism, which has roots in
the conflict and strife in Afghanistan resulting from
cold war dynamics. It is a lethal nexus of drugs and
organized crime gangs, funded and supplied with
weapons that pose a threat to Afghanistan's neighbours
and to the global community as a whole. The
consequence is that innocent civilians across the world,
including in Pakistan, have been targeted.

Pakistan will continue to do all it can to eliminate
terrorism. This we do to protect our people from
terrorists and criminal gangs. We seek peace,
prosperity and stability in order to achieve our
development goals. We have, in this struggle, the full
support of our people.

On a different plane, the report seeks perhaps to
build an argument for allowing contact with non-State
armed groups. This raises many serious questions,
including that of the applicability of international
humanitarian law to counter-terrorism. Certainly, no
one would wish to advocate contact with or sympathy
for Al-Qaida and hard-core criminal gangs.
We are perplexed when we see that many
countries across the world that are facing situations
involving insurgencies, and where protection of
civilians has been a concern, fail to rate even a passing
reference in the report. It is also a matter of grave
concern to us that the report omits any reference to the
serious and systematic violations of human rights and
humanitarian law in Indian-occupied Kashmir that
have been widely reported by the international media
and civil society.

We hope that future reports on this agenda item
will be balanced and more carefully drafted. It is
important to address these issues objectively and to
avoid politicizing questions relating to international
humanitarian law.

