Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court for
her briefing.

The United States will always believe that victims
in Darfur deserve justice and that accountability is
essential for achieving a stable and lasting peace in
Darfur. We will continue calling for all those responsible
for the horrific crimes committed in Darfur to be held
accountable for their actions. After 15 years of conflict
and a genocide in Darfur, more than 300,000 people
have been killed, and close to 2 million more have
been internally displaced. Clashes between opposition
and Government forces in Darfur's Jebel Marra area
continue to exact a toll on the civilian population,
including the destruction of villages and the killing,
injury and displacement of civilians.

The United States is encouraged by United Nations
reporting that Darfur's overall security situation is
improving. However, the security situation for civilians
in Jebel Marra remains precarious due to ongoing
fighting between opposition and Government forces.
That fighting has reportedly included attacks on
civilians. More broadly throughout Darfur, persistent
risks to civilians result from intercommunal violence
between farmers and herders and there is harassment
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) by armed
settlers, among other issues. We urge the Sudanese
Government to cease restrictions on movement in
Darfur, especially within the Jebel Marra region, for
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and humanitarian organizations to
support the region's fragile security gains.

The United States also remains deeply concerned
about the vulnerability of Darfur's IDPs. The
Independent Expert on the situation of human rights
in the Sudan highlighted land occupation and violence
targeting internally displaced persons as a hindrance
to IDP returns and the consolidation of peace in
Darfur. The Independent Expert specifically noted
sexual violence against displaced girls and women.
Long-term stability in Darfur will depend on resolving
the underlying causes of the protracted conflict. We
welcome the 6 December signing of a pre-negotiations
document by the Justice and Equality Movement, the
Sudan Liberation Movement-Minni Minawi and the
Government of Sudan. With that document signed, both
sides have now agreed to a framework for substantive
negotiations to achieve a cessation of hostilities and
address the root causes of the conflict. We call on both
sides to engage in an inclusive and transparent way in
the pursuit of an outcome that benefits all the people of
Darfur, not just those with weapons. Lastly, we call on
both the Government of the Sudan and Sudan Liberation
Army-Abdul Wahid to immediately cease all hostilities
and engage with the UNAMID Joint Chief Mediator on
ways to begin peace talks.

The United States supports the establishment
of benchmarks and indicators of achievement to
strengthen the rule of law in the Sudan, as proposed
by the Secretary-General in his 12 October report on
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (S/2018/912). The proposed benchmarks
include, inter alia, the establishment of a truth,
justice, and reconciliation commission, a Sudan police
force presence in all localities and investigations and
prosecutions by Sudan's judicial system of conflict-
related sexual violence and gender-based violence.
We acknowledge the Government of the Sudan's
steps to strengthen judicial institutions through the
deployment of judges and prosecutors. We encourage
the Government of the Sudan to continue reinforcing
that process to ensure that victims of human rights
violations and abuses have adequate access to the
judicial system.

As the international community's support of the
Sudan in Darfur transitions from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, the United States will remain engaged
on Darfur. We have demonstrated that through the
phase-2 framework for United States-Sudan bilateral
relations, which launched in October 2018, and through
continued support to help meet the needs of more than
3 million people who require humanitarian assistance
in Darfur. The phase-2 framework seeks to expand
our bilateral cooperation and facilitate gradual but
meaningful reforms to enhance stability and strengthen
human rights protections and practices in the Sudan.
That cooperation also aims to support freedom of
religion, freedom of expression, particularly for the
press, humanitarian access, the cessation of internal
hostilities and a more conducive environment for
progress in the Sudan's peace process.

The United States will use all appropriate tools at
its disposal to press the Sudan to improve human rights
practices and protect fundamental freedoms for the
people of Darfur. We believe that the United Nations
should also make promoting and protecting the human
rights of Darfuris the heart of its efforts in Darfur,
whether through UNAMID or the evolving United
Nations country team presence. The international
community must ensure that human rights monitoring
and reporting continue in Darfur following the drawdown
of UNAMID, ideally through the establishment of a
full-fledged office of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, as called for
in the special report of the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
(S/2018/530). We are eager to hear an update from the
High Commissioner's Office on steps taken towards the
establishment ofa country office.

The people of Darfur are hungry for peace after
15 years of conflict. A Sudan that adheres to the rule
of law, respects human rights, allows unhindered
humanitarian access to all populations in need and
breaks the cycle of impunity is one that will enjoy a
sustained peace and prosper. We remain committed to
working with the Government of the Sudan to usher in
that future.

In closing, I must reiterate the long-standing
concerns of the United States regarding the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The United States has
consistently rejected any assertion of ICC jurisdiction
over nationals of States that are not parties to the
Rome Statute, absent of a Security Council referral or
the consent of such States. The United States regards
any ICC investigations and other activities concerning
United States or Israeli personnel as illegitimate
and unjustified.

