Judge Khan: I would like to begin by
congratulating Judge Meron on his election as
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) for the second time. I also
congratulate the representative of the Russian
Federation, who is presiding over the Security Council
during the month of December, as well as the
representatives of Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco,
Pakistan and Togo for their nations' election to the
Security Council beginning in January 2012. I wish
them all the best for a successful tour of duty.

I would also like to thank the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and
Nigeria for their nations' service to the Security
Council as they near the completion of their term, and
to express the appreciation of the entire Tribunal to all
of the Governments of the countries that are members
of the Security Council for their continued support as
we draw ever closer to the completion of our work.

In particular, the Tribunal very much appreciates
the swift action taken by the Council in resolution 1995
(2011), making ad litem judges eligible for election as,
and able to vote in the election of, the President and
Vice-President.

In this, my second address to the members of the
Security Council, I am happy to report to the Council
on the very positive progress we have made since my
previous address (see S/PV.6545).

All of the judgements projected for completion
during the past six months were delivered, and the final
multi-accused trial judgement will be delivered in two
weeks. Moreover, trial work is expected to be finished
by June 2012, and appeals work is on track to be
completed by the end of 2014.

In June, the Tribunal rendered a historic
judgement in the Butare case involving six accused -
the largest in our history - and on 30 September the
Tribunal delivered the judgement in the case of
Bizimangu et al. with respect to four accused.
Judgement was also rendered last month in the single-
accused Ndahimana case, and on 21 December
judgement will be delivered in accordance with
projections made to this Council since December 2010
in the final multi-accused, Karemera et al.

Currently, only one case remains in the evidence
phase, and it is expected to finish by early 2012. After
December, judgement will remain to be rendered in
only three single-accused cases, all of which are
projected to be delivered in the first half of 2012. If
arrests are made in the three pending contempt cases in
the near future, we anticipate that trials will begin in
early 2012.

Next, I turn an important request that I recently
sent to the Security Council and the General Assembly,
seeking extension of the terms of office for a number
of judges, to correspond to the work remaining. All the
judges' terms are scheduled to end by June 2012, or
earlier if they complete their assignments before then.
The extensions are required to finish all judicial
activities in accordance with the completion strategy. I
also wish to add my support to Judge Meron's
streamlining of the assignment of the ad litem judges to
contempt cases. That will have a positive impact on the
ability of the Tribunals to meet the completion strategy
targets.

In June, for the first time the Tribunal referred a
case to the courts of Rwanda for trial. The accused,
Jean Bosco Uwinkindi, appealed the decision to refer
his case. We expect this appeal to be decided shortly. If
the Trial Chamber's referral is upheld on appeal, the
case will be transferred to Rwanda, and the Prosecutor
will bring a further four referral applications. They will
all be dealt with in the first half of 2012. However,
should Uwinkindi's appeal be granted, his trial will not
be referred to Rwanda. In that case, the Uwinkindi trial
will take place at the Tribunal and is expected to finish
by the end of 2012. The same may be true with respect
to Bernard Munyagishari, who was arrested in May of
this year.

There are still nine fugitives wanted for trial by
the Tribunal. In order to help ensure that evidence is
still available with respect to three of the most high-
ranking fugitives - Fe'licien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya
and Augustin Bizimana - preservation of evidence
proceedings under rule 71 bis have been taking place.
The Prosecutor has concluded his preservation of
evidence in all three cases. Under the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence, the defence duty counsel for a
fugitive accused is entitled to apply to preserve
evidence as well. In Kabuga, the defence duty
counsel's request to investigate was granted, and
investigations are currently underway. In the other two
cases, we have not received such a request.

I urge all Member States, especially those in the
Great Lakes region, to redouble their cooperation
efforts with the Prosecutor so that none of the fugitives
escape justice.

As I stressed to the General Assembly in
November (see A/66/PV.58), our greatest challenge for
the coming months remains the retention of
experienced staff. Nearly one third of Chambers legal
staff have left for more stable employment just in the
past few months. The departure of such experienced
staff causes a loss of institutional memory, which
greatly hinders our ability to work within projected
timeframes. Moreover, staff who remain at the Tribunal
are faced with a severely increased workload, which
only serves to further lower morale and increase
departures.

We appreciate that this Council continues to
highlight in its resolutions the importance of
maintaining adequate staff levels in the Tribunals.
Continued efforts to improve flexibility in contractual
terms are essential to ensure that we have adequate
staff to meet our completion strategy goals. In this
same context, I echo the concerns raised by President
Meron regarding a problem faced by both Tribunals:
the alarming rate of attrition of junior legal staff in
Chambers. I strongly support his proposal to allow the
most qualified interns to be hired as Tribunal staff
without a six-month break, as that will greatly assist
with maintaining adequate staffing levels for the
Tribunals in our final months.
Another increasingly difficult problem that I
would like to revisit is the relocation of acquitted
persons. In national jurisdictions, a person acquitted of
criminal allegations is set free and allowed to fully
reintegrate into society. Because no formal mechanism
exists for securing assistance from Member States to
relocate them, persons acquitted by the Tribunal are
forced to remain in safe houses in Arusha.

With two recent acquittals, the number of
acquitted persons remaining under the protection of the
Tribunal has increased to five, one of whom has been
in Arusha for more than five years since his acquittal
was confirmed by the Appeals Chamber. The Registrar
has been working with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to find solutions to this
problem. We hope that Member States will support
their forthcoming joint proposal in this regard.

Next, I would like to discuss an important
programme that needs the support of Governments
represented here. In 2004, the Tribunal, committed to
helping Rwanda on its road to recovery, set up the
UNICTR Clinic for Victims and Witnesses of the
Rwandan Genocide. The Clinic has not only provided
vital medical treatment for patients suffering from
HIV/AIDS and diseases such as tuberculosis, sexually
transmitted diseases and malaria, but it also provides
one of the few available sources of comfort for its
patients.

For these victims, the genocide may not have
taken their lives, but it took away their dignity, their
trust, and their security. With the help of the Clinic's
highly trained staff and with counselling sessions, the
patients are able to slowly gain this back. The Clinic's
success can be seen in its statistics. In its first year, the
Clinic provided treatment to about 200 patients. By
2011, that number has increased to about 1,000. The
Clinic, which runs on voluntary donations, is facing
closure due to the depletion of funds. I hope that the
Governments represented here will consider
contributing to the trust fund upon which the Clinic
depends.

I will now provide an update on the preparations
for the Arusha Branch of the Residual Mechanism for
the International Tribunals.

The Arusha Branch is slated to begin its work in
July 2012. In addition to the already heavy workloads,
staff from both the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) are working tirelessly,
under the coordination of the Office of Legal Affairs,
to prepare for the transition. Among the work already
completed is the provision of substantive inputs to the
Mechanism's first budget proposal. Both Tribunals
have also provided, and will continue to provide,
comments on the draft Mechanism Rules of Procedure
and Evidence.

The Arusha Branch of the Residual Mechanism
will also be the home of the ICTR archives. Those
archives will hold the nearly 900,000 pages of
transcripts and audio and Video recordings of more
than 6,000 trial days, as well as more than 10,000
interlocutory decisions and the judgements of all
persons accused at the trials. As one of our
longest-lasting, most permanent legacy projects, the
archives will help to ensure that the international
community remains conscious of the battle against
impunity that the ICTR has fought for so many years.

In the coming months we also intend to focus on
continuing the Tribunal's legacy work in the region. It
is with that in mind that we are planning a regional
international criminal law workshop for lawyers,
scholars andjudges in East Africa in early 2012.

The Tribunal has taken great steps forward in the
past six months, and our work is almost complete.
Looking back upon the many years of hard work by the
entire Tribunal, there is much to be proud of.

The creation of ad hoc tribunals was a ground-
breaking move by the international community,
premised on the noble goals of accountability, justice
and ending impunity. Building upon the framework of
their predecessors, the Tribunals have served as a
bridge to more recent internationally supported
tribunals and courts. Together, we have developed
international criminal law from its embryonic stage.
The tribunals are thus compelling proof of our shared
evolution towards a more effective system of
international justice, one in which perpetrators of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity are
held accountable.

As a part of our mandate to contribute to lasting
peace and reconciliation in the region, the Tribunal has
given a voice to thousands of victims. The Tribunal has

heard over 26,000 hours of testimony from more than
3,200 witnesses. Their testimony describing the
horrific events of a genocide will remain forever
engrained in the memories of all who have been a part
of that important process. In is in their honour that
during our final months we work with renewed vigour,
rededicating ourselves to preserving the memory of the
victims of the Rwandan genocide and leaving for
posterity the lessons we learned and the experience we
gained at the ICTR.

