The President: I shall now make a few remarks in
my national capacity.

I also want to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ivan Simonovie for his briefing on the human rights
situation in Ukraine. We have studied the report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the human rights situation in Ukraine
and note that it is comprehensive.

We are encouraged by the relentless and consistent
engagement of the United Nations in Ukraine. That
is exemplified by the establishment of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine,
the readiness of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide testimonial
assistance for legislative reforms and the recent high-
level visits by the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-
General Feltman, Senior Adviser Robert Serry and
Mr. Simonovic.

We believe in the central role of the United Nations
in de-escalating tensions in Ukraine. The United
Nations provides an impartial platform and professional
expertise, which are both essential ingredients in the
efforts to ensure that human rights are respected and
protected in Ukraine. Independent monitoring and
analysis of the human rights situation will outline
technical, legal or other assistance needs and may
contribute to addressing the root causes of the violence.
The human rights issues linked to the current crisis in
Ukraine need to be comprehensively addressed within
the framework of a peaceful and negotiated resolution
of the crisis. The authorities must continue to engage
all groups in the country and assure them that their
concerns will be addressed.

The ongoing rebellion in eastern Ukraine
flagrantly rubs salt in the wound and exacerbates an
already tenuous political situation, with far-reaching
implications for human rights, peace and security. We
all know that it is an established fact that violations
of human rights often occur in situations of conflict.
That underscores the imperative for a speedy political
and diplomatic resolution of the crisis in Ukraine. We
urge all concerned parties to cease beating the drums of
war. They must work assiduously to ease the escalating
tensions and embrace dialogue and all its ramifications,
for the larger interests of the people of Ukraine. All of
us around this table have expressed the hope that the
meeting to take place tomorrow, 17 April, will lead to
a resolution of the crisis. I hope that our hopes are not
misplaced. I hope that our hopes will be justified.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

