Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I thank all those
authorities who made presentations during this meeting
for the help they are giving us in our consideration of
the current situation in Somalia. Brazil has welcomed
the election of the Somali transitional President,
Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, who is among us, and I greet
him. And we welcomed also the nomination of the
Prime Minister of Somalia's new Transitional Federal
Government. We hope those developments will be
followed by further steps along the path of
reconstruction of the frail State structures and legal
system.

Progress in the peace process would not have
taken place without the efforts developed by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
We value the role of IGAD and the relevant
contribution of neighbouring African countries, which
point to the strengthening of African conflict-solving
capabilities.

Nevertheless, despite all efforts, many roadblocks
are yet to be overcome before peace can prevail. The
security scene is a source of particular concern, and not
all military factions participated actively in the
negotiations leading to the transition. Consequently,
not all of them are committed to its success.
Businessmen and warlords continue to take advantage
of the present situation.

The African Union and member countries of
IGAD are already discussing possible courses of action
in response to the present crisis. We note that the
Somali Government favours the idea of the deployment
by the African Union of peacekeepers, who would help
with disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
among other tasks. Brazil has consistently supported
reinforcement of African capabilities in peacekeeping,
and certainly my delegation will give friendly
consideration to the issue of possibly sending a
peacekeeping mission to Somalia.

The new President has also publicly manifested
his intention to work towards a peaceful solution of the
remaining conflicts. We hope he will persevere and
work as hard as he can to dissipate fears of a resort to
force. In our view, the Council must continue to lend
its clear, unequivocal message of support to the
national reconciliation process and to IGAD efforts. I
wish also to associate our delegation with the thanks
that were expressed to Ambassador Wang for the work
he has performed, and say that we support the
statement before us this afternoon.

