Ms. Bird (Australia): I thank you, Madam President,
for convening this important debate. I also thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mariane Pearl and
Christophe Deloire for starkly illustrating the dangers
that journalists face and the imperative that we do more
to protect them.

Risking their lives to shine a light on trouble
spots, journalists play an essential role in helping us
understand conflict and pre-empting it. Their reports
provide early warnings that can compel us to act.
History shows the targeting of journalists is often a
precursor to widespread crimes against civilians. Often,
victims are local reporters targeted for reporting local
stories. In recent weeks, we have been saddened by the
murders of radio producer Daud Ali Omar in Somalia
and correspondent Pow James Raeth in South Sudan.

In Daesh-occupied parts of Syria and Iraq, most
local television stations have stopped working, as
many of their employees have been detained, abducted
or threatened. Worse still, many reporters - local
and international - have been executed publicly for
exposing Daesh atrocities and laying bare the extent
of its inhumanity. For Daesh, targeting journalists is
not just about brutalizing those who bear witness to
their crimes. It is about manipulating the media in the
most obscene way to project to the world their perverse
brand of cruelty and religious zealotry. Journalists
contribute to our collective efforts to contest Daesh's
hateful narrative and to deny oxygen to its cause.

The Syrian Government has also targeted and
imprisoned journalists.

Violence against journalists will persist unless
perpetrators know that their attacks will have
consequences. Yet impunity for crimes against
journalists is too commonplace. States must do more
to protect civilians and eliminate impunity for crimes
against civilians, including journalists. They must
systematically investigate, apprehend and try those
responsible. They must also recognize the particular
needs of female journalists.

Australia fully supports the United Nations Plan
of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of
Impunity. It is a practical tool to help States develop
legislation and other mechanisms to allow for freedom
of expression and to implement more international
humanitarian and human rights law. We encourage all
Member States to work together with the United Nations
to implement the provisions of the Plan of Action.

There is a role too for the Security Council, as
has been rightly recognized in today's debate. The
Council should condemn attacks on journalists, and
provisions protecting civilians should be included in
relevant Council mandates. The United Nations should
also ensure that peacekeepers are trained to provide
protection, when appropriate. Australia is deeply
committed to the protection of journalists and fully
supports resolution 1738 (2006). We warmly welcome
the Council's adoption today of resolution 2222 (2015).
We encourage that the issue of the protection of
journalists to be consistently addressed in the Secretary-
General's reports on country-specific situations.

Today's journalists are working in dangerous and
volatile conditions. Their ability to do their work safely
and freely helps us all to better understand our world.
We must persist in our efforts to protect journalists,
particularly in situations of conflict.

