Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): I am pleased to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. We thank the representative of Germany
for his stewardship in September. We would also like
to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing.

The question of Palestine is one of the most
important challenges facing the Middle East. Recent
developments in the occupied Palestinian territory and
other Arab territories occupied since 1967 are evidence
of the gravity of the serious legal, humanitarian and
political violations committed by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people, including its
systematic, illegal, expansionist settlement activities
deep within the territory of the West Bank, East
Jerusalem and its surrounding neighbourhoods. Its
continued evictions of the Arab population from their
homes and confiscation of their land and property, both
public and private, undermine the foundations of the
Palestinian State and the Palestinian Authority.

The United Arab Emirates reiterates its
condemnation of all these serious Israeli practices,
which have stalemated the regional and international
efforts for the resumption of the peace negotiations and
led to increased tension and instability in the entire
region. We call upon the international community,
especially the Security Council, to fully fulfil its
obligations under the Charter to persuade Israel to
immediately cease its dangerous policies. This should
include rescinding its unilateral and illegal measures
taken in this regard and creating the appropriate
environment for the urgent resumption of peace
negotiations with a View to achieving a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution of the Palestinian question on
the basis of the two-State solution, as set forth in the
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Here we reiterate our support for the establishment
of the State of Palestine and its admission to the
membership of the United Nations as soon as possible.
We express our grave concern regarding the difficult
humanitarian and economic situation of the Palestinian
people, especially in the Gaza Strip, as witnessed by
the most recent sustained military campaign against
the Gaza Strip, the blockade and the closing of crossing
points. As the Israeli occupation forces continue to
launch air strikes on civilian neighbourhoods in the
Gaza Strip, in serious breach of international law,
including the Geneva Conventions for the protection of
war victims, we call upon Israel to immediately stop
these attacks and put an end to its siege of the Gaza Strip,
in implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) and to
remove all of its military barricades in other Palestinian
cities and villages. We also demand the immediate and
unconditional release of Palestinians who are detained
and languishing in inhumane conditions in Israeli
prisons and detention centres.

The United Arab Emirates has been following with
grave concern the increasing violence and the killings
and displacement in Syria. From this rostrum, we call on
the international community to fulfil its humanitarian
and political obligations in order to put an end to the
horrendous atrocities being perpetrated against the
peaceful people of Syria. We are convinced that the
crisis can be resolved only through a methodical transfer
of power, and we support the efforts undertaken by the
Joint Special Representative, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, to
find a solution to the crisis through peaceful means, as
set out in the terms of reference of his mandate.

We reiterate our commitment to all requirements
related to nuclear non-proliferation and to efforts
to convene an international conference on the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East, including the Arabian Gulf region, in
2012. We stress the need for all relevant parties to
participate in that conference. We also call on Israel
to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and to subject all its nuclear facilities
to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
comprehensive safeguards system.

In that regard, we urge the Islamic Republic of
Iran to cooperate fully with the IAEA and to fulfil
its international obligations, thereby dispelling all
suspicions and fears regarding its nuclear programme.
We hope that a peaceful solution will be found to this
crisis that will ease tensions in our region by ensuring
the transparency of the Iranian nuclear programme and
demonstrating its peaceful nature.

In closing, we hope that the Security Council will
fulfil its obligations and take the actions necessary to
support prospects for renewing peace negotiations and
for achievingjust, lasting and comprehensive peace and
security in the Middle East.

