The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Congo.

As an old friend of the Timorese people, and on
behalf of my delegation, I would like warmly to
welcome the Senior Minister of Timor-Leste. Indeed, I
recall that, as a young civil servant, I had the honour to
meet him in Brazzaville quite some time ago. On two
further occasions, representatives of East Timor's pro-
independence movement came to thank the Congolese
Government for supporting their cause, and the Senior
Minister present here today was a member of one of
those delegations. Continuing the excellent
relationships between our two peoples, I had the
honour to represent my Government at the festivities
that were held to celebrate Timor-Leste's
independence.

Thus my delegation attaches particular
importance to today's debate, which offers the Council
the opportunity to reaffirm the international
community's solidarity with a people whose courage
and determination are commensurate with the
magnitude of the challenges that they have faced in the
past in their quest for freedom, as well as those they
face today as they seek to consolidate a situation that
remains both complex and fragile.

While welcoming the progress achieved since the
country achieved independence, we remain concerned
by the recent incidents of armed violence as well as the
violent demonstrations, which could cause further
upheaval in that young nation, in particular given the
upcoming 2007 elections.

The Senior Minister has had the courage and the
honesty to speak in depth of those events to us and to
inform us about how his Government plans to cope
with this difficult situation. We can assure him of our
solidarity.

The international community must therefore
continue to support the efforts undertaken by the
Timorese Government in all areas where international
assistance is necessary and indispensable. That is why
my delegation supports the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General, in particular
with regard to the proposal to establish an integrated
United Nations office at the request of the Timorese
authorities. We believe that that would be the bare
minimum, as my delegation, like the Senior Minister, is
of the view that we must act in the context of a long-
term plan.

Finally, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the high quality of his report and
also to thank Mr. Hasegawa, the Special
Representative, for his excellent briefing. My
delegation also congratulates the United Nations Office
in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) for its work, which must
now be consolidated.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Singapore.

