Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Colombian presidency of the Council for
having convened this open debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2011/183*) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I further wish to
express our respect and admiration for former
President Bill Clinton, United Nations Special Envoy
for Haiti, and for my compatriot Edmond Mulet,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

The Secretary-General's report before us leaves
no doubt about the gravity of the situation in Haiti. It
appears that this country, in addition to its long-
standing problems as the least developed country in the
hemisphere, has over the past 15 months encountered a
perfect storm caused by various factors - some man-
made, others natural disasters * that have become
truly daunting obstacles. Yet, as the report concludes,
today Haitians and the friends of Haiti have the chance
to make a fresh start. Guatemala is among those
friends. Haiti is in our neighbourhood and we share
common challenges and aspirations. For this reason,
along with many other Latin American countries, we
have committed a large contingent of peacekeepers and
peacebuilders to MINUSTAH.

The fresh start to which I have alluded will
require a concerted effort on the part of Haitians
themselves, beginning with the formation of a new
Government following the elections held two weeks
ago. It will also require a concerted effort on the part
of the international community, beginning with
honouring the pledges made in this very building
almost exactly a year ago. And it will require a
concerted effort on the part of the United Nations.
While it is clearly much too early to begin to discuss
an exit strategy for MINUSTAH, it is to be hoped that
that moment will also arrive. The fact is that, for now,
it is essential to maintain a substantive international
military and police presence on the ground, as has been
obvious from the wide range of support activities that
the Mission provides. We would like to convey our
gratitude to Mr. Edmond Mulet and his colleagues for
the outstanding work that they have done in
exceedingly difficult circumstances.

Before 12 January 2010, the Mission had been
entering a period of consolidation. A renewed effort
will be needed in the coming year, with the Mission
continuing to help the Government to preserve the
stabilization progress made before the earthquake and
to ensure a smooth transition to long-term
consolidation. Much of that renewed effort can be
achieved by strengthening the existing mandate, paying
particular attention to the rule of law, security sector
reform and ending impunity.

The new beginning also stems from the electoral
process. We welcome the recent presidential run-off
election, take note of the preliminary results and await
the final results. A new Administration will provide an
opportunity to tackle the numerous and complex
challenges facing Haiti, with the support of the
international community. Our collective effort is as
much about the transformation of Haiti as it is about its
reconstruction. In that regard, we urge the international
community not to waver in its support and to act in a
coordinated fashion in accordance with the priorities of
national authorities.

In conclusion, I wish to may tribute to President
Rene Preval, who, in spite of all the difficulties he has
faced, is leaving his country with great potential for
recovery and a transition towards both greater
development and greater democracy, for which we are
most grateful.

