Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor ofthe International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her report and her briefing.
As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of
the Rome Statute this year, France wishes to acknowledge
the contribution of the International Criminal Court
to the repression of the most serious crimes. It is our
responsibility as members of the Security Council
committed to this imperative of justice to support the
Court, which, although it has not yet reached its full
potential, has made an undeniable contribution to the
maintenance of peace and security. That is the case in
Libya, and I would like to reaffirm France's support
for the Prosecutor concerning the implementation of
resolution 1970 (2011), which referred the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court.

France notes with satisfaction the efforts of the
Office of the Prosecutor to carry out its investigations
in difficult circumstances. The mission led to Tripoli
in March with the help of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), a first for the Office of
the Prosecutor in five years, constitutes progress, as
Ms. Bensouda highlighted earlier this morning.

Given the scale of the challenges facing the Libyan
people, the support of the Security Council to UNSMIL
is essential. We welcome the personal mobilization of
the Secretary-General and the valuable contribution
of his Special Representative, Mr. Ghassan Salame.
France fully supports him.

Today it is essential that all Libyan actors truly
commit to implementing the Special Representative's
action plan. As the Council has repeatedly pointed out,
the Skhirat Agreement is the only valid and legitimate
framework throughout the transition. Following the
initial positive steps in the political process, such as
the consultations between the two chambers, which
launched a new momentum for dialogue, we must
now go further. All actors must remain committed to
the national conference and the general elections in
2018. Holding a credible, transparent and democratic
electoral process will be a key step in the transition.

As we know, there are still many security, legal
and political obstacles. The situation on the ground
remains very volatile, as demonstated by last week's
cowardly attack, claimed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, against the headquarters of the Libyan
High National Electoral Commission in Tripoli, which
we strongly condemned. That is why building a unified
national security architecture under civilian authority
remains a priority. The status quo is unacceptable. The
Libyan people have demonstrated their desire to return
to democratic legitimacy in Libya by registering in
large numbers on the electoral rolls since the beginning
of the year.

Beyond those general observations, I would like to
make three more specific remarks on the work of the
Office of the Prosecutor.

First, I wish to once again recall that the ongoing
investigations by the Office require the complete and
full cooperation of all stakeholders. Cooperation with
the Court by the Libyan authorities is essential for it to
fully carry out its work in accordance with the mandate
entrusted to it by the Rome Statute and by the Security
Council. It is essential to strengthen cooperation among
all the States concerned - whether they are parties to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
or not - in order to provide the long-term support that
the Office of the Prosecutor needs in order to complete
its work. In that regard, the cooperation ofthe Tunisian,
Netherlands, Italian and British authorities and
INTERPOL is particularly welcome. The contribution
of non-governmental organizations is also valuable
and encouraged.

Like Ms. Bensouda, I also wish to express my
delegation's appreciation for the support and cooperation
provided by UNSMIL and the Libyan General Prosecutor
to the Office of the Prosecutor. France particularly
welcomes the direct dialogue initiated last February
between the Special Representative and the Prosecutor
on the margins of the Munich Security Conference.

Secondly, with regard to the sections of the report
on the ongoing investigations, France regrets the failure
to execute to date the arrest warrant issued by the Court
against Mr. Al-Werfalli on 15 August 2017. We express
our deep concern over reports that Mr. Al-Werfalli not
only is still at large but continues to serve as head of
the Libyan National Army's Al-Saiqa Brigade and has
been involved in other killings since the warrant for his
arrest was issued.
France once again urges the Libyan National Army
to transfer Mr. Al-Werfalli to the Libyan authorities as
soon as possible so that they can hand him over to the
ICC in accordance with their obligations to cooperate
with the Court, as provided for in resolution 1970 (2011).
That would be an important sign ofimpartial justice in
Libya. France also reiterates its calls for cooperation
with the ICC so that Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled are handed over to the
Court without delay.

Thirdly, France welcomes the continued attention
of the Office of the Prosecutor to crimes related to
human trafficking and the smuggling of migrants,
which are a direct threat to peace and stability in Libya.
In particular, we note with satisfaction the cooperation
begun with the Libyan General Prosecutor to crack
down on crimes against migrants. It is encouraging to
read in the report that the Libyan General Prosecutor
has issued a significant number of arrest warrants
for such crimes. The Security Council has repeatedly
recalled the importance of perpetrators of such acts
being prosecuted and brought to account. The Council
must also shoulder its responsibilities by imposing
individual sanctions against those who engage in
human trafficking and the smuggling of migrants under
the existing United Nations sanctions regime. France
will continue to mobilize its partners in that regard.
France will also continue to act against the smuggling
networks and their economic model in Libya and the
region as part of the joint statement of 28 August
2017, entitled "Addressing the Challenge of Migration
and Asylum".

The situation in Libya once again highlights the
vicious cycle of impunity and instability. That reality
compels us to provide answers to the challenges facing
us in Libya. Those challenges cannot be overcome
without the effective assistance of the Court and the
support of the Security Council.

