Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Judy
Cheng-Hopkins for her briefing and Ambassador Lucas
for her observations.

My delegation welcomes the progress achieved in
2011 on the recommendations resulting from the 2010
review of United Nations peacebuilding efforts. The
Peacebuilding Support Office played a large role in
this, in accordance with the commitment made to the
General Assembly in January 2010 to making 2011 the
year that those recommendations would be
implemented. We also welcome the Peacebuilding
Commission's ongoing efforts in this area as it seeks,
on the basis of the 2011 action plan, to achieve
concrete goals and tangible results in improving its
effect on national capacity-building, mobilizing
resources and bringing key actors together around
common peacebuilding objectives. We also welcome
the progress in strategic and operational cohesion that
Ms. Cheng-Hopkins mentioned in her briefing. If we
are to achieve this vision fully, we clearly need to
strengthen the role of the Peacebuilding Support Office

and to improve coordination between the Office and
the Commission, which continues to benefit directly
from the Office's resources.

My delegation also welcomes the information
sessions that the Office conducts for the Commission
on the activities and operations of the Peacebuilding
Fund, which have contributed to a better understanding
of the synergy between the Commission and the Fund
in the countries on the Commission's agenda. This was
the case at the most recent visit to Bangui a few weeks
ago of the Central African Republic configuration, in
which my country took part.

My delegation takes this opportunity to welcome
the Council's efforts to encourage participation by the
Chairs of the country-specific configurations to
conduct more interactive and informal exchanges on
the opportunities that peacebuilding offers or the
difficulties it faces in some countries on the
Commission's agenda. We realize that peacekeeping
and peacebuilding are increasingly linked and thus
demand greater effectiveness from the Commission in
its consulting role as it pursues its mission.

Beyond the tasks of security and stabilization, we
believe it essential for peacebuilding strategies to put
increasing emphasis on socio-economic policies
designed to improve the living standards of the most
vulnerable populations and of former combatants
within the framework of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) - particularly the crucial "R"
stage of DDR, the reintegration of former combatants.
Priorities in this area are training young people and
promoting the advancement of women, which
contribute to fighting poverty. Tangible progress in the
socio-economic area cannot fail to have a positive
impact on the security situation. My delegation
welcomes the Commission's efforts with donors to
enhance international commitment and mobilize more
funding for the Peacebuilding Fund, without
prejudging what the most effective strategies might be.

Finally, we believe that partnerships are also
crucial to the success of any peacebuilding initiative.
Exchanges and consultations with the international
financial institutions, and with regional and
subregional organizations such as the African Union,
the Economic Community of Central African States,
the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (CAEMC) and the Economic Community
of West African States, will be very helpful in backing

up the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Commission. In the Central African Republic, for
example, the authorities have emphasized that the
successful launch of DDR operations there last June
was due to the funds provided by CAEMC to support
the electoral process.

My delegation continues to believe that the
United Nations should continue to play the principal
role in the common vision of peacebuilding and in
promoting increased cooperation between its various
stakeholders, and that it should act as the link between
national authorities and the various development and
peacebuilding stakeholders.

