Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to present to the Council the 90-day report of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), in accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of that
resolution.

(spoke in English)

The report covers the period from 13 September
to 4 December 2012. During that time, the Committee
held two meetings and conducted additional work using
the non-objection procedure envisioned by paragraph
15 of the guidelines for the conduct of its work.

At the informal consultations of 23 October, the
Committee continued its discussion of the Panel's final
report of12 June 2012 (S/2012/395), which is available on
the Committee's website. Several delegations proposed
that the Committee adopt a series of implementation
assistance notices that could aid Member States in
implementing the Security Council measures, taking
into account the experts' findings during their 2011 and
2012 mandates.

On 26 November, the Coordinator of the Panel
of Experts briefed the Committee on the Panel's
midterm report of 9 November, which was submitted in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2049 (2012).
The Committee heard additional information about the
Panel's current activities.

In the course of the discussion that followed the
oral briefing, members of the Committee exchanged
their Views on the midterm report, as well as on the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Some members expressed concerns about
possible non-compliance with those resolutions, which
may have led to transfers of material under sanctions
from Iran to States in the region, while some members
also addressed the need to ensure that sanctions were
playing a constructive role in supporting diplomatic
efforts and dialogue. During a subsequent discussion,
some Committee members requested the Panel
assemble for the Committee's review a compilation of
publicly available statements recently made by Iranian
officials and alleged recipients of Iranian military
assistance regarding potential Violations ofparagraph 5
of resolution 1747 (2007). In that regard, the Committee
intends to ensure that any work undertaken regarding
reported violations will be conducted in an impartial
and objective manner, based on verified information
and solid evidence.

The Committee also discussed the possibility
of issuing a guidance note to aide States in their
submission of national implementation reports, and
sending letters to States requesting them to provide, on
a voluntary basis, additional identifiers for individuals
subject to travel bans and asset freezes. Those issues
remain under consideration by the Committee.

During the reporting period, the Committee
received a number of communications relating to
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
measures.

In a letter dated 9 October, four Member States
submitted a report stating that the July 2012 Great
Prophet 7 exercise, during which Iran tested Shahab-I
short-range ballistic missiles and Shahab-3 medium-
range ballistic missiles, constituted a violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010). That case is
currently being investigated by the Panel.

As mentioned during my previous briefing to the
Council, in September (see S/PV.6839), the Committee
sought information from several States relating to the
inspection and seizure, on 15 March 2011, of three
shipping containers of arms and arms-related materiel
onboard the ship M/V Victoria. I am pleased to inform
the Council that three States have already responded
to the Committee's letters and offered helpful details.
I would like to take this opportunity to encourage all
States to cooperate with the Committee and its Panel
of Experts in the investigation of possible sanctions
violations.

In response to a query from an international
organization, the Committee found that the described
project, aimed at assisting Iran develop its technical
capacity for intellectual property rights protection, did
not violate the sanctions measures.

Lastly, the Committee received three notifications:
two from a Member State with reference to paragraph 5
of resolution 1737 (2006) concerning the delivery of
items for use in the nuclear power plant in Bushehr,
Iran; and one from another State, submitted pursuant to
paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006) and paragraph
4 of resolution 1747 (2007), in connection with the
unfreezing of funds in order to make a payment due
under a contract entered into prior to the listing of an
entity.

On that note, I conclude my report. I thank again
the members of the Committee for their cooperation
and assistance and the Secretariat for its support to me.

