Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and the
representative of Israel and the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine for their statements.

We regret to note that, once again, the Gaza
Strip is the scene of an armed confrontation that has
caused many innocent victims among the civilian
population. We support the current efforts undertaken
by the Secretary-General, who has travelled to the
region to obtain a cessation of hostilities. We support
and appreciate the mediation efforts of other actors,
especially Egypt and the United States, who have
travelled to the region in order to reach a ceasefire.

Mexico reiterates its grave concern at the
escalation of violence between Israel and Palestinian
armed groups in the Gaza Strip, and emphatically calls
on both parties to put an immediate end to all acts of
aggression and violence. We condemn the firing of
rockets and the use of force in the Gaza Strip, which has
caused more than 500 deaths, more than 3,000 injured
and thousands of displaced persons, primarily affecting
the civilian population, including women and children.
We are particularly concerned by evidence of attacks
on hospitals and civilian housing, which are contrary to
international humanitarian law.

We call on the parties to refrain from engaging in
hostile actions that affect the Palestinian and Israeli
populations, and demand that they respect the provisions
of international law and international humanitarian law,
in particular those relating to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The status quo is not acceptable. It
will only further exacerbate tensions and bring more
violence and confrontation, directly affecting the
civilian population and destabilizing the region.

Therefore, Mexico calls for compliance with
resolution 1860 (2009), which contains the elements
needed to address the factors that led to the current
conflict, specifically the embargo imposed on the people
who live in the Gaza Strip, which is unsustainable,
unacceptable and counterproductive. We reiterate the
need to resolve the underlying problem in the region
as quickly as possible, thereby guaranteeing the
rights of both Israel and Palestine to live in peace and
security within internationally recognized borders. In
that regard, we recognize the importance of promptly
renewing direct talks between the two sides.

We call on the Security Council to fully assume
its responsibilities and take all measures in its power
to bring about a cessation of hostilities and provide
humanitarian assistance and promote dialogue between
stakeholders in order to restore trust between Israel and
Palestine. Only then can a lasting peace be achieved in
the region.

