Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your presidency of the Security Council for this month
and wishing you every success. At the same time, we
thank the Chinese delegation for its presidency of the
Council for last month.

Ijoin previous speakers in expressing my deepest
condolences to the United States Administration
and the American people following the passing of
former President George H.W. Bush who served as
the permanent representative of his country to the
United Nations and presided over the Security Council
in May 1972. Our condolences also go to his family.
President George H.W. Bush holds a special place in
the Administration, the leadership and the hearts of the
people of Kuwait, thanks to the leading and historical
role he played in mobilizing political and military
support for the formation of the great international
coalition, led by the United States of America. That
contributed to liberating the State of Kuwait from
the 1991 occupation, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the embodiment of
the concept of collective security. The principled and
courageous attitudes by the President George H.W.
Bush and his support for justice and rights will not
be forgotten by the people of Kuwait, and will remain
entrenched in their memory.

I would like to thank Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad
Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant for his valuable briefing on the important
issue before us today. We also welcome his first report
(S/2018/1031) as a road map for the Investigative
Team. We wish Mr. Khan and his team every success
in carrying out the difficult and sensitive task ahead.
We hope that the Investigative Team will be able to
discharge its mission to ensure that the perpetrators of
the most atrocious crimes against the brotherly Iraqi
people are held accountable. That would represent a
fundamental part of the comprehensive systematic
approach to eliminating terrorism.

Resolution 2379 (2017) established a mechanism
that represented a victory for humanitarian justice
and for reparation to victims. That mechanism was
formed in response to the Iraqi Government's request
to guarantee that the perpetrators of the most heinous
crimes - which could constitute war crimes, crimes
against humanity or genocide - would not enjoy
impunity, while fully respecting the sovereignty of
Iraq and its jurisdiction over crimes committed on
its territories. We believe that the mechanism is an
important deterrent to terrorists. We are hopeful that
the priorities identified by the Investigative Team in
its first report, as well as the commitments undertaken
by the Iraqi Government to support and facilitate
the mission of the Investigative Team, will bring the
perpetrators to justice under Iraqi law.

In that respect, we greatly appreciate the sacrifices
and the heroic actions undertaken by the brotherly
Iraqi people. Allow me therefore to congratulate the
daughter of Iraq, Ms. Nadia Murad, on winning the
Nobel Peace Prize and wish her every success. Her
humanitarian message encompasses a true sense of
heroism and serves to heal the wounds caused by the
so-called Da'esh terrorist organization in Iraq. It is
indeed a source of hope and optimism.

Kuwait has stood alongside Iraq throughout the
difficult circumstances it has endured, including within
the framework of the international coalition against
Da'esh. We have provided logistical support and hosted
a number of international coalition meetings. Aware
of the serious challenges that brotherly Iraq is facing
after defeating the so-called Da'esh, His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Emir of
Kuwait, took the initiative in calling for the convening
in Kuwait the International Kuwait Conference for
the Reconstruction of Iraq in February, which was
co-chaired by Iraq, the United Nations, the European
Union and the World Bank. The Conference raised
$30 billion, which was donated by participating
countries as well as representatives of the private sector
and civil society organizations. Those contributions
took the form of development loans, subsidized loans
and investments. They will help to improve living
conditions, develop infrastructure, provide basic
services and create a safe environment in the areas
freed from the terrorists in Iraq.

In conclusion, it is high time for Iraq to recover
following the tragic events it has experienced in recent
years while fighting against Da'esh. Once again,
Kuwait expresses its solidarity with the Government
and the people of Iraq in any measures they undertake
to roll back terrorism, prevent the expansion of
terrorist activities and prosecute the perpetrators of
those atrocious crimes by bringing them to justice.
We will support such measures in order to consolidate
Iraqi national unity and preserve the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq.

