Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to express my deep gratitude to my colleagues who
will be leaving the Council and thank them for their
outstanding contribution to the work in the Council.

I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
briefing.
At present, hotspot issues in the Middle East
are complicated and intertwined. Conflicts and
confrontations are ongoing and the evolution of the
situation is worrying. The issue of Palestine is the
root cause of the Middle East problem and touches on
the long-term peace, stability and development of the
region. The current security and humanitarian situation
in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip is grim, which
is not conducive to regional stability and the peace
process. China expresses its concern in that regard.

Fighting violence with violence will solve no
problem. China urges all parties to bear in mind the
safety and security of the people of the region and the
imperative ofpeace and stability by exercising restraint
to avoid an escalation of the situation. The Security
Council should adopt a long-term perspective and
make every effort to create the conditions necessary
for stabilizing the situation and resuming dialogue.
Relevant parties should cease all settlement activities
in the occupied territories, lift the blockade of Gaza as
soon as possible, and take measures to prevent violence
against civilians.

The international community should create
increase its support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, including support for countries hosting refugees.
There is a need to comprehensively implement relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
adopt a long-term perspective and jointly promote the
resumption oftalks. In that regard, I would like to make
the following observations.

First, there is a need to remain united and
consistent and renew our efforts to promote peace
talks. All parties should meet each other halfway,
avoid any action or rhetoric that would aggravate the
situation and refrain from any unilateral action that
would undermine trust in order to create the conditions
necessary for the resumption of dialogue. Parties that
can bring influence to bear on the question of the
Middle East should play a constructive role and explore
new mediation mechanisms to break the deadlock in
Palestinian-Israeli talks as soon as possible.

Secondly, there is a need to uphold the two-State
solution and address the root cause of the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict. The international community should
adhere to the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative, and persevere in resolving the issue of
Palestine in a comprehensive, just and lasting manner
through negotiations. Resolution 2334 (2016) should
be implemented in earnest. China hopes that the
Secretary-General will submit a written report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).

Thirdly, there is a need to properly address the
final status of Jerusalem. This issue is complex and
sensitive and concerns the situation the future of the
two-State solution and the peace and security of the
region. All parties should proceed with caution and
refrain from imposing a solution that could lead to new
confrontations. Relevant United Nations resolutions
and international consensus should serve as the
basis for finding a solution through negotiations that
accommodate the interest of all parties.

China firmly supports and promotes the Middle
East peace process, the just cause of the Palestinian
people to restore their legitimate national rights, and
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine
with full sovereignty based on the 1967 borders
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We support the
greater integration of Palestine into the international
community.

China will follow the four-point proposal of
President Xi Jinping to promote the political settlement
of the Palestinian issue and continue to work with
the rest of the international community to explore
innovative mechanisms to facilitate of peace in the
Middle East, to promote an early resumption of peace
talks between the two sides and make tireless efforts
to realize comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
region.

