Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I too would like to
thank Ambassador Quinlan for his work as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and for presenting the report of the Committee.

Azerbaijan attaches great importance to the work
of the Committee concerning the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions and in finding
a diplomatic solution to the problem that is based on
international law. It is essential to continue dialogue
and cooperation on the issues on which progress is
urgent for regional stability.

During the reporting period, the Committee
received from Member States a number of
communications on actions taken in implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and on
responses on reported incidents. We support the call of
the Chair of the Committee addressed to all Member
States to cooperate with the Committee and the Panel
of Experts by providing information on implementation
measures. The Committee discussed the report of the
Panel of Experts on the results of its investigation into
a January 2013 incident reported by a Member State. It
is critical that all cases and incidents be examined in
an impartial and objective manner, and that appropriate
actions be considered on the basis of credible and fact-
based evidence.

It is essential that the Committee continue its efforts
to assist States in implementing the relevant Security
Council measures. We commend the Committee for
holding an open briefing on 24 June to share information
about the work of the Committee and the Panel of
Experts. The briefing was an important opportunity
to engage with the United Nations membership and
thus provide greater access to and transparency in the
Committee's work. We support the intention of the
Chair of the Committee to continue to look for such
opportunities for engagement in the future.

We also note the Panel's visits to several Member
States to discuss matters pertaining to the mandate
of the Panel and the participation of its Experts in a
number of workshops during the reporting period. It is
essential that the Panel continue its outreach activities,
which play an important role in increasing the number
of national implementation reports from Member
States.

During the reporting period, the Islamic Republic
of Iran and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) held another round oftalks in Vienna, on 15 June,
aimed at concluding the structured approach document.
However, according to the report (GOV/2013/27) of the
IAEA Board of Governors of 22 May, no agreement was
reached, and it was not possible to begin substantive
work on resolving the outstanding issues. It is
important that the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran continue its efforts to build international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. It is encouraging that dialogue and
discussions continued during the reporting period. We
hope that diplomatic efforts will help make concrete
progress in the talks and move the resolution of the
problem forward.

