Let me start by talking about the political cooperation between the Federal Government and all federal member states. We have talked about this many times, but I think it cannot be stressed enough. It should be a key element of all efforts if we want to see Somalia move forward in the right direction. It is the basis for reaching sustainable progress. For example, coordination meetings should be resumed swiftly and should take place regularly in order to resolve outstanding issues, such as constitutional reform, or open questions on the electoral process. We take note of the progress made in the preparation for the elections but are concerned that the electoral code does not include a 30 per cent quota for women. Let me also underscore that credible, free and fair one-person-one-vote elections in late 2020 or early 2021 are key to democratic State-building in Somalia and will be the yardstick by which the current Somali Administration will be measured. We acknowledge the challenges posed by coronavirus disease (COVID-19) to the continued preparations for the elections, but want to make clear that this should not hamper the Federal Government's ability to answer unresolved questions on the basis of a broad political consensus and in full cooperation with the federal member states. A return to the 2016 clan-based model must be avoided. We need to see concrete progress towards implementing the principle of one-person-one-vote wherever possible. We welcome the progress made in the security sector; however, the security situation remains a great challenge. We are concerned about the high frequency of attacks by Al-Shabaab. In order to update and implement the security transition plan, a comprehensive approach to security is essential. The plan needs Somali ownership and buy-in from all stakeholders and partners, as well as a focus on capacity- building for the Somali security forces in order to enable them to fully take over responsibility for security in the country. Against that backdrop, we must pursue a constructive discussion on international support to the Somali security sector over the next months, also with an eye on the upcoming independent assessment. The African Union Mission (AMISOM) has been of key importance to the security situation in Somalia since its inception. The European Union (EU) has contributed very significantly to supporting AMISOM, with a total of almost $2 billion since 2007. Germany is convinced that AMISOM will continue to be one of the cornerstones of international support to the Somali security sector for the time being. Turning to the humanitarian situation and COVID-related repercussions, we remain extremely concerned about the current humanitarian situation. The present flooding and the increased spread of desert locusts clearly show the aggravating consequences of climate change for Somalia's humanitarian situation and fragile statehood. COVID-19 poses additional challenges. We welcome the measures taken by the Somali authorities to combat the spread and call upon all international partners to support Somalia in that regard. It is essential that, under these circumstances, humanitarian access be maintained and humanitarian principles be fully respected. We will continue our humanitarian engagement in Somalia. The EU is very heavily and seriously engaged in humanitarian support for Somalia. Germany is doing the same bilaterally and nationally. Germany has already provided over €55 million for humanitarian assistance. In the light of the worsening humanitarian situation, further commitments are being considered.
