Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): It is with deep sorrow
that we are once again witnessing the escalation of
violence in the Middle East. The spiralling and
unchecked use of force that started in Gaza has reached
Lebanon. The conflict, which is deplorable per se, is
now characterized by a rapidly growing use of
indiscriminate force. Brazil strongly condemns the
attacks perpetrated by Hizbollah, initiated by the
kidnapping of two military personnel. Those attacks
have killed or wounded several military and civilian
persons in northern Israel. We also condemn the attacks
carried out in Gaza. No cause or grievance justifies
terrorism, which we firmly repudiate.

Brazil reiterates the provisions of resolution 1559
(2004), which calls for the dismantling and
disarmament of all militias in Lebanon. Although we
recognize Israel's right to self-defence, we are of the
View that Israel should act with utmost restraint in
order to avoid further civilian casualties and damage,
which are likely to spur a new cycle of violence,
causing more victims. Such restraint will be the key to
any solution to the present crisis.

Brazil condemns the disproportionate use of force
that has resulted in the loss of innocent lives and heavy
damage to the Lebanese and Palestinian infrastructure,
in flagrant violation of the most basic principles of
international humanitarian law. All forces in the
conflict should allow humanitarian assistance to
immediately reach the affected population.

At least seven Brazilian nationals, including three
children, perished as a consequence of the Israeli
military incursions into southern Lebanon. The
Government of Brazil has already extended its
condolences to all the victims in Lebanon and their
families. We are arranging for the evacuation of a large
number of Brazilian nationals. I should note that many
thousands of Brazilians currently live in the affected
regions.

Peace can be attained only by the resumption of a
diplomatic process involving all interested parties. The
Government of Brazil supports the efforts undertaken
by the United Nations to achieve a ceasefire and the
release of the abducted Israeli soldiers. We believe that
the diplomatic and humanitarian initiatives currently
being undertaken by Secretary-General Kofi Annan
must be seriously considered by the Security Council
with a view to obtaining an immediate cessation of
hostilities and establishing conditions for achieving a
durable solution to the crisis.

Through the Security Council, the international
community must urgently fulfil its responsibilities and
take immediate action to prevent a further escalation of
the conflict. A lack of action by the Council in such a
flagrant case threatening international peace and
security would only contribute to weakening its
credibility.

Brazil is convinced that stability ultimately
depends upon the achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict
in all its aspects. Unilateral and other types of non-
negotiated solutions are not likely to bring about peace,
but only precarious truces that are broken in bloody
conflicts such as the one we are witnessing today. The
international community must not remain passive
before the deterioration of the conflict and the
destruction of Lebanon as a viable nation.

