Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and thank
you for having convened this timely meeting on an
important issue which continues to be the focus of the
attention of the entire international community. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Lavrov of the Russian
Federation for the excellent manner in which he
conducted the work of the Council in April.

The international humanitarian and human rights
organizations are reaching consensus on the fact that
the Israeli army perpetrated war crimes in the course of
its latest incursion into the occupied territories,
especially in the Jenin refugee camp. Having visited
the war-stricken areas, these organizations have
documented the atrocities committed by the Israelis.
They have brought to light evidence which clearly
points to the resort by the Israelis to indiscriminate and
excessive force: firing from helicopters, razing houses
with bulldozers, the wilful and unlawful killing of
Palestinian civilians and the use of such civilians as
human shields - measures clearly outlawed by
international humanitarian law. These actions
constitute highly visible war crimes that have been
widely reported by the international media and could
be documented with relative ease.

It is quite obvious that the Israelis blocked an
official inquiry into their aggression with a view to
averting the uncovering of evidence on massacres that
their forces committed in Jenin and elsewhere in the
occupied territories. By doing so, they are seeking, in
vain, to conceal their hands, which are stained with the
blood of innocent Palestinian refugees. And ultimately
they are trying to continue to act with the impunity
from which they benefit, in complicity with those who
rely merely on force in conducting their foreign policy.

World public opinion is reflecting dismay at the
circumstances that led to the decision to disband the
fact-finding mission to the Jenin refugee camp. It is
being seen as another example of the double standards
which have paralysed the United Nations for quite a
long time. The acquiescence of the United Nations to
Israel's refusal to cooperate with the panel will
unfortunately cast a long shadow over the activity of
the Security Council for a long time to come and will
affect its efficiency and credibility in dealing with
other current and future crises.

It is unfortunate that the Security Council and, to
some extent, the whole United Nations system, has
once again proved powerless in the face of the
protection accorded to the Israeli regime. It would not
be an exaggeration for me to suggest that what
happened to the Jenin fact-finding team was a blow to
the credibility and authority of the Security Council.
Henceforth, there are several relevant questions that
should be asked. How can any effort on the part of the
Council to compel implementation of its resolutions
look legitimate in the eyes of peoples across the globe?
How can the United Nations hope to enforce any future
inspections or investigations when it has willingly
backed down on the one mandated for Jenin?

While appreciating the efforts made by the
Secretary-General and his representatives to alleviate
the impact of the Israeli atrocities against the
Palestinians, we believe that the dissolution of the fact-
finding team was premature and that efforts with a
View to having it fulfil its mandate were yet to be
exhausted. The team might have been able to fulfil its
mandate by employing means other than visiting the
scene of the crimes.

We share with the rest of the world the conviction
that the occupation by the Israelis of Arab lands,
whether Palestinian, Syrian or Lebanese, lies at the
heart of the crisis and conflict in the Middle East. It is
hypocritical and deceitful to ignore such a root cause of
the crisis and, instead, to try to draw attention to this or
that particular tactic that this or that group may
employ.

We are deeply concerned about the decision to
abort the fact-finding mission. We also deplore the
Council's failure to take firm action under Chapter VII
of the Charter to stop the Israelis from continually
flouting its resolutions. We believe that the United
Nations must use all necessary means to force Israel to
comply with the demands of the world community. In
our view, it is essential that the Israelis, who ordered
and actually committed war crimes against civilians in
the Palestinian occupied territories, be brought to
justice. It is also essential that the international
community take a fresh look at the question of whether
a regime inclined readily to commit crimes against
innocent people and flout the Council's resolutions and
the principles of international law can still claim a
place in the world's multilateral organizations.

