Mr. De la Fuente Ramirez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico welcomes Peru's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and its invitation to
review the issue at hand today.

International terrorism and organized crime are two
phenomena that affect the stability, development and
well-being of our societies. Both are serious and need to
be tackled head-on and effectively. However, while it is
true that both endanger peace and security, it is necessary
to differentiate between them. That is precisely why
there are two different legal frameworks, each with its
own institutional scaffolding. Generalizations about the
scope of the link between international terrorism and
organized crime are therefore neither valid nor timely,
nor are generalizations about the responses required to
prevent, combat and mitigate their effects.

Certainly, in specific contexts, there
have been links - above all of a financial
nature - between transnational organized crime and
terrorist organizations, which, of course, deserve the
effective attention of the international community. And
it is precisely in that regard, in the methods of financing
terrorism, that we must redouble our efforts to rigorously
analyse their implications and learn more about their
scope. But for all this to happen, in strict compliance
with the mandates conferred by the Member States, it
is essential to strengthen international cooperation in
coordination with the specialized multilateral agencies
of the United Nations. In that context, we endorse the
call of the General Assembly, in its sixth review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
to also improve cooperation at the national and
subregional levels and to generate a more timely and
effective response to the links between terrorism and
some forms of transnational organized crime.

We believe that it is necessary for these
considerations to be taken into account by the Security
Council in addressing the issue. It is therefore not
only a question of recognizing local and regional
differences, but also of rigorously analysing whether
we are adequately contextualizing the debate within the
Council's mandate.

