Guterres I welcome this opportunity to present my first report on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167). Since the report was issued, our world has been shaken by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Young people are feeling the impact acutely, from lost jobs to family stress, mental health and other hardships. More than 1.54 billion children and youth are out of school. Young refugees, displaced persons and others caught up in conflict or disaster now face even more vulnerability. Persons with disabilities may face new hindrances in accessing the services and support to which they have a right. Even before the current crisis, young people were facing enormous challenges. The numbers are startling: one of every five young people was already not in education, training or employment; one of every four is affected by violence or conflict; and every year 12 million girls become mothers while they themselves are still children. Those frustrations and, frankly, the failure of those in power today to address them fuel declining confidence in political establishments and institutions. When such a cycle takes hold, it is all too easy for extremist groups to exploit the anger and despair, and the risk of radicalization climbs. We can already see such groups taking advantage of the COVID-19 lockdowns, intensifying their efforts on social media to spread hatred and recruit young people who may be spending more time at home and online. Yet, despite those hurdles and risks, young people are still finding ways to engage, to support each other and to demand and drive change. We see it in our battle against COVID-19. In Colombia, Ghana, Iraq and several other countries, young peacebuilders and humanitarians are delivering supplies to front-line health workers and people in need. They are keeping communication open within communities to maintain social cohesion despite physical distancing. They are supporting my call for a global ceasefire. We see it every week in our battle against climate change. The Fridays for Future movement continues because young people know that their prospects and aspirations are at stake. And, as illustrated in the report, we see youth engagement in their efforts to bring about lasting peace and security. Just five years after the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), encouraging steps are being taken to enable young people to play their essential role in building peaceful and just societies. From prevention to mediation and from humanitarian assistance to post-conflict healing and reconciliation, young people are stepping up through formal and informal mechanisms and by using traditional platforms and new technologies. Many of Member States have taken steps to facilitate that. In Colombia, young leaders played a critical role throughout the peace process and had a direct impact on the content of the 2016 peace agreement. In the Philippines, young women peacebuilders organized interreligious dialogues to strengthen local ownership of the Bangsamoro Organic Law. In South Sudan, young people used the online campaign #SouthSudanIsWatching to assert their rights as observers of the High-level Revitalization Forum. In Syria, young medical students are supporting engineers to build medical supplies and are teaching others with special needs through online messaging. Finally, in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and the Sudan, more than 6,500 former combatants, mostly young people, have benefited from programmes supported by peacekeeping missions. I am encouraged to see that global networks have emerged to support young peacebuilders. The African Union has begun to develop a Continental Framework on Youth, Peace and Security. The Security Council meets often with young people during its country visits. The Peacebuilding Commission has provided young peacebuilders a platform to present their work and policy recommendations. Young refugees helped shape the Global Compact on Refugees, and countries including Finland, the Gambia and Nigeria are developing national road maps for youth and peace and security. The United Nations, for its part, is striving to integrate that agenda across the Organization, guided by the United Nations Youth Strategy. Notwithstanding that progress, the youth, peace and security agenda still faces formidable challenges. Participation opportunities remain inadequate. Many young peacebuilders report that their participation is not welcomed by the public or those in positions of power. That is especially evident for young women. Exclusion from political decision- making further increases their vulnerability to discrimination, sexual violence and exploitation, trafficking and child marriage. Only 2.2 per cent of the world's parliamentarians are under 30 years of age, so it is not surprising to see declining turnout on the part of young voters in the world, reflecting growing dissatisfaction with political establishments. Young women and men forced from their homes owing to conflict and violence remain highly vulnerable. Reports of threats and human rights violations against young peacebuilders and human rights defenders are also of grave concern. Behind all of that lies insufficient investment in prevention and in ensuring that young people have opportunities to advance in life. Even before COVID-19, a global learning crisis already threatened to undermine long-term prospects for development and social cohesion, particularly in conflict-affected settings. Now this crisis is multiplying, coupled with massive increases in poverty and unemployment. It is in that context that I am issuing a call to action on youth, peace and security. First, we must do more to address those challenges, guided by the findings of "The missing peace: independent progress study on youth and peace and security" (see S/2018/86). Secondly, we must invest in young people's participation, organizations and initiatives. The Peacebuilding Fund is an invaluable tool, and I urge the Council to ensure it has the resources it needs. Thirdly, we must strengthen human rights protections and protect the civic space on which youth participation depends. Fourthly, we must emerge from the COVID-19 crisis with a determination to recover better by massively increasing our investment in young people's capacities as we deliver on the Sustainable Development Goals. Across that work, our efforts must reflect a fundamental understanding: young people are not subjects to be protected, but should be seen as citizens with equal rights, as full members of our societies and as powerful agents for change. The world cannot afford a lost generation of youth, their lives set back by COVID-19 and their voices stifled by a lack of participation. Let us do far more to tap their talents as we tackle the pandemic and chart a recovery that leads to a more peaceful, sustainable and equitable future for all.
