Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I can only agree
with you, Mr. President, on your last statement. But let
me thank Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev
for his useful briefing today, as always. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his informative and
comprehensive report (S/2018/623), which we welcome.

I would also like to acknowledge Bolivia's
spearheading efforts in advancing this agenda through
resolution 2365 (2017)last year and their commitment
to keeping the Security Council's attention on this
important issue. As we said at the adoption of resolution
2365 (2017) one year ago (see S/PV.7992), the terrible
legacy of landmines and explosive remnants of war
on the communities where they are found cannot be
overstated. We commend the United Nations for all of
its work on all aspects of mine action.

Together with countless community and civil-
society groups, results are being achieved. Casualties
from landmines have decreased in recent years and
that is worth highlighting. At the same time, there is
no room for complacency, as the number of casualties
from improvised explosive devices, on the other hand,
has risen sharply. These are generally used in conflict
and post-conflict areas, including by non-State actors.

Sweden fully shares the concerns expressed over the
serious post-conflict humanitarian and peacebuilding
problems caused by explosive remnants of war. We
need to do more to minimize their occurrence, effects
and risks. In that context, it is worth recalling the
significance of mine clearance in further enhancing the
possibilities for peacekeeping operations to fulfil their
work according to their mandates.

There is a growing awareness within the
mine-action sector that including a gender perspective
in activities will result in mine action having a greater
and wider impact. Women are often more inclined to
share information on threats, and women and children
often subject to risk from remnants of war in their
daily activities. We note with satisfaction that the
programme staff of the United Nations Mine Action

Service (UNMAS) is almost 50 per cent women.

All in all, Sweden has contributed over $100 million
to mine action worldwide over the past decade. The
Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency is a stand-by
partner to UNMAS and the International Committee of
the Red Cross, and conducts humanitarian operations,
including humanitarian mine action worldwide.

Sweden believes in an approach to disarmament
and international security that puts human beings at the
centre ofits policy. Sweden is a State party to all relevant
conventions banning or regulating the use of mines,
anti-personnel landmines and cluster munitions as well
as the handling of explosive remnants of war. Sweden
remains firmly committed to these Conventions and
their full universalization, which is the most effective
way to counter the risks associated with the use of
such weapons.

