The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam. I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their briefings. Viet Nam is deeply concerned about the continuing violence in the occupied Palestinian territories, which resulted in the death of nearly 3,000 Palestinians and 46 Israelis in only three months, between September and December 2019. We condemn all attacks on civilians, women, children - both Palestinian and Israeli - as well as assaults on civilian infrastructure, including schools, agricultural crops and civilian properties. While the prospect of the two-State solution has yet to be realized, it is imperative that all relevant parties exercise the utmost restraint, refrain from all acts of provocation or violence, end attacks against civilians and act in strict compliance with international law and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. That is the only way to ease the people's suffering and put the peace process back on track. We firmly reiterate our calls for Israel to cease all its illegal settlement activities and fulfil its obligations under resolution 2334 (2016), as well as to lift the restrictions on movement of people and commodities within the occupied Palestinian territories. We also express our concern about information regarding Israeli plans to annex the Jordan Valley and parts of the West Bank. We strongly believe that unconstructive acts, coupled with new, dangerous flashpoints in the region, will bring about only casualties and greater suffering for civilians, not solutions leading to sustainable peace and development in the region. We commend the persistent efforts of the international community, the mediation role of the United Nations and Egypt, and we support the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We commend all Palestinian efforts and initiatives of the United Nations and its States Members to foster unity and improve the living conditions of the Palestinian people in Gaza. Viet Nam reaffirms its unwavering support for the Palestinian people's legitimate struggle for their inalienable rights, including the right to self-determination and to become an independent and sovereign State. We strongly believe that the only solution for lasting peace and security is the establishment of a Palestinian State on the basis of pre-1967 borders, living side by side with the Israeli State in peace, security and mutual recognition. Given the destabilizing regional context, it is time for the Security Council to enhance efforts to prevent jeopardizing the progress made thus far towards the sustainable safety and security of the Middle East. While the root causes of the Middle East issues have yet to be addressed, Viet Nam is deeply concerned about the recent alarming developments in the region. We strongly urge all concerned parties to uphold the Charter of the United Nations, respect and fulfil their commitments, exercise the utmost restraint, refrain from any action that may further escalate tensions and resolve all conflicts by peaceful means, in accordance with international law. I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council. I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more than four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the text in writing and to deliver condensed versions when speaking in the Chamber. I wish to inform all concerned that we will suspend this open debate at | p.m. and resume at 10 a.m. tomorrow. I now give the floor to the representative of Norway.
