Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda and thank
her for her presentation of the eighteenth report of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), in accordance
with resolution 1593 (2005). Since her last report (see S/PV.6974), the situation in Darfur has continued to
develop, with some positive progress at the political
level, in contrast to the deterioration of the security
situation.
In regard to the political process, we welcome
the positive progress that has been seen in the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur and the Darfur Development Strategy adopted
at the Doha donor conference held on 6 and 7 April. The
traditional conflict-resolution mechanisms have been
reactivated and have demonstrated their effectiveness.
The joint efforts of Government and local authorities,
traditional leaders and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) are
reasons for hope, but they should be strengthened
and supported. The growing involvement not just of
UNAMID but also of the Government and the regional
authorities of Darfur has helped, if only a little, to
reduce tensions and thereby to avoid an increase in the
number of displaced persons, which is still at alarming
proportions.

However, peace in Darfur cannot be achieved
without first assuring peace and security for the people.
The deterioration of the security situation is due mainly
to violent intertribal clashes whose underlying causes are
generally connected to the control of natural resources.
Another aspect of the current insecurity that worries
us greatly is the increase in attacks on UNAMID. The
attacks are deliberate and demonstrate a willingness
not merely to circumvent the political process but to
intimidate UNAMID and cause its mission to promote
peace and reconciliation to fail. The perpetrators and
instigators of the attacks should be arrested and brought
to justice. Rebel groups that are deliberately attacking
civilians or are involved in attacks on Blue Helmets
must also be pursued. We should take all these factors
as a whole into consideration and act accordingly.

For its part, Morocco has always called for a
political settlement among all the parties concerned
in order to mitigate the suffering of the civilian
populations and reaffirm our dedication to respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights. We
also reaffirm our dedication to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Sudan. Morocco has always
shared its belief in the Doha Document for Peace and
its conviction that it represents the only possible way
out of the conflict and therefore should be more firmly
supported, so as to enable the root causes ofthe conflict
to be addressed.

The current situation in the Sudan deserves the
wholehearted attention of the international community
in order to enable the country to return to peace and
stability. The significant improvement in neighbourly
relations with South Sudan is also an important element
that we hope will have a positive effect on the evolution
of the situation on the ground. The Sudan has shown its
availability and willingness to cooperate with all parties
concerned, witnessed by the many agreements that
have been signed. However, the decision of the ICC to
blame President Al-Bashir does not enjoy international
consensus. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
the Arab League and the Non-Aligned Movement,
among others, have questioned the basis for taking such
a step. Perhaps it is time to look at a process that would
respect international justice without threatening the
countries' peace and stability. We should also clarify
the question of the cooperation of States that are not
parties to the Rome Statute, which find themselves in a
complex situation in many ways.

In conclusion, we believe that the long process
that will enable a return to peace and stability cannot
be achieved without the effective and coordinated
cooperation of all parties concerned, including regional
organizations and mediation mechanisms.

