We thank the Permanent Mission of France for convening today's very important Security Council open debate via video-teleconference on the issue of children and armed conflict. We also thank Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF, and the civil society representative for their insightful briefings. In the last few decades, particularly after the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) and the Secretary-General's effective outreach efforts, a comprehensive normative framework has been developed in protecting children's rights. As a result, the theme of children and armed conflict has been mainstreamed into the Security Council's work. The work done by the Special Representative and regular monitoring, reporting and action plans have all helped. Yet a lot more still needs to be done. Despite progress, violations and abuses of international law affecting children are rampant, and this disturbing trend shows no signs of abating. The facts revealed in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525) are stark. Children remain at the front line of armed conflicts around the world. The tragedy of children being used and abused in, for and by armed conflicts continues unabated, as the United Nations has verified that over 25,000 such grave violations took place last year alone. Moreover, the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic has further exacerbated difficulties in the protection of children affected by armed conflicts, with humanitarian agencies finding it difficult to conduct their work safely. Unfortunately, the scale and intensity of today's conflicts are stretching our capacity to protect children. Particularly in situations of foreign occupation and alien domination, we are witnessing the worst form of atrocities against children. Nowhere is this grim reality starker than in today's Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir. In this regard, I wish to draw the Council's attention to the latest report of the Secretary General, which has expressed deep concerns about the continued use of torture, pellet guns and illegal detention against children in occupied Jammu and Kashmir by the Indian security forces. The Secretary-General's report also raises alarm on the "the [illegal] detention of [Kashmiri] children, including their arrest during night raids, internment at army camps, torture in detention and detention without charge or due process" (SS/2020/525, para. 204). Accordingly, the report cites in particular 68 verified instances where children between the ages of 9 and 17 were detained by Indian security services in Jammu and Kashmir on national-security-related charges. In view of these serious concerns, the Secretary-General has urged the Indian Government to immediately end such practices and take preventive measures to protect children, including by ending the use of pellets against children. We are not surprised by the findings in the Secretary-General's report. Over the past 70 years, succeeding generations of Kashmiri children have suffered the brutality of the occupying Indian forces. In the wake of India's illegal and unilateral actions of 5 August 2019, these atrocities have been redoubled. Even after 10 months, the Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir remains under a digital and physical lockdown. Harrowing and spine-chilling stories abound - of widespread torture and arbitrary arrests and of how thousands of people, including children, have been removed from their homes by occupation forces in the dead of the night, taken away without a trace. Some have even been extrajudicially killed in so-called cordon- and-search operations and fake encounters. The worsening situation and increased attacks against children in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir as reported in the Secretary-General's report calls for the Security Council's intervention in the form of holding India accountable for its clear grave breaches of international humanitarian law and war crimes in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistan fully supports the mandate of the Special Representative, which is adequate for dealing with situations of armed conflict. While the mandate does not need accretion, we would like to see the political consensus around it strengthened. We firmly believe that the legal parameters of the mandate established by Security Council resolutions must be respected. Our singular focus should remain on situations of armed conflict. In this context, we wish to state for the record that the references in the report of the Secretary- General to certain situations in Pakistan are not within the purview of the mandate established to address children and armed conflict. We hope that this principle will be kept in mind in the preparation of future reports.
