Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the delegation of the United Kingdom
for its work in leading the negotiations on the drafting of
resolution 2307 (2016), which we adopted today in the
beliefthat it will help to consolidate and strengthen peace
at this hopeful stage for Colombia. Uruguay commends
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia - Eje'rcito del Pueblo for
the historic agreement reached on 24 August on ending
the conflict and building stable and lasting peace in
Colombia, which made it possible for us to adopt today's
resolution. My country acknowledges and highlights
the commitment and courage of the parties during the
four years of negotiations. The implementation of the
agreement will put an end to the last and oldest conflict
on the hemisphere, while consolidating Latin America
and the Caribbean as a zone of peace. My country also
acknowledges the ongoing efforts of Cuba and Norway
as guarantor countries, as well as the work of Chile and
Venezuela as supporting countries during the peace
negotiations. We are also grateful for the complete and
detailed report (S/2016/729) of the Secretary-General,
which informed the drafting of today's resolution and
which details the complex work still ahead, which we
trust will be concluded successfully.

At this new stage in the process, Uruguay reaffirms
its support for peace in Colombia and reiterates its
readiness and willingness to continue to work with
the parties in any way they deem we can be useful.
Uruguay is very pleased to point out that this was
a process initiated and led by Colombians, with
Colombians as the main focus of its future success.
We believe that hallmark of the process is an example
for the international community. We will continue
attentively to follow each step forward in this new
phase of the process in the same spirit of supporting
the Government and the people of Colombia at such a
crucial stage of their national history and that of the
entire American continent.

