Mr. Radomski (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for, as always,
a very comprehensive and insightful briefing.

I would also like to align myself with the statement
of the European Union to be delivered later on in
today's meeting.

Despite our constant calls for de-escalation in the
Middle East, there has unfortunately not been any
progress. On the contrary, we have failed to prevent
further losses of life. The humanitarian situation
of 2 million people in the Gaza Strip is even more
desperate today than during our last debate, in April
(see S/PV.8244). Limited access to basic services,
including health care, chronic energy crises and lack of
cooking gas and fuel can easily lead to the escalation of
social tensions that may destabilize the situation in the
region even further.

The ongoing protests at the Gaza border fence,
fuelled by Hamas and Islamic Jihad, have led to
violence, which affects both parties to the conflict.
Recurring rocket attacks from Gaza towards Israel,
as well as the launch of incendiary kites and balloons
from the strip, aimed at nearby Israeli communities, are
unacceptable and must stop.

We are also worried about the use of live ammunition
by Israeli security forces, which have resulted in a high
number of Palestinian casualties, including children,
journalists and health workers. Thousands of people
have been injured, which has put the Gaza health sector
under further pressure. While recognizing the right of
Israel to protect its borders and defend its legitimate
security interests, we urge Israel to ensure the
proportional use of force by its security services and
to respect the fundamental right to peaceful protests.
At the same time, Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad have the responsibility to avoid provocations.
Their actions represent a real threat with direct effects
on Israel.

The danger of another war in Gaza is real. That is
why we strongly urge all parties to de-escalate, exercise
maximum restraint and prevent incidents that jeopardize
the lives of both Palestinians and Israelis. Our main
goal should be the resumption of a meaningful peace
process. We continue to believe that only by returning
to bilateral negotiations, based on the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international law, will it be
possible to make a positive contribution to the process.
That is the only path to a two-State solution and to
resolving all final-status issues.

Establishing a political horizon, as well as an
appropriate framework for political progress, will
be possible only by working with our regional and
international partners, starting with the Middle East
Quartet. In that regard, we wish to underscore United
States engagement and peace proposals, which could be
helpful in reactivating the Middle East peace process.
The constructive development of peaceful solutions
would also require greater active involvement of some
countries of the region. In that context, we especially
thank Egypt for its important efforts in de-escalating
the situation in Gaza.

At the regional level, the situation on the ground
remains volatile. We share the Special Coordinator's
opinion that we risk a regional spillover of the conflict,
especially as the region already faces so many other
challenges. We should do our utmost to prevent any
further escalation and loss oflife. In that context, Poland
underlines the crucial role of the Security Council and
the United Nations as a whole, as well as the key role
played by Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov. Let
me reiterate that we support a two-State solution under
which the national aspirations of both parties to the
conflict would be met, including the Palestinian right
to self-determination and independence, as well as the
Israeli right to ensure its security and the normalization
of relations with Arab States.

We closely follow developments with regard to the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation and hope that the process
will be successful. We therefore urge all Palestinian
factions to work together to achieve a sustainable
process that would allow the Palestinian Authority to
resume its full responsibilities in Gaza. One single and
legitimate Palestinian Authority could be an important
step in securing the unity of a future Palestinian State
and a basis for a sustainable peace agreement.

In conclusion, let me briefly touch on Lebanon
and reaffirm our strong support for its territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence. The
long-awaited parliamentary elections held on 6 May
were conducted in a generally calm and peaceful
atmosphere. We deem them to be very important and
congratulate the Lebanese people. We support all
efforts to strengthen Lebanon's long-standing tradition
of democracy, freedom and diversity - a model for the
whole region of the Middle East.

