Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. I would
like to pay tribute to Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
Ms. Ann M. Veneman and Mr. Gabriel Oling Olang
who gave interesting briefings on this important topic
this morning. On the whole, Uganda welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2006/826). It will go a long way in
strengthening the machinery for protecting children
caught up in unfortunate situations of armed conflict
and generally preventing under-age children from
being recruited into armed forces. We welcome in
particular the operationalization of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and pledge our support to its
success.

However, I think the mandate of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict should be well defined
and should not extend beyond situations that appear on
the agenda of the Security Council.

Because of constraints of time, my delegation
will confine its remarks to paragraphs 107 to 111 of the
report, which concern Uganda. When the newly
appointed Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict visited
Uganda, a four-principle understanding on the issue of
children and armed conflict, as a basis for
strengthening the existing legal and policy frameworks,
was agreed on. Those principles are enumerated in my
written statement, copies of which are available to
Council members. I will not go through each one of
them, again because of time constraints.

We are committed to those principles. Although
the report acknowledges that the Government of
Uganda does not have an official policy to recruit
children, it goes on to assert, rather boldly, that
"children are present among the local defence units and
the Uganda People's Defence Forces (UPDF)"
(S/2006/826, para. 108). That is not true. Let me
emphasize that the existing legal framework and policy
does not allow the recruitment of persons below the
age of 18 into the UPDF or local defence forces. There
has been no recruitment into the UPDF - although
there have been some interviews - since the visit of
the Special Representative, and so no children could
have been recruited. On the contrary, auxiliary forces
are being demobilized in the Teso and Lango
subregions as peace returns to those areas. Further, as a
sign of cooperation, designated institutions that so
request have access to military institutions.
06-63153
The Government of Uganda respects its national
laws and its obligations under international
conventions and protocols against the recruitment and
use of children in armed forces. Sensitization of
various stakeholders to those laws is under way.
Whenever the UPDF has rescued abducted children
from Lord's Resistance Army rebels, they are
rehabilitated and reintegrated into society. Those above
the age of 18 who freely express the wish to join the
armed forces are recruited.

I am glad to report that the Government has
finalized its action plan, as promised, and will soon
discuss it with relevant stakeholders so that it can be
operationalized.

It is not correct, as asserted in the report, that
there are many reported cases of sexual exploitation
and sexual violence against girls by Uganda's armed
forces. One example cited in the report cannot justify
such a sweeping statement. The Government does not
tolerate impunity, and severe punishment is meted out
to any isolated case of misbehaviour on the part of an
offending member of the armed forces. The UPDF is a
highly disciplined force.

I want to commend Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for her good cooperation
with the Uganda Government. This is a marked
departure from her predecessor, who seized on every
opportunity, for his own hidden political agenda, to
demonize the Uganda Government. We certainly do not
miss him. He falsely listed the UPDF and local defence
forces in annex II of reports on children and armed
conflict as organizations recruiting children into armed
forces. We have been pressing for the removal of those
organizations from the annex. It is our hope that under
the dynamic leadership of Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy that will be done. It is not a favour; it
is the correction of a wrong.

Finally, Uganda commends the Security Council
for its presidential statement (S/PRST/2006/45) calling
for international support for the Juba peace talks and
for the talks to be concluded expeditiously, and calling
on the Lord's Resistance Army to immediately release
children, women and non-combatants. Moreover, we
commend Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for her press
statement to that effect. The Juba peace talks should
not be turned into a money-making business for some
people. We are looking forward to the day when the
children of northern Uganda will no longer live in fear
of abduction and all manner of atrocities.

