Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank the Bolivian
presidency for organizing this open debate.

We are meeting at a particularly poignant juncture
in the political history of the Middle East. Today, on
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Oslo Accords, the
sense of hope and optimism created by the two-State
solution has given way to despondency and despair. As
the fundamental tenets of the two-State solution are
being systematically dismantled in the plain sight of
the international community, it comes as no surprise
that there are few people in the region who believe that
peace can be achieved in their lifetime. Many more
question if peace is at all possible.

An unfortunate sequence of events has exacerbated
that sense of despondency. Long-standing resolutions
of the Security Council on the status of Jerusalem
have been flouted and cast aside. The illegal expansion
of Israeli settlements into the occupied territory
continues with intensity and impunity. The recent
Israeli decision to dismantle the Bedouin community
of Khan Al-Ahmar is only one more manifestation of
the occupying Power's long-standing policy of forcibly
displacing Palestinians from their lands. That measure
takes fresh aim at the roots of Palestinian identity and
their existence as a people. The killing fields of Gaza
continue to be drenched with the blood of innocent
Palestinians - over 200 civilians have been killed
since peaceful protests began in March, including
another seven on 12 October.

The decision by the United States to cease all
financial support for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) has not only cast a deep shadow of
uncertainty over the long-term sustainability of many
of its critical activities, including education, health
and social services, it also runs the risk of unravelling
the peace dividend gained through the work of that
important Agency. From its very inception, UNRWA
has served as a vehicle for political stability and social
cohesion in its areas of operation.

The humanitarian needs ofthe Palestinian refugees
should not be sacrificed at the altar of political
expediency and narrow interests, all the more so when
the prospect for a just settlement of the Palestine
issue remains more distant than ever. As members
of the international community, we must collectively
endeavour to preserve the integrity of the Agency's
core services to 5.3 million Palestinian refugees.

Pakistan's commitment to our Palestinian brethren
remains firm and abiding. As an expression of our
solidarity, Pakistan will make an additional contribution
to UNRWA this year. The international community
must also continue to lend its voice in support of a
two-State solution, based on agreed parameters and the
1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as the capital of
the Palestinian State.

As instability and violence continue to ravage many

parts of the Middle East, the imperative for diplomatic
solutions is more urgent than ever. Syrian stakeholders
are working towards the establishment of an inclusive
constitutional committee, and we commend the diligent
efforts over the past five years ofthe Secretary General's
outgoing Special Envoy, Staffan de Mistura, in pursuit
of the goal of a negotiated settlement in Syria.

Pakistan will continue to lend its support to a
negotiated settlement in Yemen, based on agreed
frameworks and through inclusive political engagement.
Immediate measures to alleviate the humanitarian
suffering of the Yemeni people must remain an
equally urgent international priority. The plight of the
Palestinians is as old as the United Nations itself. It is
also intrinsic and integral to lasting peace in the region.

Over the years, as international efforts to bring
an end to the suffering of the Palestinian people have
faltered and failed, the burning cauldron of anger and
pervasive sense of injustice have inescapably sown the
seeds of animosity and violence in the entire region,
fuelling instability and intensifying insecurity across
the Middle East.

If we want to put out these fires of conflict, we
must act decisively against injustice and oppression
across the region and across the world. It is time to
bring an end to the tragedy of Palestine. It is time to
inspire hopes of peace and mutual coexistence for the
entire region.

Despite the heavy odds, our pursuit of this worthy
endeavour should be renewed with even greater resolve
and determination.

