The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Lebanon.

I would first like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to welcome Mr. Vuk
Jeremic', Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and to
thank him for his statement. My thanks also go to
Mr. Skender Hyseni for his statement.

With regard to the security situation, the
Secretary-General has referred in his report
(S/2010/169) to incidents, including those affecting
minorities, not having increased in comparison with
the previous reporting period. Apart from that, the
security situation has remained relatively stable. We
call upon all parties to cooperate to bring about justice
and support victims, by ensuring accountability for
criminals. Such efforts will have a positive impact on
stability and security and serve to reassure various
groups. It is important also to improve institutional
mechanisms for the protection of human rights.

With regard to the situation in northern Kosovo,
we believe that sustained efforts must be made vis-a-
vis local communities. Any effort to ensure inclusion
for northern Kosovo must include open, flexible
dialogue and ongoing consultation with all
stakeholders. We call upon all stakeholders in northern
Kosovo to play a constructive role by encouraging
local communities to meet and enter into dialogue with
a view to finding practical solutions to sensitive issues.

With regard to the missions working in Kosovo,
we commend UNMIK for its work to strengthen
security and stability, ensure respect for human rights
and foster reconciliation through cooperation among
the various groups. We urge the Kosovo authorities to
continue dialogue and cooperation with UNMIK in a
constructive and practical manner. We welcome the
coordination among UNMIK, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force in the
context of neutrality set out in resolution 1244 (1999).

With regard to cooperation on humanitarian,
cultural and development issues, we welcome the fact
that in 2010 there has been an increase in volunteer
minority returns compared with 2008, according to
statistics from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. We commend efforts by
the UNMIK and the European Commission Liaison
Office to permanently resolve the problem of camps
for minorities. The number of those repatriated remains
very low. We need to ensure security and development
conditions that are conducive to returns.

The various parties to cooperate have committed
themselves to protecting the religious and cultural
heritage of the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo,
which is an encouraging step forward in protection of
that heritage. We commend the constructive work done
by the head of Greece's liaison office in Pristina as
facilitator of those efforts.

We call upon all parties to find practical solutions
to matters of common interest by moving away from
politicization with respect to the status of Kosovo.
There must be cooperation among all parties to
improve daily life of the people of Kosovo, irrespective
of their affiliations. We encourage Belgrade and
Pristina to adopt a constructive approach to ensure the
participation of representatives of Kosovo's institutions
in international and regional forums. We also call on
them to pursue constructive and direct dialogue aimed
at reducing tensions. Lebanon encourages peaceful
solutions to these problems, which can strengthen
regional security and stability throughout the Western
Balkans.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia has
asked to make a further statement, and I give him the
floor.

