The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Turkey.

I would first like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2010/446), and his Special
Representative, Edmond Mulet, and Ambassador
Merores for their comprehensive briefings. Let me also
add our sincere gratitude for the strong leadership
Mr. Mulet displays at the helm of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Indeed,
Mr. Mulet and his staff are doing a most commendable
job in support of the Haitian people and Government.

Nine months have passed since tragedy struck
Haiti once again, but the enormous suffering it has
caused in Haiti is still vividly remembered in our
minds and hearts. Indeed, the magnitude of the
earthquake and the loss of human life and
infrastructural damage it caused are neither forgettable
nor easily surmountable.

Hence, we are glad to learn that the immediate
humanitarian needs of the displaced population have
been addressed to a large extent, although there
remains much more to be done. In particular, the
number of displaced persons is quite high, and a
sustainable resettlement plan has to be implemented to
protect this vulnerable group, especially women and
children.

That having been said, it is quite admirable that
the security situation has remained relatively calm,
although there seems to be a slight increase in criminal
activities such as drug trafficking. Haitians continue to
teach us important lessons of humility and humanity.
However, due to the high number of displaced persons
living in precarious conditions, we have to remain
vigilant so that the security situation does not
deteriorate in a way that would endanger the ongoing
humanitarian assistance and stabilization efforts.

In this context, MINUSTAH certainly has an
important role to play, and there is still room to
increase the number of troops and police officers
serving within the Mission to reach the levels
authorized by resolutions 1908 (2010) and 1927
(2010).

MINUSTAH should also keep on building the
capacity of the Haitian National Police, but no matter
who has the primary responsibility, we cannot expect
security to be maintained through military and police
means alone. Political and institutional stability are
equally important, if not more so.

Hence, the presidential and parliamentary
elections scheduled for 28 November will be crucial
for the future of the country. Haitians cannot live
forever in transitional periods where uncertainty
prevails and short-term actions are taken to meet

urgent needs. They need and deserve a strong
Government and a functioning parliament that will
provide long-term stability. Thus, MINUSTAH should
continue to help the Haitian authorities in the
preparation of the elections and provide technical,
security and logistical support to the Government and
the Provisional Electoral Council.

Along with political and institutional stability, we
should also not forget long-term recovery and
development activities. The international community
has responded quickly and quite effectively to the
emergency situation in Haiti, but we have to do even
better in coordinating financial assistance from donors,
technical support from United Nations agencies and
MINUSTAH and the reconstruction plans of the
Government. Also, the pledges made at the donor's
conference should be made readily available whenever
and wherever they are needed, with a long-term
commitment.

In conclusion, the international community,
including MINUSTAH and the Haitian authorities, has
so far responded well to the challenges compounded by
the earthquake. But there is a need - and there is
room - to do better. Turkey remains ready to support
all efforts in that direction.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Uruguay.

