Mrs. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania):
At the outset, allow me to join other speakers in
congratulating Panama on having organized this open
debate on children and armed conflict. We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the Executive Director
of UNICEF and Jo Becker from Watchlist on Children
and Armed Conflict for their comprehensive updates on
this issue.

We wish to state our satisfaction with the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF in the
protection of children and the promotion of their rights
in situations of armed conflict.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed report on children and armed conflict
(S/2007/757) and welcome the recommendations
contained therein.

It is a matter of serious concern that many
children are losing their childhood and even their lives
as a result of ongoing conflicts in different parts of the
world. It is even more disturbing that, now, children
are not only caught in the crossfire of the warring
parties, but are more and more becoming deliberate
targets and unwitting victims of violence and abuse.
Children are forcibly turned into cannon fodder and
killing machines as child soldiers and are lured into
destructive covert missions.

My delegation is further concerned with the
escalating incidences of rape and sexual abuse of
children, especially girls, in times of conflict. We
strongly condemn rape and sexual violence and abuse
in all of their manifestations. The gravity of rape and
sexual violence and abuse lies not only in the physical
trauma they cause, but in the long-term psychological
trauma as well. Means to provide assistance and
support to victims of rape, sexual violence and abuse
have thus to be provided. We note the decline in cases
of sexual violence and abuse brought against
peacekeepers. We urge the Secretary-General not to
relent on the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse.

We also condemn the attacks on civilians and
public properties, especially those targeting schools
and teachers. Stern measures need to be taken against
all those who are in violation of international law
relating to the rights and protection of children in
armed conflict. We need to send a clear message that
those violating the rights of children, including those
recruiting children and using them to fight adult wars,
will be prosecuted with the full weight of international
law. We thus call upon Member States to end impunity
and to prosecute those responsible for violations of the
rights of children.

We commend the efforts of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone and the International Criminal Court in
prosecuting such persons and urge Governments to
support their work. We would further request the
Security Council to consider targeted measures for the
worst offenders, especially those who are repeatedly
mentioned in the reports of the Secretary-General.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism that has
been created through resolution 1612 (2005) has
invigorated our quest to improve the situation of
children in armed conflict. We are encouraged by the
positive results on the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, including the
creation of awareness and dialogue on the issues
affecting children in situations of conflict. The
mechanism also provides a good example of teamwork
and collaborative efforts among Governments, United
Nations country teams and civil society organizations
on the ground.
We note also that other countries that are not on
the agenda of the Security Council have volunteered to
implement the monitoring and reporting mechanism.
That is testimony to its usefulness. We would thus call
upon the Security Council to extend the monitoring and
reporting mechanism to all situations of children in
armed conflict, not only those on the agenda of the
Council. It is therefore important that the monitoring
and reporting mechanism be supported and adequately
financed.

We commend the efforts of the Security Council
and its Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict in following up on the reports from the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. We would,
however, encourage members of the Working Group
also to undertake field visits to see the reality on the
ground. We welcome the Working Group's adoption of
the toolkit on children and armed conflict. The Security
Council is encouraged to make greater use of the
toolkit.

While progress has been made on improving the
situation of children in armed conflict, the situation on
the ground is still unsatisfactory and is becoming more
complex.

We need also to address the root causes of
conflicts, as well as other political, economic and
social issues that can improve the situation of children
and other civilians in situations of conflict. At the same
time, we need to support the rehabilitation and the
reintegration of all children who have been associated
with armed forces. In that respect, there is an express
need for child protection mandates and child protection
advisers in all Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and Department of Political Affairs missions, as
appropriate.

In conclusion, we urge the Security Council to
continue to be seized with the issue of children and
armed conflict and make it one of its priority issues.

