Ms. Gunnarsdottir (Iceland): The continuing and
escalating bloodshed in Syria must be stopped. The
international community must unite to end the violence
and do whatever it can to foster a political and peaceful
solution for the sake of the Syrian people. We must
ensure that the regime, and anyone else responsible for
the horrible atrocities committed, will at the end of the
day face responsibility in an international court of law.

The conflict in Syria is already having serious
consequences on neighbouring countries, with the
flow of refugees straining their ability to cope, and the
artillery and mortar fire across borders. Additionally,
traditional transport routes are being disrupted, which
can have devastating economic consequences. The
truth of the matter is that if the Security Council cannot
agree on how to address the situation, then other forces
will determine the course of action. That does not
bode well for the Syrian people or regional stability. It
will do us well to recall that the Charter of the United
Nations confers the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security upon
the Security Council. The Council has to live up to that
responsibility.

In his speech during the general debate of the
General Assembly, my Foreign Minister said:

"The truth is that the Security Council has become
an obstacle to the international efforts to address
and solve situations such as that in Syria. We must
reform it so as to make it a tool, not a hindrance, for
progress in situations such as that in Syria this year,
or as we saw last year concerning the Palestinian
application." (A/67/PV18, p.4)

The Minister also left no doubt in his speech
during the general debate as to Iceland's firm support
for the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination. Accordingly, Iceland continues
to call upon the Security Council to vote in favour
of recommending that the General Assembly accept
Palestine's application for United Nations membership.
In the meantime, Iceland will support Palestine's
application for non-member State observer status
should the Palestinians decide to pursue that path.

It was a tragic loss of opportunity when the Security
Council decided not to accept the invitation to visit
Palestine to see for itself the situation on the ground
in order to put it in a better position to take informed
decisions on the matter. The Council is judged not only
by its actions, but also by its inaction, and we strongly
urge the members of the Council to reconsider their
decision.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is at the core of
restoring durable peace and stability in the region.
The occupation leads to violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, where
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem and the wall,
continue to top the list. The international community
needs to continue to speak out against those violations
and to take action accordingly. One should, however,
never loose sight of the main issue, which is to end
the occupation altogether and to realize through
negotiations the two-State solution, where both States
can live in peace and security side by side. That is the
heart of the matter. This is a conflict about land, and
that is why continued settlement activities are such an
obstacle to peace. It is, however, important also to be
aware that the settlements and the wall are reversible,
like everything man-made.

