The President: I would now like to make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

I would first like to join others in expressing
our appreciation to Mr. Zenenga, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Madeira,
Special Representative of the African Union
Commission Chairperson for Somalia, and Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for their comprehensive
briefings. I would like to bring three points to the
Council's attention.

First, Indonesia stands by its believe that the
continued and proactive engagement of the international
community is essential to supporting peace and stability
in Somalia. We welcome the commitment of the Somali
Government and the United Nations to strengthening
their cooperation and deepening their partnership. The
relationship between the two should always be based
on the fundamental principles of sovereignty, national
ownership and mutual respect.

My delegation supports the essential role of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) in promoting the Somali Government-led
inclusive political settlement, the development of a
functioning Federal State and the implementation of
the transition plan. Strengthening UNSOM's mandate
to support the 2020-2021 elections is a step in the right
direction. Those roles are especially pertinent as the
political impasse between the Federal Government
and the federal member states continues to threaten
the possibility of progress in key political and
security sectors.

Secondly, we are seriously concerned about the
ongoing threat and destabilizing activities of A1-
Shabaab, which extend beyond the Somali border. Its
attacks in Mogadishu have increased significantly over
the past two months, with incidents involving improvised
explosive devices taking place almost every day. Its
reported ability to manufacture home-made explosives
demonstrates that even if they are not actively fighting
they continue to come up with other ways to commit
atrocities. It is high time that we effectively cut off
Al-Shabaab from its sources of weapons and financing.

Against that backdrop, the continued presence of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
as well as its need for predictable and sustainable
funding, cannot be overstated. Since the Council is
about to deliberate on the AMISOM. draft resolution,
my delegation wants to emphasize that AMISOM. must
be reconfigured in a way that does not create a security
vacuum and takes the potential humanitarian impact and
the safety of the civilian population fully into account.
The Somali security forces taking over AMISOM's
security responsibilities must be adequately trained and
equipped. It will be vital to accelerate the necessary
capacity-building.

Thirdly, we must be aware that the efforts to promote
peace and stability are taking place against the tide of
a deteriorating humanitarian situation and yet another
severe drought, as Ms. Mueller mentioned. A third of
the population requires humanitarian assistance, some
5.4 million people are expected to experience food
insecurity and 1.2 million children are projected to be
malnourished in 2019. These are not simply numbers.
They are human beings.

With 2.6 million internally displaced persons,
Somalia has one of the largest displaced populations
in the world. We are concerned about the fact that
the 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan for Somalia is
critically underfunded.

The international community clearly has no
magic wand to resolve the Somali situation, but it
could - and obviously should - do more to alleviate
the suffering of the Somali people. Understanding the
challenging operating environment for humanitarian
actors in Somalia, my delegation urges all parties to
respect international humanitarian law and remove all
impediments to the delivery of humanitarian relief.

I should like to close by commending the Federal
Government for assuming ownership and demonstrating
perseverance in executing its comprehensive reform
agenda, some of which is beginning to bear fruit. We
urge continued and sustained political dialogue between
the Federal Government and the federal member states
to resolve their outstanding differences.

Lastly, my delegation pays tribute to the
contributions of UNSOM, AMISOM, the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia, and all other actors
working to bring peace and stability in Somalia.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.

