Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The
State of Qatar attaches great importance to the issue of
children and armed conflict. I therefore thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to
participate in this important discussion today. I would
like also to thank Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for her important efforts
and for her illuminating briefing.

Despite the almost universal ratification of the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child,
millions of children in conflict-ridden areas are, on an
almost daily basis, still subject to killing, maiming,
abduction, recruitment and rape or other forms of
sexual violence. Children who are victims of the
circumstances in which they live in those areas are also
subject to another type of attack that makes them
permanently vulnerable to practices that violate their

right to survival and development. Here I refer to
attacks on their minds that violate their right to the
very education and knowledge that develops their
ability to face the conditions of life imposed on them.
Their schools are targeted, their textbooks are burned
and their teachers are killed. Such conditions put
children in an environment that invites them to carry
weapons and subjects them to repeated economic and
sexual exploitation.

Just over ten years, Ms. Graca Machel submitted
a report on the situation of children in armed conflict.
In her study, she identified major gaps in the provision
of education in conflict-ridden areas. She highlighted
the need to ensure continuity of the different phases of
education, from early childhood education to higher
education, during times of conflict, and to stand up to
the repeated targeting of educational facilities. She
highlighted also the need to attach greater importance
to secondary education, which has become non-existent
in conflicts.

Since the preparation of that report, there has
been a better understanding of education and its role as
a mechanism of protection and a means for the
prevention of conflicts. Monitoring and reporting
mechanisms established by the Security Council have
become highly capable of detecting serious violations
targeting children in conflict-torn areas and have made
concrete progress in ending the recruitment of children
in some areas.

Despite those positive developments and the
creation of multiple legal and operational mechanisms,
education in conflict areas has reached a stage of the
utmost gravity. Statistical reports indicate that 43
million children in various regions of the world
affected by armed conflict are deprived of basic
education. Such reality puts us far behind on the road
to achieving the Millennium Development Goals,
which call on States to provide a full course of primary
education by 2015. Furthermore, the reports of the
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict note repeated and deliberate targeting of
schoolchildren, especially girls, and of teachers, not to
mention attacks on schools and educational buildings.

Despite international appeals that have been
launched to meet the educational needs in conflict
areas since the International Conference on Education
for All, in Dakar in 2000, education rates remain low
and in some cases non-existent in those areas. That is
why the State of Qatar has joined States and
international organizations that call for giving special
attention to the areas of education and the elimination
of illiteracy during and after conflicts.

Her Highness Sheikha Mozah Bint Nasser
Al-Misnad, Consort of His Highness Sheikh Hamad
Bin Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, has
had a major impact at the national, regional and
international levels in drawing attention to support for
education efforts in poor countries and in countries
affected by various conflicts, especially the education
of girls and young people and providing them with
skills needed for daily life, based on the belief that
education is the best means to contain violence and
establish peace and calm.

Her Highness has contributed to the integration of
education in programmes of humanitarian relief and
emergency responses in the State of Qatar. One of the
most important of those are the Reach Out to Asia
initiative, which sought to participate in the process of
rebuilding the educational infrastructure in many
countries, including Pakistan, Lebanon and Bangladesh.

As UNESCO's Special Envoy for Basic and
Higher Education, Her Highness has expressed her
concern in several international forums about the
consequences on education that result from tragedies
that triggers the flame of violence in areas of conflict.
This situation has prompted Her Highness to launch
many educational initiatives of international
dimensions, including the establishment of the
International Fund for Higher Education in Iraq to
confront the rapid deterioration that has afflicted the
educational infrastructure in that country. Qatar has
contributed $15 million to that Fund. At the end of
February Her Highness will sponsor the UNESCO
Regional Review Conference for the Middle East and
North Africa in Doha, through which she will seek to
mobilize regional efforts in order to reach a consensus
on the issue of the protection and promotion of
education in situations of conflicts in the region, with
special focus on the plight of refugees.
Her Highness has not hesitated to convey her
message, which aims to strengthen the global
responsibility to ensure quality education in times of
conflict and emergencies. She believes that such
responsibility needs to be extended to include the
United Nations system with all its committees and
organs, including the Security Council.

At this important meeting, Her Highness calls on
the Security Council to join the international campaign
to ensure that the utmost importance is attached to the
situation of education in areas affected by armed
conflict, within the framework of the Security
Council's agenda and to devote equal attention to
ensuring the right to education during conflicts and in
post-conflict peacebuilding situations through
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes, and calls
for the full enforcement of all legal and operational
standards.

The message of Her Highness emphasizes that
quality education has cumulative benefits, which
reduce the impact of conflict on children and help
prevent future conflicts. History has proven that.
Historically, lack of equal access to education has been
one of the root causes of conflicts such as the genocide
in Rwanda and the ethnic conflicts in Kosovo. In her
message, Her Highness stresses that the Security
Council should consider the issue of the lack of
educational opportunities for children and young
people during conflicts as one of the root causes of
existing armed conflicts, and not just as a product of
them. Such children and young people will be highly
vulnerable to becoming involved in military action and
sexual slavery if they are constantly denied quality
education. They would thus become a factor for
instability and for the continuing cycle of violence that
triggers conflicts and crises. That is precisely what we
are witnessing in today's world.

We recognize the importance of the concrete
results that have been achieved through the monitoring
mechanism established by resolution 1612 (2005) and
the important role of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflicts. It is therefore imperative that we
further develop workplans for existing mechanisms, in
order to ensure the right to education in times of
conflict and crisis and in post-conflict peacebuilding
situations. In that regard, we must take into account
fundamental issues, including, first, prevention, by all
means necessary, of the repeated and deliberate
targeting of schoolchildren and teachers, schools and
other educational institutions, by considering them to
be protected against any and all attacks aimed at
undermining and paralysing education; secondly,
putting an end to impunity for perpetrators of such
crimes against education and learning; thirdly,
including programmes to support the continuity of
education in emergency humanitarian responses in time
of conflict; fourthly, attaching great importance to the
education sector during the stabilization, peacebuilding
and reconstruction phases in such countries; fifthly,
providing continuous support once the emergency is
over; and finally, ensuring that those important aspects
are a strategic priority in the programme of work of the
Security Council and its various committees and other
subsidiary bodies.

We must not lose sight of the fact that children
are the most precious resource for building peaceful
communities. The Government of Qatar, with the
guidance and support of Her Highness Sheikha Mozah
bint Nasser Al-Misnad, will seek to cooperate with
international partners and international
non-governmental organizations for the purpose of
ensuring the right to education in conflict areas. The
Security Council must also renew its commitment to
international efforts for the protection and promotion
of the right of children to education, in order to
promote international peace and security.

