Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation, a member of the
observer troika regarding a settlement in Angola, is eager
that consistent progress be made in the peace process and
that peace and concord be speedily restored. Overcoming
the many years of conflict in Angola would not only be a
blessing for the people of that country and for all States of
the region, it would also represent a major success for
United Nations peacekeeping operations and for the
international community as a whole. Recent events in
Angola - the inauguration of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation - had strengthened our hope that
a final settlement of this conflict was imminent.

Unfortunately, these hopes, and indeed the aspirations
of the Angolans themselves for a safe and peaceful future,
have not been realized. More than that, there is a real
danger that the peace process may be reversed. The
deterioration of the situation requires very close scrutiny on
the part of the Security Council and the Secretary-General,
and also redoubled efforts on the part of his Special
Representative and of the United Nations mission in
Angola, as well as on the part of the troika of observer
States. In light of the developing situation it is quite
justified that there should be adjustments to the process of
withdrawing the United Nations military contingents from
Angola.

The international community is entitled to demand that
the Government of Angola - but, indeed, first and
foremost that the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola (UNITA) - fully and without further
delay carry out the remaining aspects of the peace process
and refrain from any further acts that might worsen the
situation.

This is precisely what guided Russia in drawing up,
together with the other members of the troika, the draft
resolution that is before the Security Council today. As is
clearly stated in the draft resolution, UNITA bears the main
responsibility for the present situation. It is that
organization's fault that the implementation of the
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol has been completely
paralysed and that we have not received any reliable data
about the upcoming disarmament and demobilization of
the armed forces of UNITA. UNITA is not complying
with the process of demobilizing its soldiers. There is
information that already demobilized soldiers as well as
new civilians have been enlisted into the army. And the
VORGAN radio station continues to broadcast hostile
propaganda. They continue to put obstacles in the way of
the representatives of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA). The statement by UNITA
on 11 August and, above all, its actual activities do not
constitute a satisfactory reply to the demands which have
been made by the Security Council. All this confirms the
fact the leader of UNITA, Mr. Savimbi, has no interest in
pursuing the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and
in transforming his organization into a genuine political

parts/-

The international community has frequently had
occasion to warn UNITA that such an obstructionist
attitude was unacceptable, expecting that these signals
would be duly heeded. Unfortunately, this did not occur.
UNITA is defying the United Nations and the Security
Council. We believe that the international community has
no other choice but to give an appropriate reply.

The draft resolution prepared by the troika contains
additional sanctions to be imposed on UNITA. These are
precisely targeted and concrete and will not effect those
representatives of UNITA who are members of
Parliament or the Government or who are cooperating
with the Joint Commission. Provision is made for
deferring the imposition of the sanctions and for the
possibility of their being lifted, as well as for the adoption
of further sanctions against UNITA if it were to fail to
fully and expeditiously fulfil its obligations under the
Lusaka Protocol. It is our belief that this sends a tough
but necessary and clear signal that the patience of the
international community is at an end and that it will no
longer accept either the obstacles placed in the way of the
implementation of the peace process in Angola or the
disregard of the international community's decisions.

At the same time we would like to express the hope
that the grace period granted UNITA will be properly
heeded, that it will allow that organization to take a sober
look at the situation for which it is to blame and lead
UNITA to carry out what it has long been expected to
carry out. We hope that this in turn will make it possible
not to introduce the additional sanctions against UNITA

 

contained in the draft resolution. This is what we sincerely
hope will happen.

