Mr. Yardley (Australia): I thank Special
Representative and all the briefers today for their
valuable briefings.

Australia congratulates Afghanistan on overcoming
significant security, political and humanitarian
challenges in 2017, and notes the progress made on
key reforms, particularly on anti-corruption and in the
security sector. We encourage sustained attention to the
challenges of the security environment, establishing a
credible peace process and the response to continuing
high levels of internal displacement.

We welcome the Afghan Parliament's recent
confirmation of 11 ministerial nominees to bring more
certainty to domestic politics, but were discouraged by
the failure to gain confirmation for the single female
nominee. Conducting parliamentary elections in 2018
will be crucial for political credibility. We encourage
Afghanistan to continue to work towards timely, free
and fair elections, and welcome the United Nations
commitment to providing electoral support.
The worrying trend of increased drug production
identified in the recent report of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime will also require increased
attention in order to avoid undermining security and
development gains.

While the security and political phases of transition
are important, it is essential that Afghanistan's
economic transition not be neglected. It is critical to
long-term stability. We are encouraged by growing
regional economic cooperation, which has seen
Afghanistan build closer trade partnerships with
its neighbours through 2017. We look forward to the
Kabul process meeting in February 2018 as a means of
continuing to draw together different peace initiatives
into a coherent and comprehensive Afghan-owned and
led peace process. We would also welcome enhanced
engagement between Afghanistan and Pakistan and
urge that priority be given to strengthening this bilateral
relationship, which is vital to regional stability.

Australia continues to work with partners in
support of the international response to Afghanistan's
challenges. We welcomed renewed international
commitments to Afghanistan in 2017, including the
United States and European Union strategies on
Afghanistan and the bolstered commitment of NATO
and its partners. Australia also contributed to that
effort, modestly increasing our military contribution to
the Resolute Support mission during 2017.

This has been a year ofreflection and realignment for
the international community's approach in Afghanistan.
We urge full implementation of the recommendations
of the strategic review of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and inclusions flowing from
these in the Mission's renewed mandate - especially
initiatives that address gender issues.

Australia appreciates the significant contribution of
United Nations agencies and their staff in Afghanistan,
and we would like to thank them for their close
cooperation as development and diplomatic partners
throughout 2017. As we move into 2018, we look
forward to a refreshed approach. We have a window
of opportunity to use the momentum of 2017 and see
tangible progress for Afghanistan.

The meeting rose at 1.45 pm.
