The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Cuba,
Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Nepal, New Zealand, Norway,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the Sudan, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 13 October
2003 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2003/988, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
on 14 October 2003 regarding the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem."
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the
current debate in accordance with the rules of
procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I should also like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 9 October
2003 from the Permanent Representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to the United Nations, which reads as
follows:

"In accordance with rule 39 of the rules of
procedure of the Security Council, I have the
honour to request the participation of Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, Permanent Observer of the League
of Arab States to the United Nations, in the
meeting regarding the decision by Israel to
proceed with the construction of its expansionist
conquest wall in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem."

That letter is published as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/2003/975.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees that an invitation under rule 39 should
be extended to His Excellency Yahya Mahmassani.

I invite the Permanent Observer for the League of
Arab States to take the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.


The President: I should also like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 13 October
2003 from the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the United Nations which reads as
follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC)
Group at the United Nations, I have the honour to
request that the Security Council extend an
invitation to Mr. Ahmad Hajihosseini, deputy
permanent observer of OIC to the United Nations,
Charge d'affaires, a.i., to address the Council
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure
in the course of the Council's consideration of the
agenda item 'The situation in the Middle East,

including the Palestinian question .

This letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2003/989.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Ahmad Hajihosseini.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Hajihosseini to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 13 October 2003 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which
reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice
in the matter, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, Mr. Papa Louis Fall, to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to the request contained in a letter
dated 9 October 2003 from the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, document
S/2003/973.

I should also like to draw the attention of Council
members to documents S/2003/974 and S/2003/977,
which contain the texts of letters dated 9 October 2003
from the representatives of Malaysia and the Islamic
Republic of Iran, respectively.

As a measure to optimize the use of our time, in
order to allow as many delegations to take the floor as
possible, I will not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the table. When a speaker is taking the floor,
the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, to whom I give the
floor.


