Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's meeting. It has been a
while since the Security Council discussed the situation
in and around Ukraine (see S/PV.7498), a situation that
is fluid and dangerous. The details have changed, but
not the basics. The Russian aggression has reached new
heights; it most certainly has not stopped. Crimea is
under occupation. Donbas is under attack. Minsk looks
like a jigsaw puzzle that has not been put together-
hopefully it will be. It is high time that we took a closer
look at things.

I thank my friend Lithuanian Foreign Minister
Linas Linkevieius for helping to convene this meeting.
I also thank the briefers - Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, Assistant Secretary-General Ivan
Simonovic, Chief Monitor of the Special Monitoring
Mission (SMM) of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Ertugrul Apakan, and
Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs John Ging - for their informative
contributions to this meeting.

Almost 300 days have passed since the adoption
of resolution 2202 (2015), by which the Council
unanimously endorsed the Minsk agreements. Months
have passed. Hundreds and thousands of people
have died. Why are the Minsk agreements not yet
implemented? Why has peace not been reached?

Reaching peace is a matter of motivation. Peace
is possible only if peace is wanted. Ukraine wants
peace, because peace is our chance at survival. Is
Russia motivated? That is an open question. Right
after the Minsk accords were agreed, in February, we
expected, at the very least, that the ceasefire would be
implemented. We expected to see the withdrawal of
weapons and troops within days or weeks. We expected
a final political solution to be reached by the end of
2015. That was the expectation when the parties to the
Minsk accords were signing them.

However, the ink of the Russian signature was not
yet dry when the Russian regular army, along with pro-
Russian proxies, launched a full-scale military attack
on Debaltseve. Ukraine kept suffering. It now seems
that Russia is still wondering whether that was enough
or whether it should go on. The actions in the small
town of Debaltseve were a tour de force, just a preview
of how Russia would "implement" the Minsk accords.
It started a pattern that we continue to see up to now:

sabotage, blockade and lies.

What did Ukraine do while Russia was tormenting
our minds and souls? It is very simple: Ukrainian forces
ceased their fire, as was verified by the OSCE among
others, and withdrew their weapons. The OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission got full access to all areas under
the control of the Government of Ukraine. Despite
endless provocations and shelling by Russia-supported
terrorists, Ukraine, in cooperation with the OSCE and
the international community, made every effort to
implement its commitments to avert a humanitarian
crisis. We have been paying social benefits to the
residents of occupied Donbas and to everyone who
is able to escape from the Russian-proxy-controlled
area. And we have given without the expectation of
reimbursement.

Ukraine is establishing special humanitarian
logistics centres and is carrying out projects on
infrastructure reconstruction, with thousands of
people coming to the centres every day. With the
withdrawal of the security clearance, teams have been
sent out to repair the damage to critical electricity
and water supply infrastructure. After an inclusive
national dialogue, including with representatives of
the Donbas region, the Ukrainian Parliament adopted,
at first reading, some constitutional amendments
on decentralization, stipulating a special order on
local self-government in certain areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions. Furthermore, as previously
mentioned, Ukraine presented to the Trilateral Contact
Group a concept paper on modalities for holding local
elections in Donbas. Finally, we have been providing
comprehensive support to the OSCE to enable it to
implement its mandate throughout the entire territory
of Ukraine.
But let us look at the other side. What has the Russian
Federation done as a party to the Minsk agreements?
It has done essentially nothing. Instead, Russia and
Russian-backed illegal armed formations have engaged
in provocations and massive assaults, thus rendering the
ceasefire exceedingly fragile. It has failed to withdraw
its heavy and lighter weapons, manoeuvring and hiding
them in the prohibited areas. It has blocked access by
the Special Monitoring Mission to the areas under its
control. It has refused to release hostages in Donbas and
the political prisoners being held in Russian prisons,
such as Nadiya Savchenko, Alexander Kolchenko and
others. It has hindered the activities of the international
humanitarian organizations in the region, including
Doctors Without Borders. It has rejected the holding of
local elections in Donbas in accordance with Ukrainian
legislation and international standards. It has impeded
any sort of involvement of the OSCE. And, naturally,
Russia keeps rotating and reinforcing its military
contingent in occupied Donbas.

Previously, the Council heard from the Russian
representative that Russia is not a party to the conflict.
It is the same old narrative about the conflict being a
domestic one. Once again, it has been said by the Russian
side, not just today but many times, that the Russian
military personnel there are simply on vacation. But the
truth can be proved in many ways: just two weeks ago
we exchanged a Russian major for one of our own who
was being held hostage. Russia can claim that Elvis is
alive, but no amount of lying can ever change the facts.

We need to think about why the Russian narrative
is so diametrically opposed to everything we have
heard today from all four briefers. Is Russia living in
a different reality? My answer would be, by no means.
We are continuing to hear the same propaganda from
Russia as we heard at the beginning, the reason being
that the Russians want a Russian Donbas in a Russian
Ukraine. Our simple goal is the full implementation of
the Minsk agreements. Through peace, we can have a
normal life and the return of law and order. What we
want is a Ukrainian Donbas and peace for the Ukrainian
people of Donbas in Ukraine. That is why Russia is
telling all these lies.

It is not Ukrainians fighting against Russia, but the
other way around. It is not Ukraine sending weapons to
Russia, but the other way around. And it is not Ukraine
annexing Russian land, but the other way around.

Since the Minsk agreements were signed,
Ukrainian forces and civilian locations have been
shelled or attacked more than 13,500 times. Russian
forces and pro-Russian proxies carried out multiple
massive offensives on Debaltseve on 15 February,
Maryinka and Shchastya on 3 June, Starohnativka on
10 June and Shyrokyne on many occasions. There was
a time recently when the death toll stopped rising. That
is over now. Things are deteriorating again. The trend
is very bad. The only chance to prevent things from
backsliding into full-blown is via a full commitment
to the Minsk agreements, not in words but in deeds.
They may not be perfect, but they are the only way
to end what is happening in Donbas. Ukraine is fully
committed to the agreements as our bridge into the
future. We will not burn them.

But why should Russia be motivated to stop
this? Things will not change until Russia changes
its attitude. It must adhere to resolution 2202 (2015).
It must implement all core elements of sustainable
de-escalation. It must cease armed provocations against
Ukrainian forces in Donbas, provide full access to the
OSCE missions to the State border between Russia
and Ukraine, verifiably stop supporting militants in
Donbas, withdraw its troops and weaponry from the
territory of Ukraine, start genuine, practical discussions
on modalities for the reinstatement of full control of
the border by Ukraine, and, of course, work clearly
towards a real electoral regime in accordance with the
criteria of the OSCE and Ukrainian law. If any of those
indispensable elements of de-escalation is sabotaged,
the outcome will be fragmented and unstable, as can
be seen today. To secure sustainable de-escalation,
coherent international action is necessary.

Back in March, Ukraine formally requested the
United Nations to deploy apeacekeeping mission in order
to support implementation of the Minsk agreements.
That mission, or its probable alternative -the expansion
of the mandate of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission - would be essential for implementing such
Minsk provisions as, inter alia, disarming the illegal
armed formations, monitoring and verifying the
withdrawal of Russian troops and weapons, delivering
and distributing humanitarian assistance and securing
an environment for local elections according to OSCE
standards. I urge the Security Council once again to
assume leadership in establishing such a mission.

Against the backdrop of the recent awful terrorist
attacks, we should not forget the innocent victims of the
crash ofMalaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. One year after
that incident, a group of like-minded States, seeking
justice for victims and their families, initiated the
establishment of an international mechanism that would
have the highest international legitimacy, effectiveness,
accountability and transparency for bringing those
responsible to account. Not surprisingly, only one State
blocked the adoption of the draft resolution in that
regard (see S/PV.7498). However, the Russian veto did
not discourage us, quite the opposite. The vote on the
draft resolution concerning the crash of Flight MH-17
was the moment of truth, and truth is what we want.
Ukraine is working closely with Australia, Belgium,
Malaysia, the Netherlands and other grieving nations to
identify another credible and effective mechanism for
delivering justice. Ukraine believes that the Security
Council should remain actively seized of th3 matter.
When the time is right, the Council must send a clear
message that it will not tolerate any infringements
on the safety of civil aviation and the delivery of
justice - first and foremost for those who lost their
daughters, sons, grandfathers and grandmothers in that
terrible disaster.

In violation of General Assembly resolution 68/262,
the Ukrainian Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol remain occupied by the Russian
Federation, which continues to pursue its policy of
oppression against the local population, espedially
Crimean Tatars and Ukrainians. I would recall that,
under international law, Russia bears responsibility
as an occupying authority. We call on Russia to
immediately put a halt to human rights violations and
allow international human rights monitors free and
unconditional access to Crimea.

Every war is a perversion. War perverts nature,
God and humanity. Still, history has not seen many
wars more perverted than this one. This is a war
between people who often speak the same language,
read the same books and listen to the same music. They
got along pretty well until propaganda convinced the
Russians that Ukraine was ruled by Nazis. It is a war
that officially does not exist, against an enemy that
never existed. It is a war that makes Russia feel strong
but that in reality makes it weak. It is a war of the past
against the future. We have to stop it. Let us use the
opportunity of Minsk before it slips away.

It has been said that a mistake repeated is not
a mistake, but a decision. More than 9,000 people
have died between 2014 and 2015 because of Russia's
decisions. The time has come for new attitude. Ukraine
does not want to impose anything on other nations. But
we will not sacrifice our own freedom for anything in
the world. All we want is peace and quiet and to decide
our own destiny - and once the aggression is over,
we definitely will. Those who came to make war must
go. Those who killed those 9,000 must, and will, be
punished. Those who were simply fooled by propaganda
can be forgiven. And those who thought they would
break Ukraine's will must realize that they failed.

