Mrs. Eilon Shahar (Israel): Allow to me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month and to thank you
for convening this important debate. My delegation
also congratulates the Chairpersons of the subsidiary
bodies on their able stewardship and thanks them for
their briefings this morning.

The struggle against terrorism is a global one
and, as such, the United Nations has an important role
to play in coordinating the efforts to combat that
scourge. States must remain vigilant not only in
meeting their obligations to prevent terrorism but also
in providing support to those States that lack capacity.
We therefore encourage enhanced cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
subsidiary bodies of the Council and other relevant
entities of the United Nations. We also stress the
importance of a comprehensive approach within the
United Nations system to deal with the threat of
terrorism and measures taken to address it. To that end,
we look forward to the review of the implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
this coming September.

While Israel has specifically experienced the
threat of terrorism, it is well known that terrorism
transcends geographical boundaries, borders and
nations. It is therefore incumbent upon all States to
adhere to their obligations under international law,
including the relevant resolutions adopted by the
Council, in particular resolution 1373 (2001). Some
States not only neglect their responsibilities to enforce
their borders and prevent the movement of terrorists;
worse, they host, support and sponsor terrorism. The
granting of safe haven to terrorists - as we see today
in parts of our region - is a threat to international
peace and security. The international community must
press for an end to State support for, and sponsorship
of, terrorism. Those States that lack the capacity to
implement their international obligations should be
assisted through the appropriate channels.

Resolution 1624 (2005) is part and parcel of the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED). We
note the Chairperson's reference in this morning's
briefing to the Committee's agreement to initiate
discussions to explore the technical assistance needs of
States in implementing that resolution. We emphasize
the urgency and pressing need to address the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) beyond
States' reporting. We believe that no counter-terrorism
strategy is complete without addressing the issue of
incitement.

In March of this year, the Council extended the
mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate. We support that extension and the
organizational change made within CTED, which
allows for better quality, consistency and flexibility in
its work. We appreciate the dialogue among the
Executive Director, the Chairman and Member States.
Those efforts have led to greater transparency and
positive engagement with CTED. We look forward to
their continuation.

Although nine years have passed since the
Council adopted resolution 1267 (1999), the
Committee's work and impact on countering terrorism
is more relevant than ever. Israel fully supports the
work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). We encourage efforts to ensure
that fair and clear procedures continue to be utilized in
the listing and de-listing process. We welcome the
further consideration of how to improve and expand
the procedures so that the lists remain imbued with
quality and not merely quantity. At the same time, we
note that much progress has been achieved under
resolutions 1730 (2006) and 1735 (2006). In that
regard, we look forward to the deliberations of the
Council in the lead-up to the extension of the mandate
next month.

On a related note, we support taking a fresh look
at the working group established under paragraph 9 of
resolution 1566 (2004) to consider and submit
recommendations to the Council on practical measures
to be imposed on individuals, groups or entities
involved in, or associated with, terrorist activities,
other than those designated by the Al-Qaida/Taliban
Sanctions Committee.

Similarly, Israel supports resolution 1540 (2004)
and believes it is a significant step towards the
implementation of international standards against the
threats of international terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). We are
committed to its full implementation, and we welcome
resolution 1810 (2008), which extended the mandate of
the 1540 Committee for three more years. In that
context, allow me to briefly highlight some of Israel's
national policies.

As a State facing conventional and
non-conventional threats, including missiles and daily
terrorism, Israel has taken legal and practical measures
designed to prevent the proliferation of WMDs. Export
controls have been put into practice through the
adoption of the control lists of the Wassenaar
Arrangement, the Missile Technology Control Regime,
the Australia Group and the Nuclear Suppliers Group.
That was effected by the entry into force, in January
2008, of Israel's Export Control Act. The list is updated
in accordance with international standards.

Extensive counter-terrorism legislation exists in
Israel. We are committed to act against any form of
support for terrorism. Accordingly, we actively
confront any attempt by non-State actors to develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or use
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
means of delivery.

I wish to note that Israel's support for curbing the
spread of weapons of mass destruction extends to other
mechanisms and initiatives as well, including the
Proliferation Security Initiative, the Global Threat
Reduction Initiative, the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism, the Container Security Initiative
and the United States Megaport Initiative.

As many know, Israel is a country that has been
forced to live under the threat of terrorism, before its
inception and since. The vast majority of Israelis have
first-hand knowledge of the devastating effects of
terrorism. For us, terrorism is not a technicality or
abstract matter; it is a reality with devastating
consequences for our civilian population. Israelis feel
the threat of terrorism today, whether from the north,
the south or the heartland. For that reason, Israel
remains prepared to continue to work with the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council to advance
its objectives and improve cooperation and engagement
with other Member States. We appreciate this
opportunity for dialogue and an exchange of ideas and
are prepared to continue to do our part.

