Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to brief the Security
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Liberia
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. It
gives me great pleasure to share with the Council some
of the main takeaways from my recent trip to Liberia.
The objective of my visit of 14 and 15 June was to
follow up on progress made in the implementation of
the peacebuilding plan; discuss preparations for the
upcoming elections; consult with stakeholders on key
reforms related to land rights and decentralization; and
identify ways in which the Peacebuilding Commission
can best offer support during the upcoming transitions.
I was fortunate enough to be able to meet with
a wide range of stakeholders, including President
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and Deputy Ministers from the
departments of internal affairs, foreign affairs and
finance, as well as the Ministry ofJustice. I also met with
representatives of civil society, youth representatives,
political parties, the National Elections Commission,
the Chief Justice and Supreme Court justices, and
representatives of the international community. At this
point I would like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Liberia and his delegation for being consistently
supportive of my Visits, and to say that working with
Liberia, as part of the Peacebuilding Commission, has
been an exceptionally good experience. It is a pleasure
to work with a country that is itself so committed to
working with the Commission.

In my meetings, I welcomed the dedicated, inclusive
and swift efforts of the Government and of the United
Nations to develop a peacebuilding plan in response
to the Council's resolution 2333 (2016). I also stressed
the importance of undertaking key structural reforms,
as set out in phase I of the peacebuilding plan, which
will help to address some of the root causes of conflict
in Liberia. That includes the enacting of important
bills on issues such as land rights, local Government
and domestic violence. I also urged all stakeholders to
contribute to free and fair elections, prioritize women's
strong participation in them and involve young people
throughout the process. In addition to the rich briefing
we have just heard by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, I would like to share the impressions
with which I left Monrovia.

As we have noted in the past couple of months,
Liberia is at a critical juncture. Several historic
transitions are under way. The situation therefore
requires, and deserves, the dedicated attention of
international partners in the months ahead. While
no one I met suggested to me that there is a clear or
imminent risk of a relapse into conflict, there are real
hurdles ahead as the peacekeeping Mission closes down
and the new Government takes the reins. We know
that the main root causes of conflict in Liberia must
continue to be addressed. Reconciliation, land use,
decentralization, access to justice, and violence against
women are among the more critical issues that are still
to be resolved and that will determine whether Liberia
moves towards a true and lasting consolidation of peace.
As we just heard, the limited fiscal capacity to take
reforms forward under the current Administration may
itself lead to increased grievances. Diversification and
revitalization of the economy are desperately needed.
On the security side, the overall situation remains
stable. While the Government successfully resumed
responsibility for its security as ofJuly 2016, there is still
work to be done to further build the capacity of security
actors, including the armed forces and the Liberia
National Police. Efforts aimed at strengthening access
to justice and the rule of law are equally important and
remain vital to fostering a sense of inclusion and social
cohesion and to building trust in national institutions.

In four months' time, Liberians will be heading to
the polls, and the preparations for elections are well
under way. They have been described as a defining
moment for Liberia, one in which the country will
see the first democratic transfer of power in its
modern history. Successful elections and a peaceful
transition will undoubtedly help to consolidate
democracy and good governance. During our visit,
the National Elections Commission was working on
a voter registration exhibition designed to address
irregularities in the registration process. As we just
heard, in a welcome move earlier this month, political
parties signed the Farmington River declaration on the
margins of the Summit of the Economic Community
of West African States in Monrovia, in which they
committed to peaceful elections.

The otherchallenges outstanding pertainto a funding
gap for the activities of the Elections Commission and
to controversies related to the application of the code
of conduct, and should be addressed and resolved as
soon as possible. In addition, we should stress the
continuing need for civic education, awareness-raising
and outreach to a largely disenfranchised population
ahead of the election, and for increased efforts to
ensure strong participation by women. The fact that
the election is taking place during the rainy season is a
complicating factor.

Asofnow,22politicalpartiesarefieldingcandidates.
Some stakeholders have expressed worries about the
fact that candidates may be running on personalized
platforms and may mobilize voters around identity
politics instead of running policy-based campaigns. I
encouraged representatives of political parties to focus
their campaigning on the key issues confronting the
country rather than mobilizing around tribal politics.
I commend the active and important role played by
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
generally, and the Office of the Special Representative
in particular, in facilitating dialogue in the run-up to
the election. In my discussions with both the National
Elections Commission and the Chief Justice, I once
again stressed the need for solid mechanisms for swift
dispute resolution and for managing run-offs, which
they confirmed are in place.

During my meetings with a range of stakeholders,
I noted a broad sense of ownership of the Liberia
peacebuilding plan. Its commitments set out a clear
road map for addressing the country's remaining
peacebuilding challenges. Financing for the
implementation of the commitments made remains an
outstanding issue.

In meetings with the United Nations system in
Monrovia, I discussed the kind of support that the United
Nations can provide in taking those commitments
forward in the light of the UNMIL drawdown and the
coming transition in the United Nations presence. In
that regard, I commend the United Nations country
team for having carried out robust mapping of its
capacities. I believe that it may be the first of its kind.

This has clearly been a highly useful exercise.
It has provided a clear point of departure and has
enabled the whole United Nations system in Liberia to
think strategically about the transition and about how
to increase capacity in the country team as UNMIL
leaves, so that it can take over support for residual tasks.
However, it also means that we have a very clear picture
of what will be needed in the future. It is worrying to
note that, as UNMIL draws down, the United Nations
will clearly face a cliff in terms of resources, capacities
and expertise for the support of peacebuilding.

Given those capacity constraints and based on the
Peacebuilding Commission's experience with the United
Nations transition in Sierra Leone, several members of
the Peacebuilding Commission have flagged concerns
about UNMIL's transition to the country team. The
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
could help the United Nations system to identify how
to responsibly manage the transition and how to ensure
predictable financing for peacebuilding in Liberia
during the critical transition phase.

We commend the efforts of UNMIL over the past
13 years. As the peacekeeping mission withdraws, it
will serve as a test case for the United Nations system
and Liberia in the fulfilment of peacebuilding and
sustaining-peace goals and tasks. Liberia has come a
long way since the conflict ended, and much progress
has been achieved. However, the current situation
means that the indicators of fragility continue to exist,
in particular insufficient progress on reconciliation
and on needed legislation for addressing the root
causes of the conflict, the weak economy and the
upcoming election, where the stakes are high. Liberia's
international partners have a collective responsibility
to make sure that the investments made over the past
13 years, through peacekeeping, are safeguarded, and
to build on those investments in order to consolidate
the peace in Liberia. That includes ensuring that the
remaining United Nations presence is configured
and provided with sufficient resources to respond
to the ongoing needs of the Liberian people through
peacebuilding support.

In his recent trip to New York, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General ElHillo stated
that

"Liberia represents a success story in peacekeeping.
We now must ensure that it is also a success in
peacebuilding."

That will require innovative thinking on how to secure
reliable resources once UNMIL has departed, and the
Security Council has a key role to play in the process.
For our part, the Peacebuilding Commission stands
ready to continue its political accompaniment, ensuring
continued international attention after the peacekeepers
have left and insisting on drawing attention to gaps. We
will undertake continued advocacy on the importance
of pursuing reforms that are central for sustaining
peace in Liberia.

