Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to welcome Special
Representative Mr. Zahir Tanin and thank him for his
first briefing to the Security Council. Malaysia looks
forward to working closely with Ambassador Tanin
in support of the work of the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). I also welcome Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ambassador
Vlora Citaku back to New York and thank them both
for their briefings.

Malaysia is pleased with the milestone achieved
by Kosovo during the reporting period, including
the signing of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union last month. We
sincerely hope that implementation of the Agreement
will bring stability and prosperity to the people of
Kosovo through good governance, the rule of law and
socioeconomic reforms. Malaysia also welcomes the
progress made by Kosovo towards the normalization of
its relations with its neighbours, especially the package
of agreements reached by the Prime Ministers of
Serbia and Kosovo that was facilitated by the European
Union on 27 August in Brussels. We also commend the
agreement signed between Kosovo and Montenegro to
delineate their borders. We are concerned, however,
by the violent protest by violent parties opposed to the
package of agreements and the territorial delineation
agreement with Montenegro. We call on the relevant
parties to resolve their differences through dialogue and
engagement, rather than resorting to the use of violence
and intimidation to achieve their political aims.

Malaysia commends the Assembly of Kosovo
for adopting constitutional amendments and laws to
enable the establishment of the special chambers to
try cases that arise from the findings of the European
Union special investigative task force. That significant
progress reflects the political will and commitment on
the part ofthe leaders in Kosovo to ensure accountability
and promote closure and reconciliation.

In view of the challenges faced by the region
and the world in combating terrorism, we applaud
the adoption, in September, of the five-year strategy
by the Government of Kosovo for the prevention of
violent extremism and radicalization. The strategy
and its action plan reflect the Government's strong
commitment in addressing transnational challenges to
counter violent extremism.

With regard to Kosovo's application for membership
of UNESCO, we are encouraged by the overwhelming
support shown for Kosovo last week, despite falling
three votes short of a successful application. Malaysia
supported Kosovo's membership of UNESCO, as it
would lead to further assistance and funding for culture
and education in Kosovo. We also believe that it could
ensure adequate international protection for religious
and cultural sites in the country. Despite the setback,
we urge the Kosovo authorities to remain steadfast in
their commitment to preserve cultural and religious
heritage sites and to engage in dialogue with the relevant
communities to address issues of mutual concern.

In conclusion, Malaysia stresses the need for all
parties in Kosovo to intensify efforts towards national
reconciliation among the various ethnicities and
religions and to ensure respect for human rights. We
will continue to support Kosovo to that end. I also join
my other colleagues in reaffirming support for UNMIK,
which continues to play a key role in promoting
security and stability in Kosovo. We also commend the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo for their immense contributions to
peace and stability in Kosovo.

