Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The resolution which has been adopted is the
result of many months of work on the draft, which
enabled us to improve it to a significant extent. The
nature of the export/import mechanism as exclusively one
of providing notification was strengthened, and it
reaffirms that it must not impair other non-proliferation
regimes; in other words, it does not create precedents.

We should like to draw particular attention, to the
Special Commission's obligation to provide, within a
short time, the information needed for the adoption, at the
national level, of measures to implement the mechanism.
It is also important that the resolution specifies the time
interval - between the adoption of the resolution and
receipt by the Secretary-General of the information from
members of the Council and other interested States -
needed for the adoption, at the national level, of
preparatory measures to ensure that the mechanism
functions effectively; paragraph 7 of the resolution refers
to this.

Taking into account all the circumstances and, in
particular, the importance of establishing the necessary
preconditions for lifting or softening the sanctions against
Iraq in the context of implementation by Iraq of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, we
considered it possible to vote for the resolution. At the
same time, we take it as given that, now that the
documents on the mechanism are approved, the
appropriate measures for implementing it will have to be
developed, and these measures will have to take into
account the well-known concerns expressed during the
process of agreeing on the draft.

In particular, Russia believes it important to work
out and finalize: the system and procedure for compiling
and transmitting notifications; guarantees on preserving
trade secrets in the notification process; spelling out the
competences of the basic organs operating under the
regime and the system whereby they will interact; and the
procedure for reviewing the mechanism and the records.

We understand that each Government must itself
determine which measures are necessary to meet its
obligations, in accordance with whatever regime obtains
within its country. At the same time, we believe that
additional clarity regarding the due dates, form, content
and system for sending notifications of supplies would
enhance the effectiveness of the mechanism.

We still have serious questions about paragraph 29
of the mechanism, regarding possible differences between
suppliers and the Special Commission. There is a need to

 

avoid situations arising in which the mechanism could
become the embryo of a policy of double standards. In this
connection, it would be useful if, in cases where the Special
Commission finds that supplies from any and every State
to Iraq may not be delivered because they exceed Iraq's
legitimate needs, the Special Commission were to submit to
the supplier State information on supplies of that particular
class of good by other countries.

It might seem that we are attaching excessive
importance to the details of the mechanism, but, as the
saying goes, the devil is in the details. The experience of
other international forums for export monitoring
demonstrates that it is specific procedures that determine
the content and effectiveness of a regime.

In light of what has been said, the Russian delegation
attaches great importance to the Special Commission's
giving a briefing, in New York, for experts from interested
States on the subject of implementing the export monitoring
regime in practice. We believe that such a briefing, with the
participation of representatives of the interested
government departments in the various countries, would
allow for a clarification and possible elimination of
existing concerns: taking those concerns into account
would enhance States' readiness for implementing the
mechanism in practice.

We believe that the mechanism is an important
precondition for the lifting of sanctions and in practice
can be put into effect only when Iraq begins to import
dual-use items and technology; i.e., in the post-sanction
period. The adoption of the resolution marks only the
beginning of the process. We hope that the goodwill we
have demonstrated today and our constructive approach
will be duly appreciated.

