Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On behalf
of France, but also in my personal capacity, let me begin
by paying special tribute to our colleague and friend
Samantha Power for her outstanding work and her
exemplary and tireless commitment to the values of the
United Nations. Ambassador Power is an exceptional
person, and I address to her from the bottom of my
heart my friendship and most cordial personal and
professional wishes for all the best in the next chapter
in her life.

I would also like to congratulate our Italian
colleague, Mr. Sebastiano Cardi, for having taken over
from our Spanish colleague the role of facilitator of the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

Almost a year ago, on 16 January 2016, the Council
received assurances from the International Atomic
Energy Agency that Iran had successfully implemented
the preliminary actions related to the nuclear field and
specified in the agreement concluded on 14 July 2015
in Vienna between the E3+3 and Iran, paving the way
for its implementation. The adoption of the Vienna
agreement and its endorsement by the Council, through
resolution 2231 (2015), marked an important step, as
it strictly governed Iran's nuclear activities over the
life of the agreement, with the ultimate objective of
re-establishing, in the end, confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. At
that time, we welcomed this important achievement,
with regard both to our sustained efforts aimed at
non-proliferation and, more broadly, for stability in the
region and for international peace and security.

Over the past year, the E3+3 countries have
implemented their commitments in full. A very close
follow-up of the implementation of Iran's nuclear
commitments has been put in place with a view to
promoting transparency and efficiency. In that context,
France fully supports the rigorous implementation of
all the provisions of the agreement and the monitoring
of the commitments of the parties over the long term.
The International Atomic Energy Agency has a crucial
role and has been diligently pursuing its verification
and monitoring activities of Iran's implementation of
its nuclear commitments, in accordance with the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).

I would also like to express our satisfaction
with the recent publication of documents approved
between the E3+3 and Iran in the framework of the
Joint Commission established by the agreement.
It contributes to the proper implementation of the
agreement by increasing transparency towards the
entire international community in the monitoring of
the implementation of the Iranian commitments. It
allows everyone to see the detail and modalities of
verification of Iranian commitments under the Vienna
agreement and to evaluate compliance with them in an
informed manner.

In that context of rigor and transparency, we see that
the benefits of the agreement for Iran are beginning to
be felt. On the economic and commercial front, bilateral
trade between France and Iran has increased by 200 per
cent in value since January 2016. Iranian oil exports
are continuously increasing. The French Government,
in conjunction with its partners in the European Union,
has continued its efforts to provide companies with the
necessary information and guidance on the lifting of
sanctions in order to support their return to Iran. We
will continue along that path.

Furthermore, in the nuclear field and within the
framework strictly determined by the agreement and
in accordance with its provisions, our two countries
have initiated discussions on the launching of bilateral
cooperation inthe area ofsecurity and in certain fields of
magnetic confinement fusion. Finally, several requests
for the transfer of goods whose export is governed by
resolution 2231 (2015) have been submitted through the
procurement channel established by the agreement and
have been approved by the members of the Council.
Nevertheless, the establishment of a climate of lasting
confidence requires full respect for the commitments
made not only under the Vienna agreement but also
under resolution 2231 (2015), which endorsed it.

I would like to express our concern with regard to
the information on Iran's failure to comply with several
important provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) over
the past six months, which is contained in the full and
factual report (S/2016/1136) that was presented to us.
We remain very concerned about the information that
has been detailed to us today. I am referring, of course,
to the Iranian arms seizures in 2016, mentioned in the
report, by Australia and the Combined Maritime Forces
and by my own country, which constitute violations of
annex B of resolution 2231 (2015). In the same vein, I
am referring in particular to the information available
to us on the arms transfers between Iran and Hizbullah,
which are of great concern to us.

Furthermore, we are equally concerned about
the information relating to the travel abroad of Major
General Soleimani and Brigadier General Naqdi,
even though they are subject to a travel ban decided
by the Security Council and confirmed by resolution
2231 (2015 ). It is essential for regional stability and
international security that Iran should refrain from any
destabilizing activities.

Finally, we note the lack of information received
on activities in the field of ballistic missiles designed
to be capable of carrying nuclear weapons. We will
remain vigilant about the continuation by Iran of any
such activity, contrary to resolution 2231 (2015), and
the spirit of the Vienna agreement, and contradicting
the objective of consolidating regional stability.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the need to
maintain our collective commitment to ensuring the
long-term implementation of all the provisions of the
Vienna agreement and of resolution 2231 (2015) in the
same spirit of cooperation that favoured the conclusion
of the agreement. The continuation of the diplomatic
success that the conclusion of the Vienna agreement
and the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015) represent
requires strict and transparent compliance in the long
term with all their provisions. France will therefore
remain vigilant and will contribute to the vigilance of
the Security Council throughout the process.

