Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate during this
very first month of the year. I also thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Fernandez-
Taranco, for his important briefing.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by Ambassador Abdelaziz of Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

This month last year saw the adoption by this
Council of resolution 1860 (2009) as a result of
intensive negotiations among concerned parties
following Israel's offensive on 27 December 2008 in
Gaza. A year later, assessments of the situation in the
Middle East once again attest to its severity on
multiple fronts. No substantive progress has been made
towards a durable ceasefire between the parties
concerned, the required resumption of peaceful
negotiations on final status or the sustained opening of
border crossings. Israel has yet to cease its unilateral
and provocative construction and expansion of
settlements and the separation wall, its demolition of
Palestinian homes and eviction of their families, and its
revocation of residency permits, thus directly
endangering and altering the demographic composition,
character, nature and status of the occupied Palestinian
territory. The humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip
remains shocking and is a causal effect of the
restrictions and blockade imposed on the local
population. The recent resurgence of sporadic rocket
attacks against civilians in southern Israel again stirs
up deep worries.

The vicious cycle of violence and counter-
violence has sowed the seeds of confrontation,
animosity and incitement for too long. In order to
achieve a breakthrough into a new period in which an
independent State of Palestine can thrive and all
peoples in the region can co-exist in peace and
security, all parties concerned should uphold their
mutual obligations under the Road Map, the Madrid
terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Constructive
dialogue and political negotiations must be put first,
whereas the military option should be excluded.

Israel must immediately freeze illegal settlement
activity, dismantle outposts erected since March 2001,
open all border crossings, release all Palestinian
prisoners and facilitate humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction efforts in Gaza. That State must do so
with the utmost urgency and responsibility.

Palestinian factions must make sincere efforts to
resolve their differences within the framework of
intra-Palestinian reconciliation and jointly work
towards the establishment of a Government of national
unity. In the interest of long-term regional peace and
justice, we reiterate our calls for all the parties
concerned to strictly comply with international
humanitarian and human rights law and conduct,
without delay, credible domestic investigations into
the many reported allegations of violations, as
recommended by the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48).

In this overall situation, my delegation again
acknowledges the intensified efforts of the Quartet, the
League of Arab States, regional countries and the
international community at large in helping to achieve
a two-State solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict and
to revitalize the Middle East peace process on all
tracks.

We recognize the Palestinian National Authority's
determination, under difficult circumstances, to embark
on practical policies and measures to strengthen
socioeconomic foundations, security sector reform and
functional institutions for a future State. We join the
repeated calls from the wider membership of the
United Nations and from many different parts of the
world for peace, reconciliation and mediation in the
Middle East.

Turning to Lebanon, we welcome and support the
efforts undertaken by the Lebanese Government to
strengthen the national course of peace consolidation,
socio-economic reconstruction and the normalization
of external relations, and encourage the parties in
Lebanon to jointly contribute to these endeavours. We
demand that Israel immediately and unconditionally
cease all violations of Lebanese independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, including by
ceasing flights over Lebanese territory and withdrawing
from the northern part of Al-Ghajar village and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line. We reiterate our
support for the full implementation of resolution 1701
(2006).

Finally, as it always has, Viet Nam continues to
commit itself to joining the international community's
collective efforts towards the peaceful settlement of the
Israel-Palestine and Arab-Israeli conflicts and the
ultimate attainment of a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

