Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): I would also like to
join others in thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his in-depth but disturbing briefing that we
have heard.

While Croatia associates itself with the European
Union statement to be delivered later today, I would
like to make a few additional remarks. Croatia has
joined the Council at a moment marked by renewed
hope for reaching a peaceful compromise in the Middle
East, after the promising outcome of the Annapolis
Peace Conference. The commitment with which both
sides promptly began bilateral negotiations was
reassuring. It is therefore disturbing to begin 2008 with
a debate on the Middle East that was prompted by the
recent upsurge in violence and worsening humanitarian
conditions on the ground. The deteriorating
humanitarian situation and the suffering of the civilian
population in Gaza is cause for our deep concern. The
recently imposed restrictions are all the more troubling,
given that they affect an area where already four out of
every five persons are dependent on foreign aid to
satisfy their basic needs.

We are seriously alarmed by the escalation of
deadly violence in and around Gaza. We share the
concern that the hostilities will hurt the chances for
peace that have been generated by the political process,
and we urge an immediate end to the hostile acts from
both sides. Once again, it should be stressed that both
parties are under the obligation to comply with
international humanitarian law and to respect the lives
and well-being of civilians. We fear that
disproportionate reactions and measures that affect the
population as a whole are a serious detriment to the
peace process.

We are encouraged by the news that the
Government of Israel is easing the restrictions imposed
last week on Gaza and hope to see an increasing
number of crossing points opened and the continued
provision of essential services. That said, let me stress
that we recognize Israel's legitimate security concerns
and its right to self-defense, and we call for an
immediate end to the continuing rocket and sniper
attacks on Israeli soil.

We believe that progress in the political and
diplomatic process remains inextricably linked to
tangible improvements on the ground. The sense of
vulnerability caused by the deteriorating humanitarian
conditions in Gaza and exacerbated by the latest crisis
is dangerously destabilizing, as is the continued firing
of rockets into Israeli territory. We therefore call upon
all sides to act with prudence and restraint and to
follow up on the commitments agreed to at the
Annapolis Conference, notably, to continue to
negotiate in good faith, while implementing the
obligations contained in the first phase of the Road
Map.

