Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): I should like to join previous speakers in
congratulating you, Mr. President, as well as the entire
Congolese delegation for its excellent performance in
the Security Council and for the brilliant presidency of
this important United Nations organ for the month of
August. We also wish to congratulate you for
organizing today's debate and for the quality of the
document circulated to underpin our discussion with
regard to the role of the Security Council in preventing
conflict, particularly in Africa.

I should also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of People's Republic of China for his
outstanding presidency of the Council in July. I would
also like to wish every success to the new
representative of France and his team, who will preside
over the Security Council during September 2007.

Conflict prevention should be the primary
function of the United Nations, and specifically of the
Security Council, as it carries out its mission to
maintain international peace and security. Although the
United Nations has in the past limited itself to acting as
a firefighter, in recent years it has had limited success
in emphasizing prevention.

Since the issuance of the Secretary-General's
excellent report (S/1998/318) entitled "The causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa", several ideas have
been proposed regarding the crucial question of
conflict prevention and the role of the Security Council
as regards peace and security, especially in Africa. The
report also included several positive concrete measures
to prevent and resolve conflicts in Africa. While it
emphasized the need to eradicate the causes of conflict
in such areas as governance, human rights and
democracy, the report also underscored the crucial need
to address such matters as combating poverty and the
illegal flow of small arms and light weapons.
Poverty poses the ongoing threat of
discontentment, which can easily be exploited by the
enemies of peace to destabilize States. There is
therefore an urgent need to assist African countries, as
well as other countries, undergoing economic
difficulties. It is therefore essential that we support
development programmes by increasing official
development assistance, reducing the debt burden,
increasing the price of commodities and raw materials
from developing countries and ensuring access to the
markets of developed countries for the goods of
developing countries. Neglecting those considerations
runs the risk of further marginalizing developing
countries, undermining their efforts to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals and putting at further
risk of conflict and, as a result, of destabilization.

With the support of the United Nations, as it
should be recognized, the countries of Africa have put
in place prevention mechanisms and other confidence-
building measures aimed at establishing an atmosphere
conducive to peace and security, which is essential to
development. For its part, as the document circulated
by the President indicates, the Central African
subregion has, among other things, put in place an
early-warning mechanism and a multilateral force for
Central Africa. However, these mechanisms run up
against the financial difficulties afflicting the Member
States that also have to deal with other major
challenges, not only in terms of development but also
on the health front, in particular with regard to the
HIV/AIDS pandemic.

However, these prevention and conflict resolution
measures introduced in Africa have been effective.
This has been borne out by the Ouagadougou
agreements, which recently brought an end to the crisis
in C6te d'Ivoire, and the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB) in 1966. It is unfortunate that in the latter
case, the efforts made both by MISAB and by the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic were not supported by donors in the context
of peacebuilding, despite the promises that were made
during the international conference held in 2000 on the
subject of the Central African Republic.
The Peacebuilding Commission, which aims at
helping countries to achieve the difficult transition
from war to peace, was established at an opportune
time to deal with this type of situation. My country
welcomes the involvement of the financial institutions
in the work of that body.

In its efforts to promote a culture of conflict
prevention, the Security Council should also ensure
that all member States - and I do mean all Member
States - respect the established weapons embargo
regimes. This is necessary in order to stop weapons
from falling into the hands of small unscrupulous
groups who use them to destabilize democratic
regimes, spread insecurity or plunder natural resources
or other wealth. In this regard, the measures taken
under the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme to
issue certificates of origin to combat the sale of blood
diamonds should be scrupulously applied and
translated into reality.

In conclusion, my delegation considers that while
it is necessary to promote social justice through
democracy and the sharing of the fruits of expansion,
at the same time greater coordination between the
Security Council and regional arrangements under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations is
also vital. We are happy to note in this regard the
agreement that was entered into between the United
Nations and the African Union in September 2006.
Likewise, specific support to regional mechanisms for
the promotion and maintenance of peace will make a
contribution to preventing and resolving conflicts. My
delegation also urges that the proposal by the former
Secretary-General contained in paragraph 118 of his
progress report on conflict prevention (A/60/891)
should also be taken into account.

Again, Mr. President, my congratulations to your
delegation for the hard work you have done.

