Mr. Zannier: The report before the Council
(S/2011/281) describes the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 16 January to 15 April 2011. Today, I
wish to update members on recent developments and,
more generally, on the key current issues concerning
Kosovo.

In the wake of the latest constitutional crisis,
which was resolved with the election by the Kosovo
2

Assembly of Ms. Atifete Jahjaga as President, Kosovo
now appears to be heading towards a period of
increased political stability. This in turn should be
conducive to further progress in the dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade, which is key to finding solutions
to the unresolved issues that hamper Kosovo's
development.

The dialogue has gotten off to a positive start
with three face-to-face meetings between the Serbian
and the Kosovo representatives to date, during which
discussions have focused on issues of importance to
the day-tO-day lives of Kosovo's inhabitants, including
civil registration, freedom of movement, and
telephony. UNMIK, though not physically present in
the discussions, has been supporting the dialogue
process and cooperating both with the European Union
facilitation team and with the two sides, and will
continue to support the process in any way that is
helpful.

I am hopeful that both Pristina and Belgrade will
demonstrate the resolve needed to find solutions to all
relevant issues in a constructive spirit so as to solve
problems for all communities, as well as to create
better conditions for progress on reconciliation and for
the further advancement of the entire region towards a
common European future. I consider particularly
positive the fact that today there was a meeting in
Pristina between local senior Government officials and
the Serbian chief negotiator, and I hope that this may
pave the way for future progress in the engagement
between the two sides. On a less positive note,
however, I regret to inform the Council that a street
protest against the visit escalated into violence that
resulted in a number of injuries. Such violence
undermines the dialogue and needs to be firmly
condemned.

In general, allow me to point out that it is
essential, particularly during this phase, for the parties
to approach the situation on the ground cooperatively
and with due respect for the concerns of all the
communities. Solutions that foster trust between
Kosovo's communities stand a much greater chance of
serving the interests of long-term peace and stability.

One area where relations between the
communities are particularly difficult is the north of
Kosovo. Work has largely concluded on renovating the
courthouse in northern Mitrovica, which was the scene
of an occupation and action to regain the court just
11-33372
over three years ago that resulted in the death of an
UNMIK police officer and scores of injured. Since
those events, only a small group of international judges
and prosecutors - a first UNMIK staff and now
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) staff - have been working in the courthouse
intermittently. Nonetheless, the issues that led to the
occupation remain unresolved and still contentious. In
order to restore a fully functioning administration of
justice in northern Kosovo, which should not be further
delayed. There needs to be progress in the engagement
between the sides and with the communities that the
court will serve.

Another controversial issue related to the north of
Kosovo is the census, which was held in the rest of
Kosovo last month. The United Nations Office for
Project Services (UNOPS), as a status-neutral entity,
agreed to conduct the census in northern Kosovo, and
UNMIK supported this process by facilitating meetings
between UNOPS and local institutions in the north and
by providing support through the UNMIK-run
administration for north Mitrovica.

It was expected that the census in northern
Kosovo would begin in early May but, regrettably, as
of today there is no start date. The process has been
unduly politicized, and UNOPS reports that
cooperation from local institutions on a number of
operational aspects has not been forthcoming, in
particular with regard to the formation of local census
commissions and the recruitment of field staff. This
situation, if not rectified, will be detrimental for
everybody. Without the proper collection of data on the
dimension and composition of the communities, it will
be more difficult to plan the much-needed
interventions to promote the economic and social
development of the region.

Looking more generally at the state of the
economy in Kosovo, referred to in some detail in the
Secretary-General's report, the situation remains of
concern due to high unemployment and heavy public
spending, notably on public sector wages and transport
infrastructure, which has led to the suspension of
substantial external budget support by the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the
European Commission. Although there are
expectations of significant economic growth, there is
still a lack of foreign investment. Moreover, inflation is
rising, and in March the consumer price index was
10.8 per cent higher than it had been one year before.
11-33372

The IMF and some recognizing States have offered
advice and support to the Kosovo authorities in
developing more realistic economic programme. It is
now expected that the Kosovo authorities will focus
their energies and attention on carrying out the
necessary adjustments.

The lack of economic prospects is also one of the
main obstacles to the returns process, which remains
disappointingly slow and in some instances
unsustainable. Although in 2010 minority returns were
greater than at any other time in the past six years,
totalling 2,275 individuals, the first quarter of 2011
shows a 53 per cent decrease in voluntary returns
compared to last year, with Kosovo Serbs constituting
fewer than one in four returnees. While the policy of
the Kosovo authorities remains open to encouraging
returns, we have witnessed persisting problems at the
local level, where economic pressures and lack of
reconciliation have created tensions between receiving
communities and returnees.

The lack of reconciliation is in fact another key
impediment to returns. Despite the dialogue and
occasional attempts by various bodies, mainly
non-governmental organizations, reconciliation
remains an issue that has been insufficiently tackled.
Nevertheless, the continuing efforts being made to
clarify the fates and locations of missing persons and
to identify their bodily remains - an essential part of
the overall process of reconciliation - are resulting in
slow but steady progress. As I have noted in past
addresses to the Council, UNMIK supports efforts by
Pristina, Belgrade, EULEX and the International
Committee of the Red Cross to identify all of Kosovo's
missing persons, as well as to investigate their
disappearance and bring those responsible to justice.

In this regard, allow me now to turn to the
Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly
resolution 1782 (2011), calling for an investigation of
allegations of inhuman treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo, which was
based on a report by the Parliamentary Assembly's
Rapporteur, Dick Marty. It is essential for these
allegations to be subject to a thorough, impartial and
independent investigation, conducted promptly, for the
sake of the victims and their loved ones, as well as for
the sake of those whom it is alleged were responsible
for the crimes. As noted in the Secretary-General's
report, EULEX has stated that it has the ability to
handle the case, while the Serbian Government has
proposed the establishment of an ad hoc mechanism
under the authority of the Security Council. In any
event, UNMIK remains fully available to cooperate
with such an investigation, in the awareness that while
these allegations are pending, it will be even harder for
reconciliation to take root.

Following further progress in the so-called
unfixing of Kosovo Force (KFOR) protection of a
number of key Serbian Orthodox Church sites, the
Kosovo Police has taken over protection
responsibilities, thus far without incident. However, the
Secretary-General's report mentions the discovery of
the theft of 13 square metres of lead sheet roofing from
the Virgin Ljeviska church in Prizren. Events such as
this could seriously undermine the Serbian Orthodox
Church's confidence in the protection offered by the
Kosovo Police. For this reason ,I requested KFOR,
which was initially in charge of protection for this
church, to provide information on the matter. On
3 May, KFOR Commander Major General Erhard
Biihler, informed me that a German military police
investigation had determined, based upon photographic
evidence and witness statements, that the lead sheeting
was in fact most likely removed between April and
July 2008, when the church was guarded by a private
security company. Kosovo Police assumed
responsibility for guarding the church in February
2009.

Finally, UNMIK continues to play a key role in
facilitating Kosovo's participation in regional and
international forums where non-recognizing States are
present. These have most recently included meetings
on justice, regional integration and transport. As
reported, the 2011 UNMIK/Kosovo chairmanship of
the Central European Free Trade Agreement has gotten
under way with a first meeting held in Brussels.
Pristina and Belgrade have indicated their willingness
to go along with a loosely defined formula for the
conduct of the meetings during this chairmanship year
that focuses on making progress on issues of mutual
interest, rather than on attempting to derive political
advantage from the issue. It is important that this
constructive approach should continue with a View to
resolving a number of important outstanding issues,
such as the use and acceptance of Kosovo customs
stamps. In this, as well as in other instances, the
Pristina authorities have recently taken a more
pragmatic approach to interaction with UNMIK.
In conclusion, on behalf of all UNMIK staff, I
wish to thank the Council for its continued support and
to assure it of our full commitment to the
implementation of the mandate with which it has
entrusted us.

