Mr. Riicker: I am very grateful for the
understanding we have experienced in this round of
discussions on developments in Kosovo, as well as for
the recognition regarding the progress that has been
made in standards implementation, which I think is to
the credit not only of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) but, in
particular, the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government.

With regard to the status process, I do not
comment on the very substance of the status process.
But it is, in my view, our mandate to point out to the
Council the objective costs that are associated with the
continued lack of clarity on status. I hope that was
clear from my statement. In addition, it is our mandate
to facilitate the transition period: we do indeed have a
role with regard to the transition period, and we want
to bring that process to an orderly conclusion.

Many representatives mentioned incidents of
violence in Kosovo. Let me assure the Council that we
not only condemn violence wherever and in whatever
form it occurs in Kosovo, but we and our Institutions
see to it that the perpetrators are brought to justice.

With regard to the figures mentioned in
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic statement, they do not match our
close monitoring of the situation. We would be happy
to share the real figures on those incidents with
Belgrade and with the Council. However, as I have
said, every incident is one incident too many, and we
do bring perpetrators to justice. I would be happy to go
into detail as necessary.

With regard to the presentation made by my
Serbian colleague, I do not want to go into detail about
what was said about UNMIK going beyond its
mandate. However, perhaps I could address just one
point. UNMIK is certainly not seeking a State for
Albanians in Kosovo; and certainly UNMIK is working
for a democratic and, in any fashion, a multi-ethnic
Kosovo.

Statements dwelled on some of the issues in
standards implementation where further progress is
needed. I fully agree that there needs to be further
progress in a number of areas. But that progress
depends in part upon status - for example, in the
26

economy. How can an emerging economy like
Kosovo's develop without access to international
lending or to borrowing, which is not possible until
there is a resolution of the status issue?

With regard to the question of returns, there also
we depend on status, because there is uncertainty and
we know that many potential returnees are waiting for
a decision on status.

Other issues have also been mentioned, such as
decentralization and protection of cultural heritage.
People are aware that Martti Ahtisaari has been
negotiating with the parties on how those problems
should be addressed and how there could be good
tangible solutions to them. With regard to the pilot
municipalities for decentralization, for example, people
are now waiting for the issuance of a status proposal by
the Special Envoy.

Other progress in standards implementation
clearly depends upon the participation of Kosovo Serbs
in the Institutions, as well as upon their recognition of
the Institutions. In that connection, I was very grateful
that so many speakers stressed the need for Kosovo
Serbs to actually take those steps. Only by
participating in the Institutions will they be able to
influence developments in Kosovo properly. It is very
important that this takes place, and I would again
appeal to Belgrade to make it happen. I think freedom
of movement is not an impeding factor for that.
Outvoting should also not be a decisive criterion. We
urge Kosovo Serbs to come to the Institutions and to
engage and to recognize the Institutions.

The situation would be better in many respects if
that were really to happen. For example, it is very good
that we now have movement toward payment to KEK
for electricity, which represents considerable progress.
Also, with regard to the telecommunication issue, it is
very clear that those providers that Sanda Raskovic-
Ivic has mentioned have no license in Kosovo and have
not paid any taxes there. However, they are encouraged
to participate in the current tender for a second license
for mobile telephoning in Kosovo.
06-6573]

All in all, I think confidence-building and
dialogue are key. I urge the Kosovo Serbs and the
minorities in general to take the hand being extended
by the PISG and their representatives. We will work
hard with this Council and under the direction of the
Secretary-General to come to a good conclusion of the
still-open question of Kosovo.
06-6573]
