I would like to start by thanking the Special Envoy for his briefing and his lasting engagement. I will make three points. One year ago, the Constitutional Committee was launched. Today, a mere three rounds have taken place. We appreciate the fact that these were the result of the Special Envoy's engagement and hard work. And we appreciate the fact that the third round took place in an overall constructive climate, despite the many challenges, and precious time lost due to the coronavirus disease pandemic. Yet, we are also deeply concerned. The absence of much discernible progress on content and the obstructive attitude of the Syrian authorities, often down to the logistics of the date and agenda of the next round, instil but little confidence. Although it is positive that the number of issues has been narrowed down following the Special Envoy's recent mission to Damascus, tangible progress must now be made urgently. We therefore urge all parties, in particular the Syrian authorities, to fully engage in the context of the Constitutional Committee, including in its upcoming meetings, and to regard this process as a major opportunity. We also call on all actors to exert their influence over the parties in order to engage closely and cooperatively in order to reinvigorate the wider political process. The current dynamics on the political level, until recently, took place against the backdrop of a relatively calm situation on the ground. However, this weekend in Idlib we witnessed the shattering of the relative calm that had existed in the north- west since the Russian-Turkish ceasefire arrangement of March, in one the most devastating attacks on record. This is of deep concern, as it may unravel quickly the relative calm and further stall the political process. In the south, a growing number of kidnappings and targeted killings leads to increasing volatility. We urge all parties to refrain from violence anywhere in the country, reduce tension and exercise maximum restraint. We also once again underline that any counter-terrorism action should respect human rights and international humanitarian law. The United Nations should play a central role in the implementation of a nationwide ceasefire, as well as in its monitoring. Given the protracted state of the Constitutional Committee, tangible progress must urgently be made regarding the other elements of resolution 2254 (2015). If the Syrian authorities want to normalize the situation in Syria, at least confidence- building measures should be undertaken. Sadly, here, too, progress made regarding the release of political prisoners and missing persons has been far too limited. Access to detainees has been restricted. Women - who have been victims of violence, including sexual violence, and who have borne the brunt of this war - have been deprived of access to their properties. They have been unable to access necessary documents to prove their administrative status and their ownership. Victims are denied their quest for justice. Belgium fully supports all accountability initiatives, including the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, and its support for criminal proceedings in national and international courts. Finally, it is clear that the situation in Syria is far from stabilized. Quite to the contrary, to think that the current situation allows for a safe, dignified or voluntary return is blatantly to deny the reality on the ground in the country. It is up to the Syrian authorities to put in place the conditions that allow all Syrian people to live their lives in peace and dignity. A first step in that direction should be genuine engagement in a political process in the framework of resolution 2254 (2015).
