Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): This is the first
time I am taking the floor under your presidency,
Madam President, so I would like to congratulate you
and your team on your assumption of the stewardship
ofthe Council for September. I would also like to thank
Mr. Koncke of the Organization of American States
(OAS) for his informative briefing and Mr. Maradiaga
for his harrowing testimony.

I think the Ambassador of Kuwait very clearly set
out the legal framework under the Charter of the United
Nations for why we are having this debate today, and we
are grateful to the United States delegation for putting
it on the Council's agenda. I will not rehearse that legal
framework, since in my view Ambassador Alotaibi
gave a very good account of it, but what I do want to say
is that it is right that the Council is made aware by the
regional organization concerned of that organization's
concerns and of the worry that this could begin to have
effects throughout the region. I do not think we should
ever reach a stage where the Council cannot hear from
a regional organization about its concerns about what is
happening in territory for which it is responsible.

But more than that, I think we also need to remember
that the Nicaraguan Government has expelled a United
Nations agency - the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). I
think that is a very important fact, independent of the
points regarding regional organizations and Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations. The Council
needs to defend the United Nations entities. Therefore,
even if there were no other reason, we would support
discussing this issue today.

Lastly, I note that there has been a situation
of refugees created. By definition, refugees cross
international borders. It is therefore right that the
Council should be able to debate the implications of
that act, which may or may not constitute an unfriendly
act, but also risks being destabilizing to international
peace and security. I am not making a judgement that
it is destabilizing but, as we heard from the Kuwaiti
representative, the Council has the responsibility
to investigate situations that may give rise to those
implications - and I stress the word "may". I think
that is exactly what we are doing today.

My Government has been watching the events in
Nicaragua very closely. We regret the loss of life that
has occurred since the protests began in April, and we
call for an end to the violence and for the Government
of Nicaragua to comply with its international human
rights obligations. Those obligations include the
people's right to freedom of expression and to
demonstrate peacefully and lawfully. We have been
deeply concerned by the excessive use of force by the
authorities and pro-Government paramilitaries against
the people of Nicaragua.

We call on the Nicaraguan Government to
demobilize paramilitary groups and to end the
repression against its citizens. We have been alarmed
by the many reports we have seen that give rise to
human rights concern. Those include the use of live
ammunition against protesters. We call for those reports
to be thoroughly investigated.

Maintaining press freedoms is always important.
It is particularly so during times of unrest. We urge the
Nicaraguan Government to respect those freedoms and
to allow the independent press to report freely, without
suffering persecution and harassment. And we are very
concerned at reports of violence against independent
media outlets, journalists and their families.

I would also like to register our deep concern about
reports of arbitrary detentions of dissenters. Again, we
urge the Nicaraguan Government to respect the right to
a fair trial and prisoners' right to due process, a proper
defence and to respect the rights of their families.

Looking ahead, I think we are all aware that the
challenges in Nicaragua can be overcome only through
a meaningful and inclusive dialogue that addresses
the legitimate concerns of the protesters. The United
Kingdom was encouraged by the establishment of a
national dialogue in May. We welcome the role that the
Episcopal Conference of Nicaragua was able to play in
convening that dialogue and mediating, but we regret
that the dialogue has had many breaks because of the
violence, and the recent decision by the Government to
abandon the process is very regrettable. I once again urge
the Nicaragua Government to fulfil its commitment to
engaging sincerely in a dialogue, including by ensuring
peaceful conditions for the dialogue to resume.

Turning to the OAS, the United Kingdom
supports its work. We also support the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, and of course the
United Nations, in attempting to resolve the current
crisis. Those organizations have important roles to
play in supporting dialogue and ensuring that human
rights transgressions are fully investigated. I referred
earlier to the expulsion of OHCHR. That followed the
publication of its report on human rights violations and
abuses in the context of protests in Nicaragua. I would
like to urge the Nicaraguan Government to reconsider
that decision, to permit the OAS working group to enter
the Nicaragua to carry out its important work and not
to impede the work of the Interdisciplinary Group of
Independent Experts established by the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights.

In conclusion, a return to peace and security in
Nicaragua benefits not only the people of Nicaragu
but also the whole region. We heard from the Russian
representative a long catalogue of history. History is
important. It provides context, but it is not the reason
we are here today. We are here today for all the
arguments Ambassador Alotaibi and I set out at the
beginning - we want to see stability, we want the
violence to end and we hope and urge the Nicaraguan
Government to engage meaningfully in an inclusive
and constructive dialogue and to ensure that all human
rights transgressions are fully investigated.

