Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): On behalf of
the President of the African Union Commission,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, who could not join us
owing to her schedule, allow me to express our warm
congratulations to the friendly country ofthe Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of February. I also wish to
welcome the presence here this morning of Ms. Delcy
Eloina Rodriguez Gomez, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. Her
noteworthy presence among us demonstrates both the
unwavering attachment on the part of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and its inspirational
determination to provide a significant contribution to
the Council's work. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his valuable briefing this morning.

It has been 70 years since the creation of the United
Nations, yet the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations can still stand the test of time
and the world's crises, allowing the Organization to
preserve the foundation guiding its work to achieve
the triptych of peace, human rights and development.
Guided by those fundamental values, the United
Nations has added several accomplishments and many
successes to its credit. Peace and security have been
restored in many parts of the world, people have freed
themselves from the yoke of colonialism in Africa,
Asia and Latin America, and the world has experienced
significant development in recent decades.

Those principles, which are of well-established
legitimacy, must continue to guide United Nations
efforts to address both traditional and new threats to
international peace and security. Those fundamental
values require a new dynamism in order to silence the
weapons in the many areas of conflict around the world,
end colonization and foreign occupation and eliminate
poverty and famine, which, along with new terrorist
threats, violent extremism and organized crime,
make up the greatest challenges facing the United
Nations. We must also work to reaffirm the principle
of complementarity, as stipulated in Chapter VIII of
the Charter. The provisions in that Chapter highlight
the importance ofjudiciously combining the universal
character of the United Nations with the advantages
that regional approaches offer.
In the tradition of its strategic partnership with
the United Nations, the African Union has espoused
the purposes and principles outlined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Article 3 of the Constitutive Act
of the African Union enshrines those objectives and
underlines the need to promote the conditions that
favour international cooperation, taking due account
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

The contribution of the African Union to achieving
the aim of the Charter set out in paragraph 1, Article
1, namely, the maintenance of international peace and
security, is now incontestable. Africa contributes more
than 45 per cent of the peacekeeping personnel around
the world. Since 2003, it has mandated the deployment
of more than 70,000 uniformed personnel and nearly
1,500 civilians in nine operations. The stabilization
efforts undertaken by those missions and the sacrifices
made by their personnel have greatly facilitated the task
of the United Nations missions that have subsequently
taken up the reins.

In parallel to the deployment of peacekeeping
operations on the ground, the African Union has also
worked to build long-term capacity through the African
Standby Force. That Force makes possible an appropriate
response aimed at remedying some of the shortcomings
seen in recent operations led by the African Union,
which relate to planning, force-generation, command,
monitoring and support for missions. However, one of
the major obstacles that the African Union regularly
faces in that context concerns the lack of flexible,
sustained and predictable financing. It is essential
that the peacekeeping operation review process find
an appropriate solution to that issue, bearing in mind
that peacekeeping efforts made at the regional level
also represent a contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The African Union, in a decision of its Assembly of
the Heads of State and Government, has committed to
ensuring that 25 per cent of its budget is designated for
peacekeeping operations.

This year also marks the tenth anniversary of the
annual consultations between the Security Council
and the African Union Council of Peace and Security.
It also marks the end of the 10-year Capacity-building
Programme of the African Union. That offers us a
unique opportunity to take stock of the partnership
between our two organizations, to draw the appropriate
lessons from past experience, to recognize both
our successes and our failures and to identify the
ways and means of strengthening our cooperation
with a view to responding better to challenges. That
strategic partnership represents an asset for both
the United Nations and the African Union. It should
be reinforced so as to enable both organizations to
achieve greater consistency in their policies, based on
prior consultation before taking any decisions and on
a common understanding of the issues and a common
definition of shared priorities. In that regard, concrete
steps must be taken to strengthen the effectiveness
of the joint annual consultations, both between the
Security Council and African Union Council of Peace
and Security, and between the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission.

Furthermore, we look forward to the General
Assembly's efforts to enshrine and give concrete form
to the new United Nations-African Union partnership
on Africa's integration and development agendas,
which are designed to succeed the 10-year African
Union Capacity-building Programme. The new
programme represents a new vision. It includes specific
recommendations on the nature of the support expected
from the United Nations system in various areas of
activity.

Today's debate also represents an opportunity to
recall the need to continue the reform of the United
Nations, to adapt its mechanisms and to modernize its
instruments so as to enable it to fulfil its mission with
greater effectiveness. The completion of the process
of revitalizing the General Assembly, as well as the
long-awaited reform of the Security Council, should
end the historical injustice inflicted on Africa. Those
processes remain essential to making the Organization
more effective and more representative of the current
global balance.

