Mr. Rubadiri (Malawi): I wish to associate myself
with all the remarks that the distinguished Ambassador of
Angola has made about yourself as President of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to
congratulate, with equal measure, your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Sweden, President for the
month of July. Both of your countries are, of course,
associated especially with Africa: yours, Sir, as part of
our history, and Sweden as part of our modern history in
Africa.

Unfortunately, this is the most that my delegation
can say by way of expressing happiness for our presence
in this room today. The progress report of the Secretary
General on the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA), contained in document S/1997/640
dated 13 August 1997, with the usual objectivity brings
with it the most depressing news about developments in
Angola, a few weeks after we all sat here, on 30 June
1997, to witness, in hope for the prosperous future of
Angola and our region, the passing of the baton from the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) to MONUA. For many of us here,
representatives of peace-loving nations, the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1118 (1997) on 30 June
meant more than the mere adoption of the resolution. It
signified an irreversible step towards peace and
reconstruction and development in Angola and the region.
Little did we know then that Uniao Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola (UNIT A) had some
sinister agenda and other motives.

 

We join others in expressing grave concern over recent
developments in Angola. We would like to condemn
UNITA's cowardly acts and actions which no doubt
threaten the peace process. We abhor the violence and the
killings. We regret deeply the intransigence of UNITA. The
slow progress in the implementation of already agreed
measures is a clear sign of bad faith. We would very much
like to see a meeting, with a meaningful agenda, take place
in Luanda between President Dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi.
This meeting cannot be delayed any longer. The long-
awaited transformation of UNITA' s radio VORGAN should
also be accelerated. More importantly, we would like to see
the normalization of the State administration throughout
Angola.
The point here is this. There are so many things left
undone that require UNITA action for the process to
proceed smoothly. Any further deterioration of the situation
will benefit no one. The people of Angola have for a long
time suffered in their desire for peace and prosperity. They
deserve to be given a chance. The Security Council needs
to send a clear and an unequivocal message to UNITA and
all enemies of peace that the international community will
not stand by at this critical juncture of the peace process. In
this we share the Secretary-General's views on how the
international community should respond. We support his
recommendations. We also support all measures that the
Security Council has taken, including those made pursuant
to resolution 864 (1993) of 15 September 1993.

The role of the international community in the
situation in Angola remains vital and imperative. We pay
tribute once again to the continuing efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, and all personnel of MONUA and of
humanitarian organizations who have, with dedication and
in the face of danger and risk to lives, met the challenges
with remarkable resilience and dedication. We also wish to
acknowledge the important role of the troika in the peace
process. We applaud their resolve in dealing with the most
delicate of situations.

But alas, how can one explain the story of the
replanting of the seeds of callous death called landmines.
Who can never, ever think that in our time and moment -
in this ethos of a civilized, growing world, which is taking
steps into the next century - or feel that no one can abet
or indeed provide or encourage the providing of mines in
Angola or in any part of the world at this particular
moment. Who indeed can lean back and even think about
Hiroshima or Nagasaki: for this is equivalent to any mine
that is planted in the wilds of Africa at this particular
moment.

Angola remains a jewel in the region of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC). Only lasting
peace in Angola will enable the region to realize its
dreams for peace and development. The people of
Angola, in their long suffering and despair, deserve to
realize this dream together with us all. We pray that the
message that the Security Council will send to UNITA in
particular will have the desired results.

We support the draft resolution and hope that those
who have the muscle to put into it will come forth, as
they have indeed all this time we've been meeting here.
And pray for peace and prosperity in Angola.

