Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix, Ambassador Momen of
Bangladesh and Ambassador Blanchard of Canada for
their briefings.

We are grateful to the French presidency for
convening today's timely debate, which follows a
series of related discussions throughout the year
that demonstrate the Security Council's seriousness
in strengthening peacekeeping as one of the most
important activities of the United Nations. I would like
to express special appreciation to Ambassador Fode'
Seek and Ambassador Nikki Haley for convening a
special meeting of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations at the Permanent Representative level
two days ago. It provided us with an excellent and
unique opportunity for Council members and troop-
contributing countries to get together for an in-depth
discussion. I would like to focus today on two key
points: first, on the significance of force generation
and, secondly, on how effective and efficient training
and capacity-building can improve force generation.

Force generation is closely linked with the Council's
responsibility for overseeing the success of mission
mandates. The gaps that we see today between actual
and desired capabilities of peacekeepers in some areas
are detrimental to achieving success. The report (see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations indicates that the capability issue is
one of the various challenges in force generation, while
resolution 2378 (2017), adopted in September, also
stresses the need to address the issue of capability gaps.

The role of the Secretariat, which oversees
the force generation process to implement Council
mandates, is key in minimizing those gaps. Several
efforts have been made, including the establishment of
the Strategic Force Generation and Capability Planning
Cell and the Peacekeeping Capacity Readiness System
(PCRS). Japan welcomes those initiatives and urges the
Secretariat to continue to undertake realistic, cross-
mission efforts that help missions adapt to realities on
the ground.

Successful force generation is about deploying
peacekeepers with the right capabilities at the right
time. Japan emphasizes that effective and efficient
training and capacity-building are essential. Japan
underlines the call in resolution 2378 (2017) for the
Secretary-General to provide recommendations on a
mechanism to address training and capacity-building.

We note that, while force generation efforts by the
Secretariat are cross-cutting in nature, as demonstrated
by the PCRS, capacity-building has remained largely
the focus of troop-contributing countries (TCCS), with
occasional donor country support. Those efforts have
so far been bilateral and could benefit from a cross-
cutting and coordinated approach. The successful
force generation conference for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali earlier this year offers a positive model and could
be expanded to all other missions as a best practice.
Further involvement on the part of the Secretariat
could also be helpful. It could play a more active role
in matchmaking between potential troop-contributing
countries and supporters who can help TCCs prepare
for challenges on the ground. We should also explore
whether the potential exists for making further use of
the Strategic Force Generation Cell and the PCRS in
that regard.

Effective and efficient training and capacity-
building measures can be achieved only through
cooperation among four actors - the Council,
troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat and
potential donor countries. Japan has already launched
discussions in that regard, including with Canada and
Bangladesh. We co-hosted a preparatory meeting in
August with Bangladesh in advance of the 2017 United
Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Meeting in
Vancouver. Effective and efficient training and capacity-
building will enable better force generation efforts,
and ultimately a better performance by peacekeepers.
Given that the Secretary-General's 90-day report, as
mandated by resolution 2378 (2017), is due by the end
of the year, Japan is prepared to follow up on the topic
during its presidency in December.

