Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Zalmai
Rassoul, and thank him for his presentation on the
situation in Afghanistan. I should like also to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Jan
Kubis, for his briefing.

To date, Afghanistan's peace and reconstruction
process has achieved positive results. The building up
of the Afghan National Security Forces is progressing
smoothly, thereby laying a solid foundation for a
comprehensive takeover of security and defence
responsibilities.
Afghanistan is actively developing its economy
so as to improve people's livelihoods and is engaging
in trade and cooperation with other countries. China
welcomes these developments.

China has always firmly supported Afghanistan
in its efforts to maintain its national sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, and to realize
enduring peace and stability. We hope that the
international community will adhere to the principle of
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process and continue
to support the Government and the people of Afghanistan
in their efforts towards peace and reconstruction and to
realize, at an early date, the objective of an Afghanistan
governed by Afghans.

With respect to advancing the peace and
reconstruction process in Afghanistan, I should like to
stress four points.

First, security, stability, the political process,
economic development and national reconciliation
all are important aspects of Afghanistan's national
reconstruction that need to be pursued with vigour. We
support Afghanistan's efforts to enhance its ability to
develop autonomously and increase its Government's
capacity. Continuing to comprehensively push for an
Afghan political and national reconciliation process is
conducive to an early realization of the country's long-
term security and stability and will create favourable
conditions for economic and social development.

Secondly, the transfer of security responsibilities to
Afghan forces must proceed gradually. The withdrawal
of forces from Afghanistan by the parties concerned
should occur with full consideration for the need to
maintain Afghanistan's security and stability. In that
process, the international community must give priority
to helping the country enhance its security sector
capacity-building. China is seriously concerned about
continued civilian casualties, especially about report
sof the death and injury of women and children in air
attacks. All sides should strictly abide by international
humanitarian law and relevant international law and
effectively protect civilians.

Thirdly, Afghanistan's reconstruction and
development require the international community's
ongoing support and help. The international
community has committed to providing $16 billion
in financial assistance to Afghanistan by 2015. That
assistance should be reflected in actual deeds as soon
as possible. The international community's assistance
to Afghanistan must fully respect the priority areas set
out by the country and support the full implementation
of the national development strategy.

Fourthly, China strongly supports greater
cooperation among countries of the region on the Afghan
issue on the basis of the principles of mutual respect,
equality and mutual benefit. Regional cooperation
initiatives should fully respect Afghanistan's
sovereignty, prioritize the legitimate concerns of the
countries of the region, and be conducted consistently
on the basis of adequate consultations. Strengthened
regional cooperation can benefit from fully utilizing
existing regional mechanisms, such as the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.

China supports the United Nations efforts in
promoting peacebuilding in Afghanistan. We hope that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the Afghan Government will strengthen
their coordination and cooperation. We hope that
UNAMA will continue to play a central coordination
role in the international community's efforts to assist
Afghanistan.

China and Afghanistan are friendly neighbours.
China will continue to support Afghanistan's
peacebuilding, provide help to Afghanistan within
our capacity and support Afghanistan in its efforts to
realize peace, stability and development.

