Mr. J eenbaev (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian): It
is my honour to speak on behalf of the member
countries of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), Republic of Armenia, the
Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the
Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian Federation and the
Republic of Tajikistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan.

The situation recently emerging in Afghanistan is
of serious concern owing to the stepping up of terrorist
activities of the Taliban and Al-Qaida. Extremists
continue to impede the assurance of full security in a
number of areas. As you know, the level of violence
and the number of criminal groups and drug bands
continue to grow. This situation undermines confidence
in the reconstruction of Afghanistan.

There is a need for effective measures to prevent
further deterioration of the security situation in this
country. Given this, we must continue to seek to isolate
extremist leaders, above all, those who are on the
sanctions list of the United Nations Security Council
1267 (1999) Committee, while we allow for rank and
file Taliban members, not tainted by war crimes, the
possibility of full-fledged participation in a peaceful
life.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) needs to seek to achieve just
those aims within its mandate. At the same time, we
believe it would be erroneous to take the view that, by
coming to terms with allegedly repentant Taliban, one
could achieve stabilization in the situation in this
country. Experience has shown us that such an
approach only helps to strengthen the positions of
extremists and enables them to increase their
subversive activities.
The problem of illegal drug trafficking is another
complex obstacle preventing the achievement of
security and stability for the Afghan people. The
subversive activities of extremists and terrorists are
funded by significant financial sources, the narcotics
trade chief among them. We are greatly concerned at

08-2692}

the continuing poppy cultivation and opium trafficking,
which are major sources of financing for the terrorist
activities of the Taliban and Al-Qaida. According to a
study conducted by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, that illegal trade poses an immense
threat not only to Afghans themselves, but to the
international community as a whole.

The fight against the growing production and
dissemination of drugs must waged by, inter alia,
cutting off the channels for the marketing of narcotics
in other regions of the world, particularly Europe.
Counter-narcotics efforts must be increased
considerably not only in Afghanistan, but also in the
surrounding region, through the establishment of a
comprehensive system of counter-narcotics and
financial security belts, with a coordinating role to be
played by the United Nations and with the participation
of neighbouring countries. In that regard, we should
further utilize the capacities of regional organizations
that have demonstrated their effectiveness in this area,
particularly the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization.

We believe that practical cooperation must be
developed between the CSTO and NATO with respect
to counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics efforts.
Afghan and Pakistani security forces should be
involved, in particular by allowing them to participate
in Operation Channel, regularly carried out by the
CSTO, aimed at establishing a counter-narcotics belt
along the borders of Afghanistan. The Operation has
developed effective mechanisms for combating drug
trafficking that have been in operation for a number of
years along the northern route - that is, the route from
Afghanistan to Europe.

As a result of those operations, the competent
authorities of the States members and Azerbaijan, Iran,
Pakistan, China and Ukraine, as observer States of the
CSTO, have removed dozens of tons of drugs from the
illegal trade. We are pleased to note that, in September
2007, Afghanistan participated for the first time in
Operation Channel. We also note that it is important
that the CSTO and NATO have concluded an
agreement on all aspects of Afghanistan-related issues.

We are convinced that additional measures must
be taken to build the combat capacities of the Afghan
armed forces, so that they can eventually ensure the
country's security independently. We must re-evaluate
the way in which we equip the Afghan National Army.
We must ensure that it has modern weaponry, including
air assets and armoured vehicles, and that we improve
the professional training of its personnel. CSTO
member States are developing cooperation with
Afghanistan, including bilateral cooperation, to that
end.

But military measures alone are not sufficient to
overcome the problems in Afghanistan; it is imperative
to fully carry out the tasks set out in the London
Afghanistan Compact. The fact that that document was
adopted by consensus attests to the international
community's firm resolve to continue to provide broad
support for post-conflict reconstruction in Afghanistan.
To that end, deadlines have been established for
addressing key problems in the areas of security,
counter-narcotics, governance and human rights. It is
essential that, in international efforts on the Afghan
front, the central coordinating role continue to be
played by the United Nations, under whose leadership
the comprehensive monitoring and coordination of the
Compact's implementation must continue.

A crucial factor in ensuring long-term
stabilization in Afghanistan is the participation of all
components of society, including various political,
ethnic and religious groups, in the building of an
effective and sovereign Afghan State. CSTO member
States are committed to the long-term reconstruction of
Afghanistan. We are prepared to continue to assist the
regional cooperation process by participating in the
international efforts in the country in key areas,
including security, economic rehabilitation and
counter-narcotics efforts.

We believe that an important factor in promoting
a comprehensive settlement is the development of
multifaceted cooperation between Afghanistan and
other States in the region. To that end, Afghanistan
assistance programmes should involve regional
partners, including through their implementation of
contracts with donor countries and international
organizations and their participation in the
implementation of a number of projects to rebuild
energy facilities and the transportation infrastructure in
Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I should like to wish Mr. Kai Eide
every success in fulfilling his mandate.

