Mr. Hackett (Barbados): Madam President, on
behalf of the Government of Barbados, I wish to
convey to you our deepest appreciation for the
important leadership role that the United Kingdom has
played, and continues to play, in heightening global
awareness of the imminent dangers posed by climate
change, as well as your Government's efforts at forging
an urgent and coordinated response to this looming
global disaster.

We bear witness to one of the greatest and most
serious environmental and development challenges in
the history of humankind - namely, controlling and
coping with climate change. As a country caught
squarely in the crosshairs of this global emergency, we
are ever conscious of the enormous challenges posed to
our sustainable development by climate change and its
attendant impact.

Developing countries are most vulnerable to
climate change, and we are the least able to protect
ourselves. For small island developing States, the
challenges are even more complex and profound and
2

our needs more urgent. The adverse effects of climate
change and associated phenomena, including sea-level
rise, the change in behaviour and higher intensity of
hurricanes, and the change in frequency and
distribution of other extreme events, such as floods and
droughts, threaten the very livelihoods and existence of
small island developing States, despite the fact that we
have contributed only negligibly to the genesis of the
problem.

With the recent release of the contributions of
Working Groups I and II to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), there is now greater scientific
certainty that dangerous climate change is already
occurring and that the opportunity to avoid potentially
irreversible, unimaginable damage to the climate
system will be lost if urgent and ambitious global
efforts are not made. As Sir Nicholas Stern puts it, if
we continue to ignore climate change, the impact on
the global economy will be "on a scale similar to those
associated with the great wars and the economic
depression of the first half of the twentieth century".
And while we might differ on the issues of timing,
location and scope, any economic, social, humanitarian
and environmental crisis of this magnitude will likely
have other unfortunate consequences, including for
international peace and security. There is no excuse -
scientific or otherwise - to delay immediate action.

As we confront this global crisis, a relevant
consideration will be how future generations will judge
our response. If we continue to delay action, we will be
judged harshly, and deservedly so, for having callously
placed their inheritance and future in great jeopardy.
For today we might have choices; tomorrow, they will
not. Yet despite these sobering realities, there is still a
glimmer of hope that if we act rapidly we may soften
the blow of this looming climate catastrophe,
particularly with respect to the poorest and most
vulnerable.

Those who have historically contributed most to
the problem have a moral and legal obligation to
assume primary responsibility. Developed countries
must take the lead in significantly reducing harmful
greenhouse gas emissions and in providing the
necessary financial and technological assistance to
support the adaptation efforts of developing countries.
The Kyoto Protocol should not be abandoned. Those
that continue to reject their agreed commitments under
07-30973
that agreement must exercise good judgement,
demonstrate good global citizenship and show the type
and quality of leadership exhibited at other seminal
moments in history. They must simply do the right
thing. For, as former United States President John F.
Kennedy once said:

"Today the eyes of all people are truly upon us -
and our Governments, in every branch, at every
level, national, state and local, must be as a city
upon a hill - constructed and inhabited by men
[and women] aware of their great trust and their
great responsibilities".

Barbados remains of the View that the
international community must attach the highest
priority to completing ongoing climate change
negotiations within the Framework Convention on
Climate Change on a post-2012 arrangement by the end
of 2008. Any new global agreement must lead to the
achievement of substantial emission reductions in the
shortest time frame possible and significantly increase
the level of resources available to vulnerable
developing countries, particularly small island
developing States and least developed countries, to
help them adapt to the adverse impacts of climate
change.

Barbados believes that this debate in the Security
Council should inspire the other principal organs of the
United Nations to assume fully their Charter
responsibilities in addressing the many dimensions of
this problem. While the Framework Convention on
Climate Change remains the primary forum for
addressing climate change, Barbados wishes to propose
that, consistent with General Assembly resolution
61/16, the Economic and Social Council should
convene a special session at the foreign-minister level
in September this year, on the margins of the main part
of the sixty-second session of the General Assembly, to
discuss the impact of climate change on sustainable
development. We believe that such a discussion at the
ministerial level would provide much-needed impetus
to the negotiations which will take place in Bali,
Indonesia, in December.

In closing, I would like to emphasize the need for
development partners to join Barbados and the other
small island developing States in the full and rapid
implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action
and the Mauritius Strategy, of which the issues of
climate change and energy are important components.
07-30973

Effective implementation of those two international
agreements, along with the action taken within the
Framework Convention on Climate Change, will
significantly assist the small island developing States
in coping with the adverse effects of climate change.

The time for rhetoric and gamesmanship is over.
We must act boldly, and we must act together to protect
our planet for the benefit of future generations.

