Mr. de Mistura (spoke in Spanish): It is a great
pleasure, Mr. President, to see you here again
following the Council's mission to Afghanistan.

(spoke in English)

I would like to take this opportunity to elaborate
a little bit about the United Nations activities in
Afghanistan and the priorities in the current Afghan
environment. I will be a little shorter than usual,
because we had the privilege of having the members of
the Security Council visit Afghanistan. The members
of the Council have therefore seen with their own eyes
and heard with their own ears about the current
situation there. I would like, in that connection, to
thank the Council for its visit. Coming just slightly
more than three months after I took up my new
assignment, the visit was a very timely one for all of
us.
10-42978
This is indeed a crucial year in Afghanistan. I
think that anyone here who has been there must have
had the same feeling. This is a year in which all of us,
together with the Afghan authorities and the Afghan
people, are trying to reach a form of stabilization in the
situation. Everybody acknowledges the fact that there
is no military solution alone to the current situation in
Afghanistan. There must be a lot more, and that is what
we are working on together. What we need is a
political vision that addresses the concerns, the
aspirations and the hopes of the Afghan people and of
all stakeholders, in particular those in the region.

This is also a year with a calendar densely packed
with events. In that sense we are moving in the right
direction. The London Conference has been held,
which was very useful. It signaled the support of the
international community for the Afghan authorities
during this crucial year. The Consultative Peace Jirga
has also been held, which was equally extremely
helpful because it gave everyone, Afghans and
foreigners, the opportunity to realize that there is a
common feeling as to how to address the dialogue in
order to have more Afghans inside the large tent where
we all attended the Jirga. The next step is the Kabul
Conference, to which many foreign ministers will go. I
understand that the Secretary-General has also
confirmed that he will be attending. It will be a very
good opportunity for a stepping-stone.

Allow me to summarize the direction that the
organizers of the Conference - who are, of course, the
Afghans; we are co-chairing, but they are in charge -
are taking. The concept is one of a public contract
between the Afghan Government and the Afghan
people, and an offer to produce public, concrete
delivery of socio-economic improvement. The
international community will not be expected to bring
new funds, but, if they feel comfortable with those
priorities, may be asked to realign bilaterally the
resources already allocated for Afghanistan. That
would have several advantages. One of them would be
to further the concept of Afghanization, which should
become not just a word but, increasingly, a concrete
fact.

The Afghans feel that very strongly. They are a
proud people, historically proven to be so and even
more so these days. They need to feel that the future is,
in fact, in their hands, and that will be a good
opportunity. If they are proposing such concrete
programmes, they should also feel that they can lead
them and, of course, be accountable for the results. At
the same time, this would not be putting more pressure
on donor countries, which are, at the moment, feeling
the stress of additional funding, because there will be,
at most, a request for bilateral realignment of the
current funding.

The United Nations, as you know, Mr. President,
is now focusing on a three-plus-one initiative. We
cannot cover everything, and if we did we would not
make a difference or be able to make a difference. The
three-plus-one areas are elections, internal and regional
dialogue, and constructive regional engagement. The
plus-one aspect pertains to aid coherence, namely,
helping the international community and Afghan
authorities to avoid overlaps and focusing better on
ensuring that the huge amounts of aid reaching
Afghanistan do not overlap.

Elections are the mother of all issues in
Afghanistan and, frankly, for all of us. The previous
elections did not go well, and to say they did would be
an overstatement. This time we are all trying to work
together so that they will be better - not perfect or
elections one would see in other countries that do not
have the same challenges, but better. Inshallah, they
will be better; first, because lessons were learned by
everyone and, secondly, because there is much more
monitoring taking place internally, among the Afghans
themselves.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) was able to contribute to one
major improvement in the process. As members of the
Council will probably remember - so many things
have happened - in April there was a moment of
difficulty that involved an institutional stalemate
between the two institutions of the presidency and the
Loya Jirga, which could have blocked the election
process. The United Nations, with the cooperation of
the whole international community in Kabul, was able
to propose, and get approval by everyone for, a formula
for what we called the implementation guidelines for
the elections.

That produced three results: first, a new electoral
chairmanship and a new electoral aid team; secondly,
the presence of international commissioners, who
would also be there with a role, namely, that no
decision would be taken by the Electoral Complaints
Commission (ECC) if any of the international
commissioners was not in agreement - a major
element of reassurance, not just nationally but, above
all, internationally; and, thirdly, a decision on the role
of women. Sixty-eight seats in the Afghan Parliament
would be guaranteed for women. If, for whatever
reason, as has happened in the past, a woman were to
give up a seat, she would be replaced not by a man but
by another woman.

All this resulted in an end to the stalemate.
Elections are now moving ahead, mutatis mutandis, in
the right direction. The new commissioners have been
doing their homework. There are now 2,679
candidates, of whom 400 are women. We also are
working on setting up 6,835 polling centres and 19,942
polling stations. Thirty thousand new voters have been
registered. We are approaching the figure of 12.5
million people expected to vote. It will not be easy.
The main challenge will be security, as will the second.
If the elections are tarnished by excessive security
problems, the result might include the closing of
polling stations, and thus the disenfranchisement of
people who could have voted. We will have to watch
that as we get closer to the date in order to be able to
assist the Afghan authorities.

It is the Afghan authorities who are in charge of
the elections, with the United Nations and the
international community proactively working to
support them. An example of that pertains to the
vetting process. Some members of the Council who
were in Kabul were part of the intense moments
relating to the vetting, where the vetting committee,
which is a purely Afghan body led by the Ministers of
the Interior and Defence and the National Directorate
of Security, were unable to come up with any people to
be vetted and excluded from the elections. I am glad to
be able to tell the Council that the latest information
indicates that we are very close to 40 - we had been
down to zero - representing different provinces.

A decision is now imminent. If that proves to be
the case, it will be a substantive improvement on the
impression we had previously, which suggested the
vetting was not conclusive in any way. We will face
difficult moments with regard to the elections. But I
can certainly tell the Council that, at the moment, the
decisions of the Chair of the Electoral Commission and
the members of the other commissions are reassuring
to everyone, including those Afghans who felt that the
elections could have been heading in the wrong
direction. We will cross that bridge when we get there,
and I may require the support and assistance of the
Council if we get into difficulties. But at the moment,
it is so far so good.

Dialogue is the second area of priority for our
own focus. As you know, this is, again, Afghan-led and
should be Afghan-led. But the United Nations has the
capacity in assisting those types of discussions that
may take place or are taking place. One example was
the Hezb-i-Islami visit to Kabul, where the United
Nations, in coordination with the presidency, did
receive the Hezb-i-Islami team in order to make them
feel that, when they move into a dialogue-type of
conversation instead of fighting, the international
community does recognize that fact and is ready to
facilitate it.

We are of course looking forward to confidence-
building measures, in which we can play a role, and we
are. Also, His Excellency the Ambassador of Austria is
actively involved in the issue of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and was able to hold quite a few discussions
while he was in Kabul. I will leave it to him to make
any relevant comments on the elements of important
confidence-building issues regarding future dialogue.

On regional issues, there is agreement by
everyone that no substantive, continuous, sustainable
stabilization of Afghanistan can or will take place
unless we have a constant constructive engagement by
all regional players, stakeholders and beyond. That is
why I myself, with the permission of the Secretary-
General, have been traveling to several regional
countries - Pakistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and
elsewhere - in order to make sure that we are able to
hear their concerns and, in a way, facilitate their
constructive engagement in the right direction.

There are other very useful initiatives, and they
are to some degree led by countries like Turkey, which
has been very active, as the Council knows. We heard
the latest relevant information recently when we were
in Istanbul and Ankara. These initiatives include the
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan initiative, the Shanghai initiative, the
Dubai process, which is being proactively supported by
Canada, and for our part, on the basis of the mandate
the Council has given us, the Silk Road initiative. It
has a very charming name, but in fact goes beyond
charm. It is meant to engage countries that are not
necessarily geographically linked to Afghanistan but
have historical or political links. It is aimed at ensuring
10-42978
that, finally, when this difficult time comes to an end,
they will all be part of it.

We are also working on the economic side of it
because sometimes that leads to a lot of dialogue. One
example is, of course, the issue of drugs, which affects
many countries, such as Russia, Iran, Pakistan and,
frankly, all of us, once it gets to the countries that are
far away. There are also the issues, for instance, of
transport or energy. They are all opportunities for a
regional dialogue that may then also enhance the
political engagement that we all need.

Aid coherence is part of our mandate, but it is
also part of a major necessity. The good news is that
there are no major contradictions. We have done a lot
of studying of that issue on the spot. There is no
excessive, shocking overlap between bilateral and
multilateral at the moment. What is needed is more
help to the Afghan authorities to do what they should
have the right to do, that is, undertake the aid
coherence approach themselves. We have a mechanism
called the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board,
which is meeting on 8 July. Everyone is part of it. I am
co-chairing it on behalf of the Secretary-General. That
mechanism needs to be revitalized.

Secondly, the next opportunity for aid coherence
is the Kabul Conference. If we come to the Kabul
Conference with the type of contract that we have just
mentioned - that is, the opportunity for realignment
between bilateral and Afghan priorities - the United
Nations has the capacity and the duty to assist on that
issue. That becomes, by itself, a new form of aid
coherence.

Last but not least, there is the possibility of the
so-called transition, that is, the movement from
military to civilian, particularly with regard to the
provincial reconstruction teams, and from civilian to
Afghan. In that sense, "Afghan" means with the
support and the capacity-building of our 21 regional
and provincial offices. By the way, as the Council
knows, we have, at the moment, 742 international
colleagues on the ground; 940 posts are filled by
international staff and 6,000 by national staff. So we
are not reducing.

Our position is to simply be careful in squaring
the circle between security - we had an attack
yesterday and there have been attacks in the past, as
the Council knows, as in October when we lost five
colleagues - and being present, being proactive,
10-42978
increasing quality when we cannot increase the
quantity, focusing on 3+1 areas and not all over, and at
the same time, having security in our accommodations.
The attack on 28 October was on sleeping
accommodations. That is why we are so keen to have
the Council's support on the issue of the financial
package that is being discussed, not only for
Afghanistan but also for Iraq, in order to enable our
colleagues to feel that they are not being treated worse
than those who are in a more secure environment. We
also need support in pushing for the excellent solution
that the Dutch Government, through the Dutch
embassy, is offering to the United Nations in order to
have secure accommodations there. We are working on
all that.

The next point is partnership. The Council will
ask, and it is right to ask, how we are doing with the
International Security Assistance Force and the
European Union - in other words, the two civilian
representatives who were appointed at more or less the
same time that I was. The short answer is, excellent.
Members of the Council can ask them. We have a
feeling of constructive, common work. We have the
right chemistry. We have different mandates, and we
should. One would expect us to have that. We
sometimes represent different countries as well. We go
beyond that in the United Nations, representing many
countries that are not in NATO or in the European
Union. And we also have slightly different priorities in
our focus, and that should be the case.

But the goal is the same, and coordination and
common messaging to avoid contradictions at a time
when we cannot afford contradictions are taking place.
In that sense, I would like to reassure the Council, and
I feel pleased to say, that this is moving in the right
direction, while each of us is maintaining - naturally
and as the Council expects us to - our independence,
neutrality and impartiality, but also our respect of the
mandate that the Council has given us.

At the end of the day, the goal is the same: the
stabilization of Afghanistan and respect for its culture,
traditions, sovereignty and religion. That is what we
are supposed to do these days, even more than in the
past, in view of the growing feeling of the Afghans and
the Afghan Government that they should be taking
their own future into their own hands.

This year, especially in the coming months - and
when I come back, I hope to be able to brief the
5

Council again on this - we will need to be resilient.
The message from myself and my colleagues who have
been volunteering to come to Kabul is that this is the
time for all of us to be resilient, creative and respectful
of Afghan priorities. At the end of the day, only the
Afghans will find their own solutions. This is the time
to have these three qualities. We need the Council's
help if we are to continue to have them.

Lastly, I want to again thank you, Sir, for having
come to Kabul. You have no idea how timely your visit
was, what a strong boost it was to the morale of my
colleagues and what a strong impression it conveyed to
the Afghan people that the international community
does care, is interested, is committed, and that this is
the time that we will not leave them alone.

