Mr. Petritsch: I address the Council today at
what is a time of great change and renewed hope for
South-Eastern Europe. The potential future for Bosnia
and Herzegovina looks very different today because of
the seismic changes in two key neighbouring countries:
Yugoslavia and Croatia.

Change is frustratingly slow in Bosnia itself but
nonetheless continues for the better. Much will depend
on the outcome of the general elections on 11
November to bring about real, sustained change. We
need new leaders who will move the country forward,
rather than the present leaders who camp out on
nationalist positions, despite the fact that they are out
of touch with their voters and the changes in
neighbouring States.

Change will not see a return to a pre-war Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The country is a decade behind the
rest of Central Europe in pushing through economic
market reforms. We want to move on from the
economics of the State plan. More importantly, the
scars of war run too deep to rescue Bosnia's
multicultural past in its entirety.

Some members might recall William Shawcross's
comment in his recent book on warlords and the work
of United Nations peacekeeping missions:

"humility is important. Not everything can be
achieved, not every wrong can be righted simply
because the international community desires it
Bosnia will not become Michigan ..."

But Bosnia and Herzegovina is and will remain a
multi-ethnic country because it is the home of three
constituent peoples - Bosniacs, Serbs and Croats-
as well as of many minorities. They will find ways to
live side by side, perhaps as German speakers, Italian
speakers and French speakers do in Switzerland. This
report, the seventeenth by a High Representative-
and this is the third time I have had the honour of
addressing the Security Council - looks briefly at the
tasks the Office of the High Representative, and by
extension, the international community, still face in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I turn to the revolution in Belgrade and its quieter
but no less important counterpart in Zagreb, and what
they mean for winning peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

First and foremost, we should not drop our guard.
The destructive nationalisms that pulled the region
apart have not fallen with Slobodan Milosevic. The
political changes in Belgrade are watched more with
apprehension than with relief in Kosovo and
Montenegro, as well as Bosnia.

Croatia's Foreign Minister, Mr. Tonino Picula,
has made his first official visit to Sarajevo since
assuming office, a clear signal that this country has
fully recognized Bosnian sovereignty, after its previous
Government spent years trying to undermine it. When I
met the newly elected President of Yugoslavia,
Mr. Vojislav Kostunica, last week in Belgrade I urged
him to do the same, suggesting that this is the safest
way of ensuring that Kosovo remains within the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as required by
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). I also
impressed upon him that Yugoslavia's full membership
in the United Nations means working with its
institutions - for example, cooperating with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in The Hague. With elections in Bosnia
soon to be held, I also called on him to end Belgrade's
patronage of anti-Dayton forces in the Bosnian Serb
entity, which fight on to try and secure the ill-gotten
gains of "ethnic cleansing".

Mr. Kostunica has made a very promising start,
taking the courageous decision to visit Sarajevo on
Sunday to meet State leaders there. I would like to pay
tribute here to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Sarajevo, Jacques Paul Klein,
whose tireless efforts helped to secure the success of
that crucial visit. President Kostunica also assured me
that he would work to establish diplomatic relations
with Bosnia and Herzegovina as soon as he had formed
his own Government. But there is much work to be
done in this area.

We need to make sure that the international
community speaks with one voice - especially when
the European Union meets at Zagreb for a summit on
south-eastern Europe next month - to say that borders
cannot be tinkered with. There is talk among some
former Balkan mediators of a need to compensate
Serbia for its allegedly inevitable loss of Kosovo. This
would have disastrous consequences right across the
region. We should make it crystal clear that cynical,
nineteenth-century map-making has no place in our
peacekeeping efforts today. A failure to speak clearly
on this now would cost us very dearly in the future, and
would destroy the five years of hard and fruitful work
since the Dayton Accords were signed, especially at a
time when the majority of people in the region now see
that nationalism makes them poor and isolated.

Europeanization is the one thing that nearly all
sides aspire to, and that we use to drive reform in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Last May in Brussels the
Peace Implementation Council approved my three
strategic priorities to help Bosnian citizens achieve that
dream: comprehensive economic reform; accelerated
refugee returns; and the strengthening of State
institutions.

But overall progress has been slow since I last
reported to the Council in May, with the country's
nationalist incumbents unwilling to take tough
decisions, especially with a general election looming.
They refuse to accept that donor money is fast running
out and that there is increasing competition for that
money from countries like Yugoslavia - this when the
country is in serious economic crisis. Gross domestic
product growth in Bosnia and Herzegovina was 7.1 per
cent in 1999, but that superficially high figure is really
the result of the last foreign reconstruction money
going into the country's war-torn economy. The real
headache is the trade balance. Preliminary data show
that the country is covering imports only to the extent
of 25 per cent by exports. This is, of course,
unsustainable.

My Office, in close cooperation with international
financial institutions, has put in place clear banking
laws that should enable transparent financial operations
across both entities. We aim to close the communist-era
payment bureaux by the end of the year. That will rid
the country of an expensive, non-transparent means of
settling payments, which the nationalist parties will no
longer be able to milk.

Local judicial and police services are clamping
down on corruption for the first time. But we are still
unhappy with the slow pace at which political leaders
are tackling the issue. Aid and investment will come
only when the country's poor record on corruption is
cleaned up. Sadly, most Bosnian politicians prefer to
put their heads in the sand with regard to that issue.

A law on State treasury has been approved that
should see more funds flowing through central rather
than entity institutions - a powerful glue to make the
two halves of this fractured country stick. We are
studying ways to cut damagingly high taxes and spread
the burden. Foreign investors are loath to put their
money into a country where they end up paying more
than 80 per cent in taxes. International experts,
together with local officials, are preparing 86 strategic
enterprises in the Federation and 52 in the Serb entity
for transparent tender privatization. And we are
studying ways of unbundling utilities, such as
electricity and telecommunications, in a way that will
dismantle damaging parallel structures, making
companies compete in a single economic space on
price, and not on a consumer's presumed ethnic
identity.

It is the economy - the advantages of a single
economic space - that will secure Bosnia and
Herzegovina's future as a functioning State. It may be
anecdotal, but I know of Bosniacs and Croats who
already travel to Banja Luka, the Serbs' regional
capital, to buy furniture because it is cheaper there than
in Sarajevo.

The tough implementation of the property laws
which I had to impose last year has started to
depoliticize the emotional issue of refugee returns. The
strict implementation of the rule of law, helped by the
good work of the United Nations in Bosnia -
especially that ofthe Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) - will have
profound implications for all areas of life in Bosnia,
and from this specific issue much else will follow. A
right enshrined in law to one's own property is vital to
restore confidence in the country's future.

The latest UNHCR figures show that by the end
of August this year about 30,000 minority returns were
registered - more than double the figure in the same
period in 1999. The figure is much higher when non-
registered returns are taken into account. But these are
all dull figures. What is truly extraordinary is where
these returns have taken place: in, or near, towns like
Srebrenica and Foca, synonymous with massacres and
rape camps during the war in the eastern half of what is
now the Serb entity.

But I do not want to paint a false picture. While
the rule of law has begun to melt the permafrost
covering the return process, there are still hundreds of
thousands of people who remain either displaced or
refugees. Again, I look to the elections in the hope that
ordinary Bosnians will vote out nationalist forces who
remain intent on keeping the returns process frozen.

Since I last addressed the Security Council, I
have removed 24 public officials for persistent
obstruction of the Dayton Accords. I am under pressure
from some parts of the international community, and
from many Bosnian citizens as well, to be more
interventionist. But, while removals and imposing laws
send a clear message, the country's political leaders use
this to avoid tough decisions.

A case in point has been political leaders' refusal
to adopt amendments to the pension laws, as demanded
by the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund. Political leaders did, as usual, nothing. They
expected me to impose them. Instead, they have been
warned that if they do not do this, they risk losing the
country hundreds of millions of dollars in badly needed
aid.

That being said, after months of wasted debate
and posturing, I ended up having to impose a law on a
single travel document for Bosnia and Herzegovina. As
with the new vehicle registration plates, which also
have no entity markings, the move was very popular
amongst ordinary Bosnian citizens. They are fed up
with finding themselves at the bottom ofthe visa queue
because their leaders, in their narrow-minded
nationalism, cannot agree on standard, internationally
recognized travel documents. This is yet another
example, like the economy, of how self-interest can be
made to work in favour of Dayton implementation. I
am happy to report that Bosnia and Herzegovina's first
new passports were issued yesterday.

In terms of State-building, one will now be able
to dial anywhere in Bosnia through the same
international code, ending the ridiculous situation of
having to dial Republika Srpska through Belgrade. The
State border service - yet another law I had to impose
early this year - has started functioning, much to the
chagrin of some leaders in Republika Srpska, as they
operate on the border with Yugoslavia. Full marks go
to the United Nations for its work in this area.

I announced at the beginning of the week the
creation of a public broadcasting service. A multi-
ethnic staff will provide balanced news and will make
programmes that will be beamed across both entities.
The Olympic games were successfully broadcast
simultaneously in both entities with a multi-ethnic
commentating team in Sydney. Cold, hard cash- or
the shortage of it - and modern management practices
drive this exciting project, not ethnic quotas.

The country's Constitutional Court last month
gazetted a decision with far-reaching consequences for
all Bosnian citizens' equality before the law. The ruling
on the so-called constituent peoples' case means that
Bosniacs, Serbs and Croats are entitled to the same
rights in both entities. This laudable concept, however,
has yet to be translated into the entities' constitutions.

But State institutions such as the Presidency, the
Council of Ministers and the Parliamentary Assembly
continued to be stymied by ethnic concerns.

After a great deal of pressure, we have wrung an
agreement out of Bosnia and Herzegovina's education
ministers to ensure that both the Latin and the Cyrillic
alphabets and a small, core curriculum are taught in all
schools. But this is far from enough. Education must be
a priority if the country is to have a future.
Unfortunately, a recent report by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) reveals that many
young Bosnians do not believe that they have a future
in their own country: a staggering 62 per cent of those
polled in the report said they would leave Bosnia if
they had the chance.

I want to be frank about the problems. But we are
moving forward, even if, as in a sandstorm on a desert
trek, one feels sometimes that one is not moving at all.
Despite the dramatic changes in the region, we need to
stay with Bosnia and Herzegovina and see the task
through. Our job there is unfinished. I am aware that
Yugoslavia will need assistance on its way to
democracy, and that there are many other hotspots in
the world deserving the Council's attention. However,
the international community has spent too much effort
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to abandon this project
prematurely. We will need the Council's continued
moral, political and financial support to get it right.

To quote Mr. Shawcross again,

"Intervention can assist people when they
are desperate. But if it is to be more than a sop to
our own guilt, intervention must be
commensurate and consistent; it must be followed
through. That is how people can be delivered
from evil and peacekeepers can prevail more
often over warlords".

I have said this before, but it needs to be stressed
time and again: Bosnian citizens themselves must
create the prosperous and tolerant country that Bosnia
and Herzegovina could be; they must take ownership of
their destiny in order to realize their dream of a place
in Europe and in the world. Their neighbours must also
turn their backs on the past and look forward by
helping Bosnia and Herzegovina; it should be clear that
their own place in the new Europe also depends on this.
But we in the international community must also
continue to do all we can to hold up a guiding light to
bring Bosnia and Herzegovina home.

That is the end of my report. However, I would
like also to inform the Council about a decision I took
yesterday. As members are aware, the victims of the
1995 Srebrenica massacre, the worst crime committed
in Europe since the Second World War, have not yet
been given a place for their final rest. The associations
of relatives of these victims have demanded for a long
time that this issue be resolved. Several agencies have
since tried to tackle the issue to no avail. My decision
transfers into trust a plot of land in the municipality of
Srebrenica in order to bury the victims and erect a
memorial. I consider this to be a first, but an important,
step on Bosnia and Herzegovina's way to come to
terms with its past.

