Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): May I, too, begin by thanking
you, Sir, for presiding over this open debate on the
developments in Sierra Leone.

I would like to join other speakers in expressing our
deepest condolences to the families of four Kenyan soldiers
who lost their lives in the line of duty. Our sympathies are
also with those peacekeepers who are being held hostage by
the forces of the Revolutionary United Front Party (RUF).
One of them belongs to Pakistan.

We note with appreciation the courage and
commitment demonstrated by the peacekeepers in Sierra
Leone, particularly those still held hostage. The RUF must
release the hostages immediately and unconditionally.
We are extremely disturbed at the unfortunate turn of
events in Sierra Leone, raising questions as to the
effectiveness of the peace efforts of the United Nations and
the determination of the international community. There is
a need to demonstrate wisdom and commitment in dealing
with the evolving situation. The only recourse to a viable
peace is to implement the Peace Agreement signed in Lome
on 7 July 1999. The international community supported the
peace process in Sierra Leone, as reflected in Security
Council resolution 1289 (2000) of 7 February this year.

It is our understanding that resolution 1289 (2000)
clearly describes the ways and means of dealing with the
challenges of the type and magnitude that have now
emerged in Freetown and in other parts of the country.
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, in paragraph 10 of the resolution the Security
Council authorized the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) to undertake some additional tasks in
the light of conditions on the ground, including, first, to
provide security at key locations; secondly, to facilitate the
free flow of people, goods and humanitarian assistance; and
thirdly, to guard weapons and military equipment collected
from ex-combatants. In the discharge of these tasks, the
peacekeepers were mandated to take the necessary action to
ensure the security and freedom of movement of
UNAMSIL personnel and, within its capabilities and areas
of deployment, to afford protection to civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence.

The question now arises as to whether UNAMSIL
took the necessary measures to ensure the security and
freedom of movement of its personnel or to afford
protection to civilians under imminent threat. The answer
is in the negative. It seems that, while an adequate mandate
has been given to the Mission to address such situations as
hostage-taking, the peacekeepers deployed on the ground
are not adequately equipped to act as per the mandate.
There has to be a balance and linkage between the
mandate, composition of forces and operational posture
adopted in the field. We could not possibly expect the
lightly armed infantry battalions deployed in Sierra Leone
to implement such robust mandates while maintaining the
right posture. The Secretariat needs to assess what went
wrong in the planning and deployment of peacekeepers in
Sierra Leone, including the configuration of the force. It
is all the more important to ensure that, in future, the
security component of a peacekeeping mission serve as an
asset rather than become a liability.

While urging proper review and corrective measures
by the Security Council and the Secretariat with a view to
making the peacekeeping mission in Sierra Leone
operational again, we would like to emphasize the need
to avoid repeating similar mistakes in other missions,
including the one in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Pakistan has committed one battalion group for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We would like to
see a practical concept of operation and configuration of
force there in a manner that is capable of supporting the
implementation of the mandate of the Mission and such
that its success does not depend only on the declared
intentions of the parties involved in the conflict.

Pakistan has always emphasized the point that the
international community's commitment to the promotion
of peace in Africa will be judged by its seriousness in
translating rhetoric into reality. We should not be found
wanting in generating the necessary political will to turn
words into deeds.

The time has come to reiterate our collective
commitment to peace efforts in Africa. We cannot allow
the peace process in Sierra Leone to fail, despite invoking
Chapter VII elements in the mandate of the Security
Council. There cannot be different types of Chapter VII
missions in different regions. If Chapter VII missions in
other regions have successfully helped to establish peace,
that has to be the case in Sierra Leone as well.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my country's
commitment to the peace, security and prosperity of the
continent of Africa.

