Baron Ahmad (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's important debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on children and armed conflict (S/2017/82l), and
the Special Representative, Ms. Gamba, for her insights
on children and armed conflict and her important work
in that area. In doing so, I would also like to recognize
the hard work carried out by the United Nations country
task forces and peace operations, often in difficult
circumstances, to provide reliable, evidence-based
information on Violations against children. At this
juncture, I would also like to acknowledge the
contribution of Mr. Mubin Shaikh for his personal
insights into that important area.

When it comes to children's lives, no efforts can
be spared. Children are innocent bystanders in times of
conflict, caught up in the atrocities taking place around
them. That is why the evidence in the annual report is
so alarming. It shows that grave violations continue
to be committed on an increasing scale. In the many
conflicts taking place around the world, children are
being maimed and killed, recruited and used as child
soldiers, and denied basic humanitarian access.

In some conflicts, there has been a growing trend
to detain children on security charges. That is deeply
concerning. No child should be detained unless he or
she is charged with a recognizable criminal offence and
only in accordance with international law and juvenile
justice standards. Authorities should seek alternatives
to detention, and if they detain juveniles, they should
prioritize their rehabilitation and reintegration and
fully protect their human rights.

The United Kingdom considers the agreement and
implementation of the United Nations action plans to be
a vital step in improving the protection of children. We
therefore call on all parties listed within the annex of
the Secretary-General's report that have not put those
measures in place to do so as a matter of priority. We
also call on all other parties that have put measures in
place to honour their commitments in full. I would like
to highlight two aspects ofthe issue that are ofparticular
concern to the Government of the United Kingdom.

The first is to ensure that children continue to have
access to education in times of crisis. That is vital,
first, in order to provide young people with at least
a degree of normalcy and stability, and secondly, to
give them the skills they need to advocate for a better,
more peaceful future for themselves, their families and
their communities. The United Kingdom continues to
provide educational support to the millions of children
around the world in need of education in emergencies
and protracted crises. Following on from the No Lost
Generation initiative of UNICEF, where £82 million
of United Kingdom international development funding
was allocated to provide protection, trauma care and
education for children affected by the crisis in Syria and
the wider region, the United Kingdom is committing
£30 million this year in support of the Education
Cannot Wait initiative. I urge all Member States to
support such initiatives, which help provide education
to those children most in need.

The second issue of particular concern to the
United Kingdom is the sexual exploitation and abuse
of children by United Nations peacekeepers and other
personnel operating in the name of the United Nations.
The annual report shows that such abuse remained a
major issue in the Central African Republic in 2016. It is
abhorrent and absolutely unacceptable. United Nations
peacekeepers must respect and protect the rights of
children. Children expect and trust peacekeepers to
protect them. Every time a peacekeeper fails to do so,
that trust and the integrity of the United Nations are
gravely undermined.

However, it is not only peacekeepers who commit
offences against children. Reports continue to indicate
that some personnel in development and humanitarian
agencies are also guilty of abusing their positions. In
the past, our collective failure to prosecute allegations
of child rape and sexual exploitation and abuse has
sent a signal to the predators that working under the
United Nations banner protects them from being
held accountable for their actions and facing justice.
There must be no more impunity for perpetrators
of such heinous offences against innocent and
vulnerable children.

The United Kingdom will insist on a zero-tolerance
approach towards sexual exploitation and abuse, and we
expect the United Nations to demonstrate the highest
possible standards of protection for children, including
actions to prevent abuse, investigate all allegations and
report annually on progress. The United Kingdom's
International Development Secretary's comments on
child rape in her speech on United Nations reform
resonated strongly at the General Assembly. We will
continue to work closely with the United Nations to
bring together other Member States to explore how to
improve accountability of any of our citizens who face
substantiated allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse. We want to end the culture of impunity so that
all children are protected and all those charged with
abuse are brought to justice.
Finally, I want to acknowledge the progress that
has been made and look to the future. In 2016, the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a stable and Long Lasting Peace, signed between the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo
brought an end to over 50 years of conflict. The
reincorporation of FARC-EP minors is now a major
focus for the implementation of the peace accords. We
have also witnessed a temporary ceasefire with the
National Liberation Army, including a commitment
to stop recruiting children into its ranks. Those are
encouraging early steps in what will hopefully become
a more substantive peace process.

Elsewhere, United Nations engagement with non- State
armed groups in Mali and the Sudan has led to the signing
of two new action plans, while in the Philippines more
than 1,850 children have been freed from the military
wing of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front. Those are
important milestones that perhaps were unthinkable
over 20 years ago, when the Graca Machel's report was
published (A/51/306). Such achievements would not
have been possible without the mandate and work of
the Special Representative, which the United Kingdom
continues to fully support.

Children are the innocent victims of conflict. Let
us today renew our determination to work together to
protect the many children caught up in conflict, get
them back to school and give them hope of a brighter
future, free from fear and conflict.

