Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Our Organization was established
after the Second World War in an endeavour to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war
through the maintenance of justice, respect for
international law and the promotion of basic human
rights. As such, the United Nations took it upon itself
to maintain international peace and security through
collective measures to remove the causes of war and
threats to peace and to bring about, by peaceful means
when possible, and in accordance with the principles of
justice and international law, the settlement of

international disputes that could lead to a breach of the
peace.

Given the current situation, which threatens to
exhaust peaceful means in dealing with the Iraqi issue,
the Jordanian Government believes that all States
Members of the United Nations should work together
to achieve a solution through all available peaceful
means, and to avoid any measures that would breach
the peace and further exacerbate the situation in the
Middle East.

That in itself makes it incumbent on the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities under the
Charter, in particular paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 24.
The rest of the membership of the Organization has
entrusted the Security Council with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and the Council must therefore use
all possible reasonable means to resolve the Iraqi issue
through negotiation and dialogue. In that connection, I
would like to reiterate the position of the Jordanian
Government that the implementation of Security
Council resolutions - all resolutions on the Middle
East, whether on Iraq or on the occupied Palestinian
territories - is an obligation on all States without
exception.

The Jordanian Government believes that a
peaceful way out of the current crisis would require
that Iraq fully implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including those related to inspections, in
particular resolutions 687 (1991), 1284 (1999) and
1441 (2002). Resolution 687 (1991) created the
framework for and set out the goals of the inspection
process in Iraq; resolution 1284 (1999) clarified, inter
alia, the obligations of both Iraq and the inspectors in
relation to resolving the remaining disarmament issues
and to the creation of a reinforced system of ongoing
monitoring and verification; and resolution 1441
(2002) provided the inspectors with significant rights
and the authority to build a robust, enhanced and
effective inspection system. Such a system would put
an end to Iraq's proscribed weapons programmes in a
peaceful manner, provided that suitable conditions for
the process existed. To date, this system has shown
evidence of unprecedented effectiveness. It should
continue and, if necessary, be enhanced, as its failure
would constitute a threat to international peace and
security. The Security Council would then have to
convene to consider that failure, as well as how to
restore international peace and security.

In this regard, the Government of Jordan would
like to reiterate that the Security Council resolutions
relevant to Iraq complement one another. It further
expresses its support for the continuation of the
inspection process and for the work being carried out
by Mr. Hans Blix, Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission, and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The Government of Jordan also calls for improved
cooperation on the part of all relevant parties,
especially the Iraqi Government, to ensure that Iraq's
proscribed weapons programmes are brought to an end
in a peaceful manner. In this regard, it welcomes the
outcome of the recent talks that took place in Baghdad,
including unconditional permission for surveillance
flights and the conducting of private interviews with
Iraqi scientists, as well as a commitment by Iraq to
enact, without conditions, legislation prohibiting the
manufacture and stockpiling of proscribed weapons.

Jordan calls on the Iraqi Government not to waste
this opportunity and to take the initiative by
cooperating proactively in the implementation of the
relevant Council resolutions. That would save Iraq, the
region and its peoples from the scourge of war and
from the suffering that would inevitably follow. The
Government of Jordan hopes that that would be the
right step towards a comprehensive solution
encompassing the implementation of all relevant
Council resolutions, including those related to Kuwaiti
and third-party prisoners of war and missing persons.
That in turn would lead to an end to the long-drawn-out
suffering of the Iraqi people, allowing them to live in
prosperity and dignity, and would ensure that future
generations of Iraqis can live in peace and security.

The wars that plagued the Middle East region in
the previous century were, and still are, the major
cause of political, economic and social instability in
that region. This in turn has had negative repercussions
on international peace and security and has contributed
to the creation of a major global economic crisis. Any
new war would therefore have serious repercussions,
not only on the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq,
but on the whole region. Furthermore, we are deeply
concerned about the humanitarian crisis that would
inevitably result from such a war - the deaths, the
injuries, the refugee movement and the displacement of
millions. Jordan, as one of Iraq's neighbours, would
like to recall the serious humanitarian and economic
consequences that continue to affect it as a result of the
first Gulf war.

For those reasons, the Government of Jordan calls
on the Security Council and on all parties directly
involved in the crisis to make use of every available
solution to avoid war; to contribute to the stability and
security of the Middle East; to respect the rights of the
countries of the region and their peoples; to abide by
the provisions of the Charter; and to act within the
framework of international legitimacy and the Security
Council.

