Modern patterns of violent conflict are fundamentally different from the wars that led to the establishment of the United Nations and informed the organization of its work. The drivers of conflict are continuously changing, and in order to effectively prevent and respond to violence we will have to continue to revise our understanding and adapt our approach. Therefore, the European Union (EU) fully supports the initiative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in holding this highly topical meeting on "Peacebuilding and sustaining peace: contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity". The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its potential implications are a tragic reminder of what constitutes a threat to collective security. The pandemic should be an occasion for us to take an unbiased and dispassionate look at new collective ways of addressing these implications. In the past, the Security Council dealt with health crises with great potential impact for the security of fragile communities - such as the HIV/AIDS epidemic in 2000 or the Ebola outbreak in 2014 - by declaring that the spread of the virus was a "threat to international peace and security". The pandemic situation in which we find ourselves today is therefore not new. However, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is not yet fully understood. When Secretary-General Antonio Guterres first called for a global ceasefire in response to COVID-19, on 23 March, fighters in numerous countries expressed their support. But none of them followed through and stopped fighting. We know now that the security impact of the pandemic will not come from voluntary ceasefires. Rather, it will come from the devastating impact it will have on the economy, health structures and social protection. While the levels of political violence and conflict worldwide have remained roughly stable until now, the economic impact of the disease could lead to a global recession or depression that will especially hurt poor States, which may prove more disruptive than the initial health effects of the pandemic. In addition, pandemics, climate change and environmental degradation exacerbate situations of fragility and vulnerability. When they are laid upon pre-existing crises, additional layers of complexity are added to already fragile systems; this is a fact that has long been recognized by the Security Council. In 2017, the Security Council adopted resolution 2349 (2017), on the need to address climate-related risks to tackle conflict in the Lake Chad basin. Challenges to peace and security, be they social, developmental, political, economic, health-related or environmental, are interconnected. To address these challenges, we have to move beyond the understanding of conflict that underpinned the establishment of the structure of the United Nations 75 years ago, and in doing so deliver responses that are coordinated and integrated across the agencies and pillars of the United Nations. The Security Council is the guarantor for collective peace and security, but to deliver on its mandate and address today's core drivers of conflict and instability, it has to engage with a wide range of actors and understand a complex range of issues. This is ongoing work, and a number of models have already been tested, including horizon-scanning meetings, field trips to, and meetings with, all United Nations agencies and briefings by the heads of development agencies. These approaches should be strengthened and explored further. The demand for humanitarian aid and post-COVID pandemic relief is increasing, but focus on the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development must not be neglected during crises and disasters. The Secretary-General's call for spending 20 per cent of development assistance on conflict-affected peacebuilding should also be heard. Furthermore, existing centres of expertise can be better utilized. The Secretariat's Climate Security Mechanism, which brings together the expertise of the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Development Programme and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and covers the pillars related to the environment, development, conflict and peace issues, is an excellent source for cross-sectoral analysis. This analysis should feed into reporting on the security impacts of environmental degradation and climate change for both the General Assembly and the Security Council. We may need more centres of this kind to organize expertise from different areas and achieve effective early warning, prevention and reaction. An example of this is the One Health approach, which brings together experts on human, animal and environmental health. The Peacebuilding Commission is a useful platform for discussions among a wide range of actors that can inform the work in the Security Council. Lately, the Commission has addressed the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in such areas as the Lake Chad basin and Burkina Faso and delivered advice on the next mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic. This has demonstrated its capacity to translate the knowledge on the ground into inputs for the Council's decision-making. Finally, it should be emphasized that the EU continues to deepen its involvement in combating the root causes of instability and conflicts, in close cooperation with all parts of the United Nations system as well as regional and local partners. In a situation where conflicts caused or exacerbated by climate change and new pandemics threaten to wipe out decades of development achievements, causing countries and their people to fall back in poverty, the EU remains a solid and reliable partner for peace and development.
