Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Minister Holguin Cuellar, for chairing this important
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Gasana, Ambassador Momen and Mr. Von
Amsberg for their important leadership on the issue of
peacebuilding.

We have learned time and again that the end of
conflict does not mean that peace has necessarily
arrived. Sustained peace must be built on a durable
foundation of national commitment, broad international
support and experience informed by the lessons of the
past. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has an
important role to play, and can continue to enhance
its contribution by focusing its efforts, strengthening
coordination with internal and external stakeholders,
and highlighting best practices.

First, peacebuilding cannot succeed without
national ownership. That is indispensable. Government,
civil society and citizens must be engaged regularly in
order to ensure the international community responds to
their needs. We encourage the PBC to engage affected
communities in shaping peacebuilding priorities and
to incorporate the perspectives of youth and women in
particular, which are crucial to post-conflict recovery.

The Liberia configuration's recent meeting with a
local peace committee is one example of grass-roots
engagement that should be repeated. Peacebuilding
strategies need to be integral to national plans, not an
added burden to post-conflict Governments already
struggling to manage delicate transitions. The PBC
can help reinforce existing national strategies and
ensure a focused effort from all actors. The PBC has
done that effectively in Sierra Leone by adopting the
Government's Agenda for Change as the basis for
its engagement in the country. As a result, the PBC
promotes a single vision for Sierra Leone's future.

Secondly, the international community still
struggles with coordinating an increasingly crowded
field of peacebuilding actors. We urge the PBC to forge
and expand partnerships with international financial
institutions, including the African Development
Bank and the World Bank, major donors and key
regional actors. Deeper relationships between the
PBC and regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, would also benefit
many countries on the PBC agenda, particularly in
dealing with issues that benefit from regional solutions,
including combating transnational illicit networks.

Thirdly, mobilizing resources for peacebuilding
remains an enormous challenge, but one on which the
PBC can have a significant impact. We commend the
country-specific configuration Chairs for publicly
advocating for sustained commitment to peacebuilding
and increasing the alignment of PBC priorities with
projects supported by the Peacebuilding Fund. The PBC
can also leverage its diverse composition and convening
power to mobilize new sources of investment and
support, including from the private sector, and work
to ensure timely and successful donor conferences and
related processes.

Fourthly, today's discussion of the PBC's
effectiveness cannot be separated from the broader
work of United Nations peacebuilding, including efforts
to develop and deploy more effectively capable civilian
specialists in the aftermath of conflict.

We welcome the commitment of the
Secretary-General to implement reforms since the
issuance of his report (S/2011/527) on the subject.
Those include the development of an online mechanism
to access the marketplace of civilian expertise, and
the designation of a new global focal point on the rule
of law, to bring greater coherence to the work of the
United Nations and mobilize the combined expertise of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on
that critical, cross-cutting issue. Indeed, successful
peacebuilding requires the United Nations to pool its
own system-wide expertise.

On other multifaceted issues, such as
youth employment and improving public sector
capacity-building, progress still needs to be made in
bringing all partners together around common strategies
and effective divisions of labour.

The United Nations can also play a unique role
in facilitating triangular partnerships that support the
sharing of expertise in post-conflict transitions, such
as the initiative of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to deploy Kenyan, Ugandan and Ethiopian
experts to South Sudan, with the support of Norway and
UNDP. United Nations agencies can encourage wider
use of those and other innovative arrangements when
designing peacebuilding activities.

Finally, fortunately, we have an increasingly long
list of experiences to inform our support for countries
emerging from conflict. The PBC has worked with six
countries on a diverse range of peacebuilding needs,
and the United Nations has supported numerous other
peacebuilding efforts in places such as South Sudan and
Timor-Leste.

While there is no one-size-fits-all peacebuilding
solution, the United States encourages the PBC,
through its Working Group on Lessons Learned, to
systematically review peacebuilding precedents and
disseminate global best practices from countries on and
off the PBC's agenda.

The Council's mandate to advance peace and
security demands that we work not just to end conflict,
but to prevent its recurrence. By aligning with national
priorities, strengthening international partnerships and
learning from what we have already accomplished, the
Peacebuilding Commission has great potential to help
countries emerging from war to stay on the path to
peace. The United States looks forward to the Security
Council's continuing engagement with the PBC to
facilitate and enhance that critical work.

