Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Africa, given its vast size and natural and
human resources, has great potential for development.
However, the disintegration of the bipolar world has had
a huge impact on Africa, which is now in great need of
an environment of peace, unity and stability. China has
always paid great attention to developments in Africa. We
deeply sympathize with the conflict-torn African continent
in the post-cold-war era and with its peoples in their
suffering caused by the conflicts.

China attaches importance to Africa. It has been an
important component of China's foreign policy to support
the African peoples in their endeavours to maintain peace
and stability, and to strengthen friendly relations of
cooperation with all African countries. We support the
reasonable demands and just stands of African countries
in international affairs. That is precisely what the Chinese
delegation has been doing at the United Nations,
including in the Security Council.

Since the outbreak of the crisis in Rwanda, the
international community - particularly the Organization
of African Unity and Rwanda's neighbours - have made
commendable efforts towards the early restoration of
peace and stability in that country. The Rwandese
Government has done tremendous work in promoting
national reconciliation, repatriating refugees, rebuilding
the homeland and improving the security situation
throughout the country. At present, stability is gradually
returning to Rwanda. There has also been some
improvement in relations between the Rwandese
Government and the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda (UNAMIR).

All these are welcome developments. However, the
repatriation of Rwandese refugees and displaced persons
is proceeding slowly. The humanitarian situation remains
grim. The flow of weapons into Rwanda has yet to be
controlled. These problems, if not solved promptly, will
severely undermine the process of national reconciliation
undertaken by the Rwandese Government. Therefore, we
believe that the Security Council should accord the same
attention to the question of Rwanda that it accords to
other regions and that the international community should
continue to take measures to help the Rwandese
Government and people resolve their current difficulties

 

so that they can enjoy peace and stability again at an early
date.

In the light of the changed situation in Rwanda and at
the request of the Rwandese Government, the Security
Council today will adopt a resolution concerning the lifting
of the arms embargo against the Rwandese Government.
We hope that this move by the Council will contribute to
national reconciliation in Rwanda within the framework of
the Arusha Peace Agreement. We also hope to see an early
solution to the arms problem in refugee camps outside
Rwanda, in order to establish conditions for the repatriation
of refugees.

Based on its consistent position of support for the
peace process in Rwanda, the Chinese delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution before us. We sincerely
hope that the Rwandese people will, under the leadership of
their Government, continue to work together to build
Rwanda into a country of peace and stability.
