Mr. Antonio: Allow me to start by congratulating
the delegations of Angola, China and Senegal for
having jointly convened this timely debate on an
important issue that deserves greater attention from
the international community. I also thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook
Zerihoun, for his briefing.

(spoke in French)
I would also like to welcome the presence of
Mr. Robert Dussey, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Cooperation and African Integration of the Republic
of Togo, and Ms. Annika deer, State Secretary for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden. I would especially like to
thank Mr. Dussey for shedding light on the African
Union initiatives, including thee draft charter clarifying
what is being done on the continent.

(spoke in English)

Acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea in Africa's
Gulf of Guinea represent a major concern not only
to the region but also to the African Union and the
international community as a whole. Our concerns
are all the more acute as, over the past decade, piracy
attacks in that region have increased in severity and
scope, spreading northward and southward. Nowadays,
such attacks represent more than a quarter of all attacks
reported worldwide. There is no need to underscore the
long-range and far-reaching negative implications that
those criminal acts continue to have on the countries
concerned, given the fact that energy security and trade
in the region depend, to a large extent, on sea-based
transport. As indicated in the concept note (S/2016/321, annex), every year such attacks inflict billions of
dollars of economic losses on the countries concerned
in the region.

Despite those facts, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
has only recently gained international attention. We
all remember the efforts made by African delegations,
especially the delegation of the Republic of Benin, to
draw the Council's attention and concern to that issue.
Unfortunately, little concrete action has been taken
since the adoption of resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039
(2012), regarding acts of piracy and armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea. The resolutions have therefore had
only minimal impact on the number of incidents of
piracy in the region. Moreover, the technical assistance
requested from the international community has yet to
be deployed in full.

National, regional, continental and international
coordination appear to be a sine qua non if we want
to effectively fight maritime insecurity in the Gulf of
Guinea and beyond. The African Union continues to
cooperate closely with subregional actors in taking all
the appropriate measures to combat maritime crime and
insecurity and to address the underlying factors so as
to foster long-term security and stability in the region.

It is in that context that the African Union adopted,
at its twenty-second Summit, the 2050 African Union
Integrated Maritime Strategy and Plan of Action, which
should be viewed as a complement and support to
regional efforts on the continent. It is also in that context
that the African Union plans to hold an Extraordinary
Summit in Lome, as mentioned by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and African Integration of
the Republic of Togo, on the issue of maritime security.
As we already stated, his participation in this meeting
is another demonstration of not only the engagement,
but also the awareness on the part of the leadership
in Africa.

At the regional level, countries of the region and
concerned regional organizations have taken numerous
steps to combat piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea. It is unnecessary, therefore, to underscore
what many delegations have already said with regard
to the importance of the Summit of Heads of State and
Government of Central and West Africa on Maritime
Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, held in June
2013 in Yaounde. That Summit led to an ambitious
memorandum of understanding that established
the Code of Conduct Concerning the Repression of
Piracy, Armed Robbery Against Ships, and Illicit
Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa and the
Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety
and Security in the Gulf of Guinea. The memorandum
also established the International Conference on
Maritime and Energy Security, which was sponsored
by Angola, the United States of America and Italy,
and held in Luanda. The key question remains how
adequately and effectively we have supported all of
those initiatives. The coordination of those initiatives is
important as well. Also ofparamount importance is the
use of established bodies, such as the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and the Gulf of Guinea Interregional
Coordination Centre.

Regional and continental efforts need to be fully
supported and enabled by the international community,
in accordance with Security Council resolutions 2018
(2011) and 2039 (2012). We also need to strengthen the
collective efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission. These
efforts must also include other neighbouring regional
and international bodies, namely the Southern Africa
Development Community and the zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic, which includes 21
African countries and three countries from Latin
America, namely, Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay, the
latter being the current President of the zone, as already
stated by the Uruguayan delegation.

Maritime security is closely linked to security
on land, as well as to the conditions of stability and
development of the concerned nations. The concerned
countries need to be supported to achieve long-term
prosperity, including for the development of the maritime
domain to enable greater trade, cooperation and job
creation. We must also ensure that our interventions in
the fields of development, including the development of
the blue economy, which was already well stated by the
Minister of Togo; cooperation; peacebuilding; conflict
prevention and international security are mutually
reinforcing.

For its part, the African Union will continue to
support all efforts of the region and its coastal States to
address the many challenges of maritime security and
organized crime that peoples of this region are facing.

