Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs for his briefing and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for his statement.

France associates itself with the statement to be
made by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union.

The peace process in the Middle East remains at
an impasse. On 21 September the Quartet established a
one-year deadline to achieve a framework agreement
on all final status issues for the creation of a sovereign,
independent, viable and democratic Palestinian State
living in peace alongside Israel within safe and
recognized borders. We recall the importance of
achieving this goal because more than ever, time is
working against peace.

Attaining this objective in 2011 means the swift
resumption of negotiations on final status issues, which
is the only way to bring an end to the conflict. The
deadline established by the Quartet is ambitious, but
this urgency is dictated by the situation on the ground,
where the viability of a two-State solution seems more
threatened every day. In the immediate term, moves to
recreate the conditions for confidence that are
necessary for negotiations, both politically and on the
ground, are awaited.

The parameters for a negotiated solution are
known, and we do not need to reinvent the foundation
of a process that has been under way for some 20 years
now. Moreover, the European Union publicly recalled
those parameters recently. Accordingly, France deems
it necessary, in line with what Mrs. Clinton said in her
speech at the Saban Forum, to call on the parties to
provide their positions on the main final status issues.
We welcome the fact that the United States is planning
to provide the parties with its proposals if that becomes
necessary, but we recall that a close involvement of the
other members of the Quartet and certain Arab States
in those efforts would increase their chances of
succeeding. The international community, including
within this Council, must indeed be able to support
those efforts in all their forms and confer on them the
necessary legitimacy. We thus hope that the
forthcoming meeting of the Quartet, on 5 February,
will contribute to recreating conditions of confidence
that are necessary between the parties.

France and the European Union have reiterated
their availability to make a substantial contribution to a
peace agreement and to the arrangements that that
would involve. That is the message that the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mrs. Michele Alliot-Marie,
while visiting the region from the 19 to 23 January, will
bring to the parties, as well as to the two main regional
actors in the peace process, Egypt and Jordan. The
support of States in the region for the political process,
based on the Arab Peace Initiative, remains crucial.

This objective involves preserving the viability of
the two-State solution on the ground. Given the
increasing speed of construction, the international
community, in particular this Council, cannot relax its
attention with regard to the question of settlement
activity. As the European Ministers recalled on
13 December, settlement activity is illegal. It is an
obstacle to peace, as it undermines confidence between
parties and the viability of prospects for peace.

France desires that initiatives in this area may
constitute a constructive element of the effort to
relaunch discussions between the parties on all final
status issues. There will be no solution to the conflict
without a cessation of settlement activity, including
with regard to natural growth of existing settlements.

We are asking in particular for the cessation of all
measures that affect the demographic balance in
Jerusalem, which is destined to become the capital of

the two States. In East Jerusalem, settlement activity is
not only illegal but increases the likelihood of violent
incidents in the Holy City, with political implications
that are to be feared. At present, France is concerned
by the situation and condemns the recent demolition of
Shepherd Hotel in order to build a new settlement in
the Palestinian quarter of Sheikh Jarrah. We call on the
parties to avoid all provocation in a context of
increasing tensions. This situation on the ground, like
the increasingly fragile political outlook, is likely to
undermine the projects of the Fayyad plan, which is
main tangible achievement on the way to the
attainment of a Palestinian State since the Annapolis
Conference in 2007.

The support of the international community for
the Palestinian Authority and for President Abbas in
order to strengthen the institutions for a future
Palestinian State must not waver. In order to
consolidate this international support, the President of
France announced our country's willingness to
organize a second donor conference in Paris in the
spring. This should be linked to the political process; it
can in no way be an economic substitute for the peace
process. The challenge is also for Israel to align itself
with this movement in a much more determined way,
particularly in the West Bank. Gestures have been
made on the ground, but they remain insufficient,
especially in terms of freedom of movement and
access.

The situation in Gaza continues to be of concern.
A change in approach, without infringing on Israel's
security imperatives, is necessary and possible. Our
Minister of State, who is going to Gaza, will reaffirm
our willingness to contribute to this.

France welcomes the Israeli Government's recent
decision to authorize the export of several categories of
products from the area and to develop infrastructure at
crossing points. This announcement is in the right
direction, as it promotes the growth of Gaza's economy
by supporting the development of its private sector. We
should work together to ensure that it is rapidly
implemented, and secure complementary measures that
can help achieve a comprehensive lifting of the
blockade. In that regard, we are also awaiting sped up
implementation of United Nations construction
projects and a relaxation in restrictions on movement
in and out of the Gaza Strip. The European Union has
proposed concrete assistance in that regard.

We must not forget Gilad Shalit, who has been a
hostage in the Gaza Strip for four years now, in
disregard of the principles of international
humanitarian law and basic humanity. France remains
ready to help achieve his immediate and unconditional
release. We also continue to call for an immediate halt
to all violence, particularly rocket fire into southern
Israel.

With regard to the political crisis that Lebanon is
currently experiencing, France supports the Lebanese
authorities and remains committed to respect for
institutions and the framework defined by the Taif
Agreement, as well as democratic principles and the
stability, independence and sovereignty of Lebanon.
We encourage the Lebanese people and representatives
of Lebanese institutions to find a solution to the current
crisis through dialogue. Given recent developments,
following discussions with the main Lebanese and
regional stakeholders, France's President has proposed
international consultations to help Lebanon overcome
the difficulties it faces. France is of course
coordinating its efforts with the Secretary-General.

With regard to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon,
on 17 January the Prosecutor submitted an indictment
to the judge, thus launching the judicial phase of the
Tribunal's work. France of course fully supports the
work of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, which was
established by resolution 1757 (2007). We call on all
parties, especially those in Lebanon and the region, to
respect the Tribunal's independence, to reject any
political manipulation and to refrain from hindering the
Tribunal's work. Lastly, in this very unstable
environment, we call on all parties to respect resolution
1701 (2006), and commend the work done in southern
Lebanon by the United Nations Interim Force in that
country.

The regional aspect of the peace process is
crucial. We are working to create the conditions for a
renewal of negotiations between Syria and Israel, in
close cooperation with the United States and Turkey.

The Middle East is a region of great cultural,
human and religious diversity. Peace and stability there
is inconceivable without the preservation of the culture
of tolerance and respect that is the foundation of the
region's richness. The recent attacks aimed at religious
communities demonstrate a desire to fuel hatred. We
must join forces with those countries that have been
attacked so we can together fight terrorism and combat

those who want to promote the notion of a conflict
between civilizations. The perpetrators of such terrorist
acts must be prosecuted. Members of religious
minorities must be able to live in safety in their
countries. France stresses the importance of the
effective protection of minorities, of respect for their
freedom of religion and belief and of the promotion of
tolerance. We encourage and support the efforts of the
Governments of the region to that end.

