Mr. Begec (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I should, however, like to make some additional
comments in my national capacity.

We join others in appreciating the convening of
today's debate and thank the briefers for their insightful
remarks. We also thank the co-facilitators of the
draft resolution 4 the representatives of Angola and
Australia - for their transparent and inclusive work.

The United Nations has undertaken several review
processes on how to better address the challenges to
international peace and security. Turkey welcomes those
processes and supports their key recommendations.
However, it is also important that synergy and coherence
be derived from them in order to give rise to cross-
cutting and multidimensional solutions; otherwise we
run the risk of fragmentation.

The report (S/2015/682) of the Secretary-
General entitled "The future of United Nations peace
operations: implementation of the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations"
and the report (S/2015/716) on the global study on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) have already
contributed to the ongoing debates. Moreover, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), in particular Sustainable
Development Goal 16, has underscored the link between
peace and development with an emphasis on conflict
prevention, good governance and the rule of law.

Turkey has long advocated in favour of a
stronger interrelationship between humanitarian
and development perspectives. In our experience,
humanitarian assistance delivered through development
tools enhances recipients' resilience in facing recurrent
crises. The World Humanitarian Summit to be held in
Istanbul will enable all stakeholders to further assess
this interrelationship.

The Organization devotes most of its energy
and resources to crisis management. However,
conflict prevention can be more efficient and cost-
effective. As an important tool in recovery efforts,
peacebuilding may well play a preventive role. In
fact, peacebuilding 4 which is at the nexus of the
three pillars of the United Nations 4 is applicable
throughout the conflict cycle. Turkey supports United
Nations efforts in using effective mediation tools for
the purpose of conflict prevention, and regards United
Nations peacebuilding capacity as a contribution to
sustainable peace.

The Peacebuilding Commission plays an
important role as a bridge between the principal
United Nations organs 4 the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. Turkey participates in five out of six country-
specific configurations within the Commission. We
therefore believe that, if given strategic guidance, the
Commission can fulfil its mandate more effectively.
We should also find a way for allocating adequate
resources to the Peacebuilding Fund. Peacebuilding is
a political engagement with a broad scope of activities,
including institution-building, which requires financial
and human resources. With this understanding, Turkey
supports the Fund with voluntary contributions.
Likewise, activities such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector reform
and the promotion of human rights and the rule of law
are heavily dependent upon United Nations support,
and therefore require further resourcing.

The report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group

of Experts emphasizes the need for deeper cooperation
between the United Nations and the international
financial institutions. In that regard, cooperation with
regional development banks could play a positive role
in sustaining peacebuilding activities with a higher
degree of ownership at the regional, national and local
levels.

It is key to success in our peacebuilding and
development endeavours to encourage the increased
participation, inclusiveness and empowerment of all
segments of society, notably women and youth, because
social division and injustice will only harm the prospect
for a culture of peace to flourish.

Last but not the least, the work ofthe Peacebuilding
Support Office deserves more support and
encouragement than it receives at present.

The meeting rose at 4.40 pm.
