Mr. Mayr-Harting: I speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The acceding country Croatia,
the candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and
Serbia, the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank and congratulate the United
Kingdom for organizing the timely and successful
Somalia conference in London on 23 February. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mahiga for
their briefings here today.

Allow me to begin by reiterating the European
Union's deep concern about the situation in Somalia
and about the regional implications of its conflict. The
European Union is determined to support the people of
Somalia. They need peace, a prosperous economy and
a stable political future in which they are able to live in
security under the rule of law. Only such improved
governance in Somalia can bring to an end both Somali
suffering and the consequent scourges of terrorism and
piracy beyond its borders.

The EU has set out its approach to Somalia in its
strategic framework for the Horn of Africa. It has been
putting its words into action through a wide range of

interventions - humanitarian, developmental,
political, counter-piracy and maritime capacity-
building - re-establishing the rule of law and

coordinating counter-terrorism. The EU's overall
support to Somalia amounts to more than €l billion.

The European Union welcomes the progress that
the Garowe Principles constitute in implementing the
Kampala Agreement and the road map to end the
transition. We look to Somalis to build a new Somalia
on those Principles by putting in place a new
constitution and a stable and accountable political
structure that is acceptable to all, through an inclusive
process that is representative of the Somali
communities. All Somali groups that clearly renounce
violence and allow unhindered humanitarian access
should be included.

The European Union encourages and supports
Somalia's reconciliation process. We will work hard to
help the process move forward in accordance with the
agreed benchmarks and timelines, as there can be no
extension of the transitional period. But conflict
resolution happens when local communities agree to
live in peace together, not when outsiders impose
peace.

It is reassuring that recent months have seen the
withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from some key cities in the
central and southern regions of Somalia. In fact, the
EU's largest contribution has been in the area of
security.

The European Union welcomes the recent
adoption of resolution 2036 (2012). The EU remains a
steadfast supporter of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). We praise the commitment and
bravery of the Mission's troops. The European
Commission will propose a further financial support of
€100 million to AMISOM. to help fund the troop
increase. That will be in addition to the €325 million
given to date, provided through the African Peace
Facility. The EU expects that, with that increase,
AMISOM. will be able to deliver security outside
Mogadishu. But the decision to introduce
reimbursements for contingent-owned equipment
places an additional burden on EU member States,
which together pay more than 40 per cent of the United
Nations peacekeeping budget. Burden-sharing on a
more equal basis is necessary. The European Union
therefore calls on new, additional donors to ensure the
sustainability of AMISOM. financing.

Together with the political process, helping
Somalis to establish their own effective security forces
is our best exit strategy. The EU is therefore training
the national security forces of Somalia through its
training mission in Uganda. To date, together with
partners, the mission has trained approximately 1,800
soldiers, specialists, trainers and junior leaders. We are
currently training more trainers and officers to enable
them to take command and control of the forces. The
EU has also funded, through the United Nations
Development Programme, the training and stipends of
7,000 Somali police officers.

The European Union supports security to create
space for good, inclusive governance and for
improving lives through development. Already the
largest donor to Somalia, the European Union is
increasing its development assistance, which now
totals more than €500 million, to support governance,
education and economic development. We are working
wherever adequate security and governance permit
development to hold sway, including the regions of
Puntland and Somaliland. That support ought to be
expanded to more regions, as circumstances permit.

The EU and its member States are encouraged by
the United Nations announcement that famine
conditions in Somalia have ended. However, concerns
persist in relation to the 2.3 million people who remain
in crisis. The onset of famine in Somalia spurred the
EU to more than double its humanitarian aid to
€77 million. The EU provided food, health care, water
and sanitation facilities to those affected by the crisis.
In tackling the humanitarian challenge, the EU and its
member States emphasize how humanitarian assistance
should be guided by the principles of humanity,
independence, neutrality and impartiality. A clear
distinction between humanitarian objectives and
political and security objectives is essential.

The European Union also plays an important role
in combating piracy off the coast of Somalia through
its Operation Atalanta naval force. Its mission is to
ensure the protection of World Food Program
shipments and of vulnerable shipping, including
deliveries to AMISOM. Operation Atalanta, whose
mandate was very recently extended until December
2014, works to deter, prevent and repress acts of
piracy.

The prosecution of suspected pirates continues to
constitute a key task, to be solved in close cooperation
with local and regional partners and within the longer-
term goal of restoring the rule of law in Somalia. The
European Union has signed memorandums of
understanding with the Seychelles and Mauritius to
transfer pirates arrested by Operation Atalanta, and is
currently negotiating such agreements with other
countries of the region. Additionally, the European
Union welcomes the recent report by the Secretary-
General on specialized Somali anti-piracy courts
(S/2011/360).

Regional ownership is important. That is why the
European Union supports the anti-piracy strategy of the
Eastern and Southern Africa and Indian Ocean regions
adopted in Mauritius in October 2010. A new element
of the EU's anti-piracy engagement will be a civilian
mission to build regional maritime capacities that will
benefit the littoral countries of the Red Sea and the
Horn of Africa regions.

In conclusion, the key to resolving the political
impasse in Somalia lies with Somalis themselves. The
EU notes the important contributions made by the
European Union in Somalia under the leadership of
Special Representative Augustine Mahiga. The

European Union welcomes the relocation of United
Nations staff to Mogadishu. A sustained presence in
Somalia's capital will facilitate the international
community's work in the country.

The increased international attention, recent
security improvements on the ground and the
expansion of AMISOM. constitute a window of
opportunity in Somalia. Now is the time to redouble
efforts to reach the ultimate goal, namely, the transfer
of political and security responsibilities to a Somali
Government with broad-based, local support.

We look forward to the United Nations and the
African Union exercising decisive leadership in
promoting peace in Somalia. The European Union will
contribute to attaining that goal through a
comprehensive approach. At the same time, it is
imperative that all Somali stakeholders, especially the
Transitional Federal Institutions, act upon their
promises to solve the tremendous political, economic
and security challenges before them.

