Mr. Annabi: I am pleased to introduce the fourth
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan, as called for under Security Council
resolution 1401 (2002) of 28 March 2002.
The Secretary-General's report describes the
administrative, political and economic developments
that have taken place over the past four months in the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement on
Afghanistan. I would like in this briefing to focus in a
more general and thematic way on the challenges ahead
in the implementation of the Agreement and on how
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) proposes to meet them.

UNAMA's focus over the next year will be to
continue to assist the Afghan Government to
consolidate its authority throughout the country and
implement national policies that reach the entire nation.
This effort will build on progress made last year in
establishing the essential structures of Government and
in proving that these structures can work at a basic
level. Building on these foundations will require
enhancing administrative capacity, carrying out
security sector reform and furthering the political
transformation towards representative Government.
But, as Mr. Brahimi has frequently said in this Council
and as the Secretary-General has made clear in his
report, we cannot take these basic structures for
granted. They must be further consolidated, expanded
and legitimized. This will require the continued support
of the international community.

The determination of the Afghan Government to
take the leading role in rebuilding its State and the
economy was clearly demonstrated during preparations
for this year's national budget. The budget was
presented to donors at the Afghanistan Development
Forum held on 13 and 14 March in Kabul and at the
Afghanistan High-Level Strategic Forum on 17 March
in Brussels. The budget process saw Government
ministries, with the support of the consultative groups
comprised of international and donor partners, prepare
and justify their expenditure plans, defend their
proposals to their cabinet colleagues and accept final
allocations on the principle of sustainability. The
progress of all programmes will be measured against
agreed benchmarks.

The Government sees the budget as its main
policy-making instrument and as a mechanism to
ensure that decisions on resource allocation are
domestically led and have domestic ownership. The
budget sets the role of the State as regulator and
guarantor of social well-being and enshrines the
principles of geographic equity in the allocation of
resources. The budget provides for some $2.26 billion
in expenditure. The Government estimates that it will
collect internal revenues of $200 million and donors
have to date pledged $1.87 billion, leaving a funding
gap of around $191 million in this year's budget.

At the heart of the budget process is the issue of
government ownership and leadership in setting
national priorities for the overall reconstruction
agenda- in other words, of transforming an ad hoc
system that developed during the years of civil war,
when non-governmental organizations, the United
Nations and other international organizations gradually
assumed some State functions related to the delivery of
services, into one where the State itself has the
capacity to exercise its responsibility for national
development.

The United Nations has supported this
transformation, working with and within ministries to
build their capacity and coordinating United Nations
programme priorities with national programme
priorities. The United Nations support in this regard
builds on a generally successful effort over the past
year to integrate United Nations agency programmes
under the UNAMA umbrella. At the same time,
UNAMA has stressed the Government's responsibility
to ensure the effective use of the resources that it
manages - many of them still provided by donors -
by building capacity and preventing corruption. A
number of delegates at the Brussels conference, which
I mentioned earlier, also underlined the need for
administrative reform in the public service.

In the Government's plan, reconstruction and
economic development rest upon successful
administrative reform. The national development
programme lays out a clear role for the State over the
long term. While the State will invest in human capital
and implement social policies focused on assistance to
the most vulnerable, it will take on a direct managerial
role only when social justice demands it. The
development plan otherwise calls for the reorientation
of the State machinery to focus on policy and
regulation, leaving implementation and growth to the
private sector. The Administration recognizes that a
robust private sector that provides sustainable
development opportunities is ultimately the most
effective way to improve the conditions of the majority
of the population and to stabilize the revenue base of
the national Government.

As the Secretary-General's report notes, the
Government has already taken steps to effect this
transformation, in particular through a successful
currency exchange exercise; through staffing changes
that better reflect the ethnic composition of the
population; and through the establishment of a number
of commissions, including on security sector reform,
civil service reform, judicial reform, constitutional
development and the promotion of human rights. Much
more remains to be done, however, in particular as
regards the reform of the civil service and of the
judicial sector.

I believe that one of the most pressing challenges
ahead for the Government of Afghanistan is to
strengthen the links between Kabul and the provinces
and to strengthen the capacity of the provincial and
local governments themselves. Effective governance at
the local level, with reliable fiscal, administrative and
policy links to the central Government, will enable the
population across Afghanistan to gain confidence that
the Government can affect their lives positively. For
this to occur, however, security outside Kabul must
significantly improve.

In our briefings and reports to the Security
Council, we have consistently stressed that the lack of
security threatens the peace process at all levels and
that the importance of security sector reform is
therefore paramount. The Secretary-General's report in
this regard is no exception. It describes developments
in building the national army and police, the counter-
narcotics effort, judicial reform and planning for
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
programmes. It is important, however, to see security
sector reform not as an end in itself but as a mechanism
to enable the central Government to extend its control
over the country and, in turn, to allow the interrelated
political and economic development processes to occur
within the space created by a functioning security
sector. A multi-ethnic and accountable army and police
will allow the State to provide the orderly environment
required for the rule of law and the promotion and
protection of human rights. The creation of an effective
border police will ensure that customs revenues are
collected by the central Government, thereby
increasing its capacity and sustainability. The reform of
the judicial system will allow for the rule of law, based
on international covenants that Afghanistan has signed,
and incorporating principles grounded in gender equity
and respect for human rights. The fight against illicit
drugs will diminish the insidious effect of an illicit
economy that both deprives the State of revenues and
fosters crime and instability. Finally, the
implementation of an effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme will erode
from within the strength of unsanctioned armed
factions that are responsible for much of the insecurity
across Afghanistan and that in many cases resist the
extension of government control.

During the past few months, the various activities
related to the security sector reform - formation of the
national police, training of the national army,
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration, reform
of the Ministries of Interior and Defence, reform of the
national intelligence services and counter-narcotics
action - have taken central stage in the work plan of
the Afghan Government. At the same time, it is
becoming more and more evident to President Karzai
and his colleagues, as well as to Afghanistan's partners
in the international community, that all these projects
are intimately connected and must be very closely
coordinated. Meetings to that effect are taking place in
Kabul on a regular basis to allow the heads of the
national commissions, the various lead nations and
UNAMA to come together to supervise cooperation
among themselves and push the various programmes
and processes forward. To assist Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mr. Brahimi in helping the
Afghan Government and the five lead security sector
reform nations to achieve their goals, the Secretary-
General has recommended the addition of a few
military and police advisers to UNAMA.

Administrative development and security sector
reform should be coupled with a political
transformation process that ensures that the
Government is representative and accountable to all
segments of the population. As the Secretary-General
reported, the drafting and approving of a new
constitution and preparations for general elections to be
held in 2004 will be key tasks in this regard for the
coming year. Elections in particular constitute a
linchpin of the process and an essential element of
UNAMA's mandate.

Holding elections within the timeline of the Bonn
Agreement will constitute a major challenge for
UNAMA and the Afghan Transitional Administration.
In February, President Karzai formally requested, in a
letter to the Secretary-General, that UNAMA play an
essential role in the preparation and organization of the
election. The Secretary-General is prepared to respond
positively to that request, subject to Security Council
approval, and, as a result, he is proposing in his report
the establishment within UNAMA's Pillar I of an
electoral section. Electoral consultants have already
been deployed to UNAMA to begin assisting the
Government with the election preparation process.
Those consultants have confirmed what we have long
believed, namely that the holding of a registration and
election will be a very complex exercise. We presently
envisage an electoral section within UNAMA that will
be able to provide expert advice and technical
assistance to the Afghan electoral management body on
such issues as voter registration, voter education, the
development of political party laws and the
development of the electoral system itself.

It is clear that a certain amount of institutional
development must occur and that an adequate level of
security must be in place if the elections are to be
meaningful and credible. In addition, elections are a
technical activity for which certain international
standards must be maintained in order for the elections
to be perceived as legitimate. The resources required to
meet those standards, over and above the cost of the
electoral section with UNAMA itself, will be
significant. If elections are to be held according to the
Bonn Agreement, it is essential that the UNAMA
electoral section be established and be provided with
adequate resources as soon as possible. It is also
important that the Afghan Government continue to lay
the framework for future elections. As Mr. Brahimi
said, in his remarks to the Afghan Development Forum
on 13 March,

"It is clear that if the timetable set by Bonn
is to be met, it will be necessary to establish a
legal and institutional framework for registration
within the next 40 days to start urgently the actual
work to be able to launch the registration
campaign itself during the summer. The
appointment of the Afghan electoral body to lead
the process is, of course, equally urgent."

More generally, as the Council prepares to renew
the mandate of UNAMA, it is opportune to underline
again the vital need for strong international political
commitment and support to the Bonn process during
the crucial months ahead. The neighbours of
Afghanistan signed a Good-Neighbourliness
Declaration last year in Kabul. The United Nations, as
well as key partners of Afghanistan, were present and
expressed strong support for that initiative. The
Security Council also welcomed that declaration and
confirmed its readiness to lend its support if needed. It
is important that all stakeholders actively participate in
the implementation of the letter and spirit of that
declaration. Member States, donors and international
partners in the Afghan peace process may wish to
consider further ways to cooperate to support the peace
process as a whole.

Finally, I would like, on behalf of the Secretary-
General to thank the Council for its steady and
consistent support of UNAMA over the past year. We
hope, above all, that the Council will maintain the
united and focused approach that it has shown so far
with regard to Afghanistan and which has been such an
important factor in the progress achieved so far.

