Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you very much, Madam President,
for having organized this meeting. I shall heed your
appeal to be a bit more interactive by making use of an
inductive thinking process to offer some very specific
ideas. I will not speak specifically about the Mano river
region, but will instead attempt to draw lessons on the
basis of the experience gained in that region.

First, there are a number of specific lessons in the
political sphere. It is not possible to resolve a situation
without taking a regional approach when a conflict
clearly has such a dimension. The regional dimension
not only can ease or resolve a conflict; at times it can
also be an additional disrupting factor, either due to
arms trafficking, refugee movements or cross-border
activities of armed groups. A second lesson in the
political area is the importance of having a leading
country in the Security Council if this body is
involved. Such a leading country must also have
political influence in the region. This helps to mobilize
financial resources and heightens awareness in the
international community with regard to a given
situation. The third lesson in the political area relates
to the potential of subregional organizations. Such
organizations offer opportunities, but have great
limitations. The dilemma for the Security Council is
what to do when there are political differences between
the subregional viewpoint and the prevalent viewpoint
in the Security Council. This is a reality in the case of
Liberia and in other situations in Africa that we need to
face.

The fourth political lesson has to do with
relations with armed groups. The lesson is the need to
understand the political agenda of those non-State
actors and to open the appropriate political spaces for
them. But in doing that, we must be cautious, we must
not be naive, and we must maintain firm positions Vis-
a-vis these actors. We must create sanctions if
necessary. We must not compromise, and we must deny
amnesty for atrocious crimes.

There are three concrete lessons in the
humanitarian area that we want to highlight. The first
has to do with the complex management of internally
displaced persons and refugees as concomitant
phenomena. The lesson there is that the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees can
and must play a pragmatic role in the area of meeting
the needs of internally displaced persons, even if there
is no specific mandate to do so. We believe that it has
been proven that it is a valid focal point in this regard
because it has strengths that other agencies of the
United Nations system lack.

The second lesson that we still need to digest is
what to do when sanctions are imposed on a country
which are politically justified but which reduce the
availability of resources for humanitarian activities. In
other words, the challenge before the Security Council
is ensuring that humanitarian assistance is not subject
to or conditioned by political strategies or the
imposition of sanctions.

Finally, concerning the role of women and
children that Ms. McAskie has referred to, I think that
we have learned that women and children are not
merely victims of conflicts. They may also be basic
actors in peace building, particularly at the grassroots
community level.

I wish to conclude with an additional lesson about
the participation of the international community. We
have learned that international assistance in the
humanitarian field and in the reconstruction process is
unpredictable and volatile. That is something that we
always have to take into account when the Security
Council is making decisions. The appeal that
Ms. McAskie made, and the appeal made with regard
to the court, is a recurring one, not only with regard to
the Mano River, but to other areas as well.
