Mr. Mansouri (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from Arabic): I would like to congratulate you at the outset,
Sir, on your presidency of the Council for this month.
You will undoubtedly steer the Council's deliberations
with skill, prudence and efficiency.

Recently, the Middle East peace process began with
the Madrid Peace Conference with the aim of reaching a
just and comprehensive solution to the Palestine question
and the Arab-Israeli conflict. Difficult negotiations were
held with Israel immediately following the Conference,
the first and foremost of which resulted in the Oslo
agreement of 1993, which was then followed by other
agreements between the Arabs and the Israelis. Some of
these agreements are now under implementation.
However, Israel unfortunately did not commit itself to the
texts of the agreements or to the deadlines. This is the
Palestinian-Israeli trajectory, which is witnessing bloody
events in Al-Quds al-Sharif, as have been witnessed in

 

the past in other Palestinian cities. This has undermined the
desired march towards peace.

Israeli leaders have advanced the question of security
as a pretext for prevarication, hesitation and reneging on the
fulfilment of deadlines and stipulations. The Israeli Power
occupying the Palestinian-Arab territories continues its
serious violations of its commitments, one after another,
commitments made in accordance with international law,
international humanitarian law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

On the evening of Monday, 23 September 1996, Israeli
authorities, under the protection of army units, opened an
entrance to a tunnel in the vicinity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif
in occupied East Jerusalem. The tunnel extends
approximately 488 metres, parallel to the Western Wall of
Al-Aqsa Mosque. The opening of this entrance and any use
of the tunnel endanger the security and integrity of Al-Aqsa
Mosque and the foundations of the Islamic structures above
the tunnel.

The question of Al-Quds al-Sharif, the first of the two
qiblas and the third holy shrine, is the essence of the Arab-
Israeli conflict and the focus of interest for the Arab and
Islamic worlds. The future of the peace process in its
entirety hinges on how we deal with this problem. It is
obvious that the latest Israeli measures are yet another
manifestation of the intended judaization of Al-Quds al-
Sharif, creating additional factors relating to the legal status
of the Holy City.
Saudi Arabia, which opposes any desecration of the
Islamic shrines in Jerusalem, views these serious measures
as a revelation of Israel's premeditated intentions to judaize
Al-Quds al-Sharif, wipe out the Arab and Islamic heritage
of Jerusalem and legitimize Israeli schemes. We wish to
warn of the catastrophic consequences of these measures,
which explicitly run counter to all resolutions of
international legality. Our position will always be that any
settlement of the question of Jerusalem will take into
consideration the resolutions of international legality,
particularly Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which
stipulates the withdrawal of Israel from the occupied
territories that have been occupied since 1967, and
resolutions 252 (1968) and 267 (1969), which relate to Al-
Quds al-Sharif.

The Security Council has repeatedly called for the
implementation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
and for its application to all the territories occupied by
Israel since 1967, including Al-Quds al-Sharif. It has called
on Israel to abide by the provisions of the agreement. The
Council has declared in many resolutions that all Israeli
measures aimed at altering the demographic and legal
status of the Holy City are null and void. Settlement
activities violate the 1993 Oslo communique and the 1995
Interim Agreement between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization on the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, particularly, the agreement of both parties to carry
out negotiations on the settlements in the second phase.
This categorically meant that no party would create any
additional facts on the ground that would affect the
outcome of the negotiations or render the agreements
pointless and futile. Israel, however, persists in creating
the so-called Israeli security zones and continues its
economic siege of Palestinian cities to oppress the
Palestinian people.

Israel's arrogance blinds it to the present and future
international implications of its actions. It implants in the
Israeli psyche concepts incompatible with peace and
security for all. The international media are now reporting
confrontations and massacres resulting from the opening
of the tunnel, rather than new progress in the peace
process.

The Arab countries would welcome a just and
lasting peace. The Palestinians have made concessions in
the hope that the Israeli party would respond with a
genuine desire for equal coexistence, would abandon
policies of containment and expansionist greed, and would
put an end to measures leading to the judaization of
Palestine.

It is the responsibility of the international community
to support the peace process until it has been completed.
The Security Council must therefore bring about the
closing of the Israeli tunnel extending under the
foundations of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and must put an end
to illegal Israeli measures with respect to Al-Quds Al-
Sharif. We call upon the sponsors of the Madrid peace
process, the United States of America and the Russian
Federation, and upon the European Union and all peace-
loving countries to shoulder their responsibility: to put
pressure upon Israel to effect no changes in the
Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the
first kiblah and the third holiest shrine, and to save the
Middle East peace process.

