The President: I should like to recall that, at its
6327th meeting, on 2 June 2010, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1926 (2010), by which it decided
that the election to fill the vacancy in the International
Court of Justice should take place on 9 September
2010 at a meeting of the Security Council and at a
meeting of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session.

This morning, the Security Council and the
General Assembly will proceed independently with the
election, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Statute of the Court, for the purpose of filling the
vacancy that occurred on 6 September 2010 owing to
the resignation of Judge of the International Court of
Justice Mr. Thomas Buergenthal of the United States of
America.

The Security Council has before it document
S/2010/443, which contains the list of the nominations
of a candidate by national groups of States parties to
the Statute of the International Court of Justice.
Following the deadline for nominations, a nomination
of the same candidate was also received from the
national group of Colombia.

The Security Council also has before it document
S/2010/444, which contains the curriculum vitae of the
candidate nominated by the national groups, as well as
a memorandum by the Secretary-General (S/2010/442)
that describes the present composition of the Court and
sets out the procedure to be followed in the conduct of
the election.

I should like to remind the Council that, in
accordance with Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute
of the International Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly and in
the Security Council shall be considered as
elected."

The required majority in the Security Council is
eight votes.
Article 15 of the Statute of the Court provides
that

"A member of the Court elected to replace a
member whose term of office has not expired
shall hold office for the remainder of his
predecessor's term."

Accordingly, the member elected to fill the
remainder of the term left vacant by the resignation of
Judge Thomas Buergenthal will serve until 5 February
2015.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to
select two delegations to serve as tellers. The
delegation of the United States will not be considered
to serve as a teller because a candidate of that
nationality has been nominated. The delegation of
Turkey will also be excluded from serving as a teller
because it occupies the presidency of the Council this
month.

>l<>l<>l=

The President: The names of the delegations of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Lebanon have been
drawn. I request them to appoint one of their members
to serve as tellers.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Vakasinovic'
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) and Mr. Karanoah
(Lebanon) acted as tellers.


The President: The voting will be held by secret
ballot. When we proceed to the vote, members of the
Council will receive a ballot paper containing the name
of the candidate. Members of the Council will be
requested to place an "X" in the box next to the name
of the candidate for whom they wish to vote. Votes
may be cast only for a candidate whose name appears
on the ballot paper.

I should like to remind members of paragraph 14
of the Secretary-General's memorandum (S/2010/442),
which specifies that each elector may vote for only one
candidate. Any ballot paper containing votes for more
than one name will be considered invalid. When a
candidate has obtained the required majority of eight or
more votes, I shall communicate the result to the
President of the General Assembly, and I shall request
the Council to remain in session, pending the receipt
from the President of the General Assembly of the
result of the voting in the Assembly.
10-51115
May I take it that the Council is now ready to
proceed with the election of a member of the
International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

I request the Conference Officer to distribute the
ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in
the box next to the name of the candidate for whom
they wish to vote.

***


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. The tellers will now count the ballots. There
will be two independent countings of the ballots, one
by each teller.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
suspend this meeting until the ballots are counted.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The meeting was suspended at 12.05 pm. and
resumed at 12.30p.m.


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of abstentions: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8

Number of votes obtained:
Joan E. Donoghue
(United States of America) 15

Accordingly, candidate Joan E. Donoghue has
obtained the required majority of votes in the Security
Council.
10-51115
I shall now send a letter to the President of the
General Assembly informing him of the result of the
voting in the Security Council.

I request the Council to remain in session while
we wait for the President of the General Assembly to
inform the Council of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have just received from
the President of the General Assembly the following
letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
118th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing a member
of the International Court of Justice, Ms. Joan
Donaghue obtained an absolute majority of votes
in the General Assembly."

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the same candidate, Joan E.
Donaghue has been elected as a member of the
International Court of Justice for the remainder of the
term of office of Judge Thomas Buergenthal, that is,
until 5 February 2015. I should like to congratulate her
and wish her every success in the high office to which
she has been elected. I should also like to thank the
tellers for their assistance.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
business for this meeting.

The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

