The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Viet Nam.

I join others in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his detailed briefing.

We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Cuba on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

As Ambassador Gillerman is leaving us, I wish
him all the best in his future professional and personal
life.

Since the Council last held an open debate under
this agenda item almost a year ago, the situation in the
Middle East has witnessed the emergence of a broad
spectrum of new opportunities and new challenges.
Positive developments include the engagement of
Israel and Palestine in negotiations on final status
issues, the strong support pledged at the international
conferences held in Paris, Bethlehem and Berlin for the
establishment of a Palestinian State, and the high-level
diplomacy initiatives and mediation efforts of the
Quartet, the League of Arab States and regional
countries.

Alongside the tangible progress reached among
Israel and relevant parties on ceasefires, prisoner
exchanges and other areas of mutual concern, the
further steps undertaken by the Palestinian Authority to
enhance national unity, security and rule of law,
promote foreign investment and pursue socio-economic
development reforms can also be mentioned.

Notwithstanding those developments, the Middle
East situation remains complex and volatile. Among
worrisome realities have been Israel's continued
military incursions into the West Bank, its plan to

expand illegal settlements in the Palestinian territory,
its ongoing construction of the separation wall, its
imposition of closures and restrictions on freedom of
movement and access to persons and goods in Gaza,
and its continued detention of thousands of Palestinian
prisoners.

Equally serious are the fact that the dire
humanitarian crisis in Gaza continues to deteriorate in
all aspects and double its impact on the lives of the
Palestinian people, who have been suffering for months
from the lack of food and medical supplies; the
suspension of electricity and fuel supplies; the halting
of services in hospitals; the withholding of heating
supplies in winter; and the paralysed functioning of
sanitation and water facilities.

The Middle East conflict has been going on for
too long. If there is a lesson that must be learned from
that, it is that wanton bloodshed produces no winners.
Peaceful negotiations remain the only means to achieve
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians to an end
to occupation and an independent sovereign State of
their own; those of Arab States to reclaiming occupied
territories; and those of Israel to sustainable security.

Viet Nam calls upon the parties concerned to
renounce violence, implement hard-earned agreements,
abide scrupulously by their obligations under
international law - particularly human rights and
humanitarian laws - and take further concrete action
to advance the peace process towards its stated goals
on the basis of United Nations resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab peace initiative
and the Annapolis outcome.

We urge Israel to put an end to restrictive
measures, open border crossings and ensure unfettered
access for humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian
people in Gaza.

We underline the importance of the continued
support of the international community, especially the
United Nations, the Quartet and regional countries for
a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Regarding Lebanon, in light of the positive
political atmosphere created by the signing of the Doha
agreement and the ongoing mediation efforts of the
League of Arab States and regional countries, we urge
all parties in Lebanon to build on the momentum of
national reconciliation and extend their full support to
the newly established national unity Government. We

08-4326]
also urge them to search for compromise solutions to
promote the country's political stability, socio-
economic development and regional and international
integration.

While continuing to support the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), we urge the
parties concerned to put an end to those acts that are
complicating this process, including targeted attacks
against Lebanese civilians and United Nations Interim
Forces in Lebanon personnel, Israeli air violations and
the continued detention of prisoners, and to resolve the
issue of the status of the Shaba'a farms, thus helping to
assert Lebanon's independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, promote its stability, and contribute
to an improved political and security environment in
the region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.

