Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to extend my sincere
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also thank you for convening this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East.

I also express my country's endorsement of the
statements delivered, and to be delivered, on behalf of
the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement.

Israel has continued both its occupation of
Palestinian and Arab territories and its aggression
against religious holy place in violation of international
law. In return, the United Nations has continued to
ignore what is right and kept silent on instances of
violent provocation, unjust aggression and illegal
acts committed by Israel against the Palestinian
people - the very same people who continue to hope
that the international community will grant them
justice by authorizing the establishment of their free
and independent State, within the 4 June 1967 borders,
with Jerusalem as its capital.

While we support the demands of the Palestinian
people, we also call for the complete withdrawal of the
Israeli occupation forces from all other occupied Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan and the Shaba'a
farmlands and other occupied Lebanese territories.

Israel has never ceased its abhorrent actions,
including attacks against religious sites, forced
displacement and expulsion, arbitrary detention and
mistreatment of prisoners, building new settlements
and expanding existing ones, as well as extrajudicial
killings.

Furthermore, in the past month, Israel has stormed
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and attacked worshipers with
sound bombs. Prior to that, Israeli settlers and the
occupation forces launched more than 60 attacks on
holy sites in Jerusalem and other occupied Palestinian
territories.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, by virtue of its
responsibility for Islamic holy sites and its custodianship
of the two holy mosques in Mecca and Medina, is
deeply concerned about Israel's continuous assault on
Jerusalem, in general, and on Al-Haram Al-Sharif in
particular, including its continuous attempts to burn
down or otherwise destroy Al-Haram Al-Sharif.

We draw attention to additional Israeli plans to
accelerate the demolition and displacement timetables
and to intensify settlement policies. The most accurate
description of the illegal settlement expansion carried
out by Israel is that it is a great danger that threatens
the two-State solution. The settlements clearly violate
international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention,
which prohibit occupation authorities from taking any
action that could lead to changing the demographic or
geographic character of occupied territory.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia considers resolving
the Palestinian issue a top priority, and reiterates its
full support for Palestine's request for full membership
of the United Nations and its affiliated entities. As a
step towards that goal, we call upon all Member States
to support upgrading Palestine to non-member State
status, and urge them to support Palestinian endeavours
in that regard.

At the same time, we question the unfair practices
that put pressure on the Palestinians and threaten to cut
back assistance to them. Rather, the threats and pressure
should have been directed towards Israel, to compel
it to end the occupation, cease settlement activities
and seriously negotiate the process of establishing an
independent Palestinian State.

My country looks forward with great interest to the
conference on the Middle East aimed at establishing
a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons
of mass destruction, to be held in Helsinki by the end
of the year. We call on the Finnish facilitator of the
conference, Mr. Jaako Laajava, and the States that
sponsored the initiative, to issue invitations to the
Conference without delay.

The tragic situation in sisterly Syria has reached
dangerous levels. The number of victims, refugees and
displaced persons has increased every day as a result of
the Syrian regime's arrogant policies and practices. That
regime insists on considering its citizens as enemies
who deserve nothing but bullets, artillery shells and
bombardment by aircraft and helicopter. Moreover,
the regime's aggression goes beyond its national
borders and threatens the security of the entire region
while depending on military and political backup and
cover from certain major Powers. The Syrian regime
continues to pursue a military solution, ignoring the
fact that fate will inevitably answer the people's call
for freedom.

While we support the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the Legal of
Arab States, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, we believe that the
success of his mission requires a focus on achieving a
peaceful transition of power and the taking of concrete
steps towards building the future of new, modern and
civil Syrian State in which the entire Syrian people,
with its broad spectrum of religious, sectarian, ethnic
and regional affiliations, enjoy equal rights and
responsibilities. The Syrian regime must realize that
the time for its departure has arrived, as it cannot build
its rule on the bones of its people, nor can it quench its
thirst for power with the blood of innocent women and
children. The international community must shoulder
its responsibilities and intensify its support for the
Syrian people using every possible means to enable
them to defend themselves, heal their wounds and care
for their children and displaced refugees. Furthermore,
we demand that an investigation be conducted on the
Syrian regime's crimes against humanity and that
all those involved in such heinous acts be brought to
justice.

My country is deeply concerned about the
continuation of the Islamic Republic of Iran's nuclear
programme outside international control, a matter that is
seriouslyjeopardizing the security of the entire Arabian
Gulf region. While we reaffirm the right of Iran and all
countries in the region to acquire nuclear technology
for peaceful purposes, we uphold the principle that the
process should be under the full and comprehensive
supervision of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We also support the efforts of the 5+1 group
with respect to negotiations with Iran aimed at reaching
a peaceful resolution to the issue. Consequently, we call
on Iran to negotiate seriously and in good faith in order
to achieve that goal. We further call on all parties to
refrain from threats and counterthreats.

