Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
issue of foreign terrorist fighters is being addressed
today because of the situations in Iraq, Syria and
Libya. Some people seek to represent the revolution of
Arab peoples as an Islamic movement and to achieve
an Islamic political movement in order to gain power.
They are affiliated with certain regional forces and
seek to promote such a movement to the detriment of
the identity of the Arab peoeple and their territorial
integrity.

Foreign terrorist fighters are a threat to their
countries of origin. They have come to our countries
from Europe, the United States and the four corners of
the world. The revolution in our region has now taken
on a religious dimension. The recruitment and training
of those fighters in some States is a very serious
mistake. The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
has a number of aspects. That serves to underscore
what Egypt has said on many occasions, namely, that
we must define a comprehensive counter-terrorism
strategy. We are aware of the appeals in that regard.

People try to convince young people to participate
in combat in the belief that they are committing crimes
in the name of what is right and just, even if they carry
out such acts on religious grounds. In addition, they
use telecommunications and the Internet in order to
establish the necessary links for the recruitment of such
young people. Those young people are also told lies.

In that regard, I would like to emphasize that Egypt
has for some time been taking steps to deal with terrorism.
That includes measures to combat the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters. In that connection, I would
like to underscore that the Egyptian criminal code
includes provisions that define and penalize terrorism
by punishing all terrorist-related acts, including
involvement in terrorist attacks, incitement and the
provision of financial support. Egypt respects Security
Council resolutions, in particular those on combating
terrorism. We submit reports to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee as proof of our commitment.

At the regional level, we seek to implement the
relevant African and Arab agreements. The situation
facing us today promotes the true values of Islam, while
trying to ensure that no connection is made between
Islam and extremism, given that common efforts in
that regard will soon be stepped up in cooperation with
various other States.

When we talk about combating terrorism in the
Middle East, such a fight must be comprehensive and
sustained. We must not only address the threat of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, since all those
terrorist groups are interconnected. Therefore, for
those efforts to be successful, we must fight terrorism
wherever it takes place, whether in Iraq, Syria or any
other country.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that we
must commit to ensuring respect for Security Council
resolutions. The United Nations bodies are called upon
to monitor the implementation of those resolutions
in order to put an end to terrorist attacks and the
recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters.

