Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would first like to
thank Foreign Minister Angelino Alfano for his
comprehensive briefing. We could not agree more
with the idea of relaunching the spirit of Helsinki,
and he can count on our support this year. We fully
support the priorities of this year's Italian chairship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), particularly finding a solution to the
crises in and around Ukraine, addressing protracted
conflicts, strengthening the dialogues on girls and
on good governance, combating discrimination and
intolerance and promoting freedom of religion or belief
and interreligious dialogue.

In recent years the overall political and military
situation in Europe has deteriorated significantly,
owing to ongoing violations of the principles and
commitments to which we all subscribe. We believe that
better use could be made of the OSCE as a platform for
dialogue, mediation and conflict prevention. Obviously,
and unfortunately, the Russian aggression against
Ukraine remains a key issue for the Organization.
We appreciate the fact that Mr. Alfano's first visit in
his capacity as OSCE Chairperson-in-Office was to
Ukraine and Russia. A lack of genuine dialogue and
trust is what has led us to this moment, and it continues
to misdirect us. The illegal annexation and occupation
of Crimea and the continued aggression in Donbas will
have devastating consequences for the Euro-Atlantic
security system. We cannot allow the use of force to
become an accepted instrument in relations between
sovereign States.

In the context of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict,
we should not ignore the role of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, which still represents the eyes
and ears of the international community on the ground.
Poland is one ofthe biggest contributors to the Mission,
with 40 monitors and analysts, and we will continue
to support it. Not only should we work to reform and
further enhance the Mission, we should ensure that
it can fully execute its mandate. All attacks on the
Mission and its monitors by Russian-backed militants
must cease immediately. Russia's return to the Joint
Centre for Control and Coordination will be crucial if
stabilization efforts in Donbas are to succeed.

We would like to reiterate Poland's strong support
for the work of the OSCE autonomous institutions,
particularly the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights, which is located in Warsaw. Its role in
identifying challenges, especially within the contexts
of security and of assistance to OSCE participating
States in the implementation of their commitments
in the area of human rights and democracy, cannot
be overestimated. Poland is proud that by hosting
the Office and its flagship event, the annual Human
Dimension Implementation Meeting, Warsaw has
become a European centre for dialogue on democracy
and human rights.

We need to make better use of the existing
instruments aimed at rebuilding trust and confidence,
notably the Vienna Document, the Treaty on Open Skies
and the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe.
We are concerned about the fact that Russia continues
either to violate their provisions or act contrary to their
spirit. Any further erosion of them would be highly
regrettable and could have tragic consequences. In that
context, we would like to emphasize that modernizing
the Vienna Document remains a crucial element of the
discussion on risk reduction and confidence-building.

The OSCE's mediating role in the protracted
conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Transnistria and
Georgia are also worthy of mention. The diplomatic
efforts that the Organization coordinates can influence
decision-makers in creating the atmosphere oftrust and
stability that the local communities in those regions
have awaited for so long.

As the looming threat of terrorist activities fuels
the ongoing migration crisis, we must stand united in
order to combat racism, xenophobia, intolerance and
discrimination, and pay special attention to education
in our efforts to halt the spread of radicalization and
poorly understood nationalism. Education is the
best prevention.

On International Women's Day, a liberating day,
I want to pay tribute to all the ordinary women who
have played extraordinary roles in the history of their
countries and communities. We hope that the OSCE will
strive to keep up the momentum in its current efforts
to further implement programmes aimed at increasing
women's participation in the political and public
arenas, building the capacities of women's networks,
combating violence against women and implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), which emphasizes women's
involvement in conflict prevention, crisis management
and post-conflict rehabilitation.

