Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me first
to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for his detailed briefing, and
to reiterate our congratulations to the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), the
African Union (AU) and all United Nations missions
in Central Africa for the tireless efforts they undertake
every day to promote the maintenance, restoration and
building of peace and security in that region.

Togo welcomes the progress made in recent months
by most countries of the region in terms of political and
economic governance. My country urges the leaders
and all political players of the countries involved to
continue their efforts by promoting dialogue and the
tireless quest for consensus in order to preserve and
build upon their democratic gains by strengthening,
in particular, their democratic institutions. We also
welcome efforts undertaken in coordination with
UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa
to convene a summit of States of the region on the
pressing issue of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

The fight against extreme poverty, youth
unemployment, hunger and insecurity is clearly crucial
to peacebuilding and the consolidation of democracy
in the region. In that regard, we welcome the action
pursued by most Governments of the countries of the
region in these areas, and we call on them to invest
more in the related sectors.

While we welcome the encouraging progress made
in peacebuilding by most ofthese countries, particularly
Burundi and the Central African Republic, the current
security and humanitarian situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a key
source of concern. In fact, the fragility and volatility
of the situation in North Kivu continues to seriously
threaten the stability of the country and the entire
region. That is why we will continue to reiterate that
a negotiated political settlement to the crisis remains
the key condition for easing the plight of civilians
oppressed by more than a decade of insecurity.

My delegation remains deeply concerned by
the serious threat posed by the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) - a movement that has been declared a
terrorist group by the African Union - to the civilian
populations of the region. Even weakened as it is by
the concerted and determined efforts ofthe countries of
the region and the international community, that group
retains the capacity to cause serious harm. The toll of
its attacks is alarming. While all countries ofthe region
and beyond are exposed to it, the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are particularly affected, and women and children are,
unfortunately, the primary victims. This is tangible
proof that the work ahead to meet the challenge of the
LRA remains immense.

We therefore firmly support the Regional
Cooperation Initiative against the Lord's Resistance
Army, and commend the actions pursued in this context,
in particular in recent months by UNOCA, the African
Union and the countries of the region. The tracking
down of LRA fighters must continue, and the capture
of its leader, Joseph Kony, remains a priority. That
individual, the principal leaders of the group and all
those who have been accused of serious crimes must be
held accountable for their acts before the international
justice system. Togo urges all States to cooperate to this
end.

From this standpoint, my country welcomes the
holding in recent months of a number of meetings
focused on the LRA. We also welcome the fact that,
in September, Uganda and South Sudan made military
units available to the AU that will become part of the
Regional Task Force set up by the AU to fight that
group. We urge other States of the region to follow the
example of these two countries. The entire international
community must step up its efforts, particularly on
the financial and logistical fronts, in order to ensure
an effective implementation of the regional strategy to
counter that group.

In conclusion, my country supports the draft
presidential statement presented by the United
Kingdom, which the Council is prepared to adopt.

