Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her valuable briefing
regarding developments of the situation in Haiti as well
as the role of MINUJUSTH. I would like to focus on
three key aspects concerning our topic today, namely,
political, humanitarian and security aspects.

We followed with concern the demonstrations
and protests that took place in October and November
following two reports by the Senate in Haiti regarding
mismanagement of the PetroCaribe Fund. The
protesters called for fighting corruption and improving
social services. Although those demonstrations led to
several deaths and many wounded, the Haitian National
Police demonstrated professionalism and succeeded in
preventing vandalism, which could have led to more
civilian casualties.

We support the measures taken by Government
authorities under the leadership of President Moise to
meet the demands of the protesters. That resulted in
the dismissal of many Government advisers and the
setting up an independent committee with the purpose
of overseeing investigations relating to corruption.

The Parliament recently adopted a revised general
budget law for the period 2017-2018, following the
reinstatement of fuel subsidies. The Parliament also
adopted a law establishing the National Council on
Legal Aid. Despite the importance of those two laws,
the present legislative activity of the Parliament has
not yet risen to the aspirations of the Haitian people
vis-a-vis the creation of an integrated legal environment
that enables national institutions to shoulder their
full responsibilities.

During our previous meeting on Haiti (see S/PV.8342) I addressed several issues that could
improve the humanitarian situation, including
providing capacity-building for national institutions
to increase their effectiveness in addressing natural
disasters. Accordingly, we view the determination
of the Haitian Government to establish a standing
mechanism for crisis management as a positive step
in that direction, especially after the earthquake that
struck northern parts of the country and led to human
and material damage. In that regard, I extend our
sincere condolences to the Government and the people
of Haiti for the victims.

We have also followed up on the progress
achieved to address the cholera epidemic. The United
Nation continues to support the Haitian authorities in
implementing the national plan to eradicate the cholera
epidemic. Both the authorities and the United Nations
must continue their efforts until the epidemic is fully
eradicated as planned.

Expediting the implementation of judicial reforms
will help reduce pretrial detention rates, thereby also
decreasing overcrowding in prison facilities and
improving the humanitarian situation.

The Haitian National Police demonstrated
competence in dealing with the many demonstrations
that took place recently in various parts of the country.
The ongoing reduction in the crime rate is further proof
of the competence of the police despite an increase
in the challenges they face, including the presence
of various armed groups and gangs that jeopardize
citizen safety and security and negatively impact
upon the steady improvement in security throughout
the country. It is therefore imperative to proceed with
the implementation of the strategic development plan
for the Haitian National Police, notwithstanding the
difficulties that obstruct its implementation, including
scarcity of the financial resources needed to safeguard
the success achieved on the security front.

I would like to commend the efforts made by
MINUJUSTH, especially those related to implementing
the exit strategy according to its mandate when it was
established, despite the difficulties facing the various
benchmarks for implementing the exit strategy. Finally,
we reiterate our gratitude to Ms. La Lime and extend
our full support to her and the Mission.

