The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.

The United Kingdom has repeatedly made clear
to the Israeli Government that expelling or harming
President Arafat would be wrong and
counterproductive. Israel should not allow its justified
anger at the continuing violence to lead to actions that
would undermine both the peace process and Israel's
own interests.

The United Kingdom believes that the road map
remains valid and that today it is even more important
that it be pursued. We urge the parties, in conjunction
with the members of the Quartet, to work for its full
and rapid implementation. The United Kingdom
remains ready to assist with the implementation of the
road map.

The road map is comprehensive, but some
elements seem particularly relevant, given recent
events. In phase one, the road map calls on the
Palestinians to undertake visible efforts on the ground
to arrest, disrupt and restrain individuals and groups
conducting and planning violent attacks on Israelis
anywhere. That is still valid and ever more pressing.

In the same vein, the road map calls on Israel to
take no actions undermining trust, including
deportations, attacks on civilians, confiscation and/or
demolition of Palestinian homes and property as a
punitive measure or to facilitate Israeli construction,
destruction of Palestinian institutions and infrastructure
and other measures specified in the work plan. Again,
it seems very relevant to where we find ourselves
today. I therefore agree with Mr. Roed-Larsen, who
yesterday said that bold parallel steps were needed.

The United Kingdom considers that the text
before us was insufficiently balanced and therefore
unhelpful in the context of implementing the road map.
As the sponsors of the resolution felt unable to
accommodate United Kingdom amendments intended
to achieve a better balance, the United Kingdom
abstained in the vote on the text. We regret, however,
that a balanced resolution failed to pass, and we urge
Israel not to misunderstand the international
community's unanimous rejection of their decision in
principle to remove President Arafat from the
Palestinian areas. Both parties should understand that
the international community wants the full, urgent
implementation of the road map.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I remind the Council that, in accordance with the
decision taken at the 4824th meeting of the Council, on
15 September 2003, I invite the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the decision
taken at that same meeting, on 15 September 2003, I
invite the representative of Israel to take a seat at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman

(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I now call on the Permanent
Observer of Palestine.


