Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg welcomes the initiative of the United
States in organizing this Security Council debate on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region. The moment is particularly
significant, and your presence, Mr. Secretary, lends it
special weight.

I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, his Special
Envoy, Ms. Mary Robinson, the President of the World
Bank, Mr. Kim and the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, Mr. Lamamra, as well
as the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda, for their statements.
I thank them especially for their sincere commitment
to the cause of peace, security and cooperation in the
region.

Luxembourg fully subscribes to the statement to
be delivered by Mr. Pierre Vimont on behalf of the
European Union.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region have for too long been ravaged by
conflict. Millions have died - the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo just
cited a figure of6 million deaths over the past 15 years.
Millions have been displaced and millions prevented
from living in dignity. And armed groups, notably the

Mouvement du 23 mars, continue to plague the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

This is no longer acceptable. Things must change.
We must break the cycle of violence. The Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework signed in the 11+4 format
in Addis Ababa on 24 February marks, we sincerely
hope, a defining turning point in the consolidation
of peace and stability in the region. That agreement
would not have been possible or its follow-up assured
without the support of the United Nations. I commend
the crucial role played in that regard by the Secretary-
General and his team. And we should also praise the
support that has been provided by the African Union,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community.
The Framework has one essential merit - it takes
into account the root causes of conflict. It rightly
emphasizes ownership by the countries of the region
of a process that must end the recurring violence and
pave the way for truly dynamic regional economic
development. We hope it will live up to the name given
it by Mary Robinson, inspired by the Irish poet Seamus
Heaney - a framework of hope, a framework that
can bring hope back to the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region and erase the
memory of what Ms. Robinsonjust described as a lack
of horror at what is going on right now.

It is time for the Framework to be resolutely
implemented. In this context, we welcome the recent
initiatives of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The national oversight mechanism for monitoring
implementation of the commitments made under the
Framework is in place. The first national plans for
security sector reform, particularly of the army, have
been laid out. We also welcome the establishment of
a new Independent National Electoral Commission,
which paves the way for organizing provincial and local
elections. A professional and loyal national army that
can protect the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and promote human rights is also an
imperative.

In that regard, it is incumbent on the country's
authorities to continue their investigations into
violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights, including sexual violence, committed
by elements of the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo. The focused implementation
of the action plan signed on 4 October 2012 with the
United Nations, aimed at halting and preventing the
recruitment and exploitation of children, and the use
of sexual violence against them, by the military ansd
security forces, must be seen in the same context.

We should recall that the signing of the Framework
was accompanied by an overhaul of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), including by the
establishment of the Force Intervention Brigade. The
deterrent effect of the Brigade has already been felt on
the ground, and we welcome that. In line with resolution
2098 (2013), the Brigade will have a key role to play in
helping to achieve the goal of reducing the threat that
armed groups pose to the authority of the State and the
safety of civilians in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In general, support for security sector
reform and the protection of civilians, especially women
and children, must remain at the heart of MONUSCO's
mandate.

At the regional level, we support Special Envoy
Robinson's proactive approach and her intention
to design a comprehensive political strategy for
implementation of the Framework in the coming months,
based on indicators agreed on by all signatories. We will
have to remain vigilant to sustain positive momentum.
The follow-up orchestrated by Ms. Robinson needs the
benefit of the Council's continued attention.

One issue we are particularly concerned about is
the ongoing illegal exploitation of and trafficking in
natural resources in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly by armed groups; it is a
major source of instability. We welcome the positive
steps taken by the Congolese authorities in the area. In
general, we encourage them to redouble their efforts in
the area of economic governance. As the Framework
states, regional cooperation must be strengthened,
including through deepening economic integration,
with special attention to the issue of the exploitation of
natural resources.

Lastly, I would like to stress how important it is
that the partners of the region focus on cooperation on
development and combating poverty. Indeed, security
and development go hand in hand. I encourage the
World Bank and the countries of the region to move
forward speedily with projects that support regional
development priorities, in the wake of President Kim's
announcement in Kinshasa on 23 May of a pledge
of $1 billion in zero-interest loans. I am thinking
in particular of projects in the areas of agriculture,
hydroelectric power and infrastructure, which can
enable cross-border economic activity to expand.
As Ms. Robinson emphasized, the ongoing political
process can succeed only ifpeople benefit quickly from
tangible peace dividends.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the call
to the signatories of the Framework to implement,
diligently and in good faith, all the commitments they
have undertaken, including the commitment not to
tolerate or provide assistance or support of any kind
to armed groups. This is a matter of responsibility and
credibility. In doing that, they can count on the support
of the international community in initiating a virtuous
circle that will enable the people of the region to at last
emerge from an unacceptable situation that has lasted
all too long. The opportunity is exceptional. The time
to seize it is now.

