Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I wish to thank
Ambassador Ashraf Qazi for his lucid and
comprehensive briefing on the activities of the United
Nations in Iraq and on recent developments in that
country. I would also like to thank Ambassador Jackie
Wolcott Sanders for her briefing on the activities of the
Multinational Force in Iraq. Finally, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for submitting the tenth
report (8/2006/945) to the Security Council on the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI).

Both the briefing by Ambassador Qazi and the
report of the Secretary-General paint an alarming
picture of Iraq. Of course, through the media, we all
have the chance to see on a daily basis the carnage that
is taking place in Iraq. It is not important to try to find
the most appropriate adjective to describe the current
situation there. What is important is the fact that
hundreds of people are being killed and wounded daily.
No matter what label we attach to that, the current
reality in Iraq is unacceptable by any standard.

The alarming deterioration of the security
situation in the country, despite the successful
completion of the transitional political process as
envisaged in resolution 1546 (2004), begs the question:
"What should be done now?" That question needs to be
answered not only by the Iraqi Government and by the
Government of the United States, which leads the
Multinational Force in Iraq, but also by the United
Nations, and by the Security Council in particular.

For the two years that Greece has served as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, much
of our attention was focused on the political process in
the hope that progress and success in that field would
have a positive impact on the security situation. We
genuinely hope and believe that an all-inclusive and
participatory political process will pave the way for
national reconciliation and for the consolidation of
national understanding based on the institutionalization
of a consensus-building national dialogue enshrined in
the constitution and supplemented by the
Constitutional Review Committee.

Iraqis were to take their fate and their destiny into
their own hands by opting for democracy, peace,
stability, unity and prosperity for the benefit of all
Iraqis regardless of race, allegiance, sect or tribe - a
common goal for a common promising future. So far,
that has not materialized.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/945)
provides us with an overview of the current situation
and an outline of new approaches needed at the
national, regional and international levels, in order to
achieve concrete results on all fronts - security,
political, economic and human rights - and to reverse
current political and security trends in the country.
While we share many of the observations contained in

the report of the Secretary-General, what will be
required before we can continue to build upon what has
been achieved so far - for much has been achieved in
Iraq over the past three years, notwithstanding the
security situation - is an in-depth analytical
understanding of the reasons that lie behind the
increase in sectarian violence and insurgent and
terrorist attacks, as well as in criminal activities. An in-
depth look into what is fuelling sectarian violence and
what is causing insurgent and terrorist attacks and into
what is allowing criminal activities to thrive may help
to reveal what are the most appropriate instruments to
put into play to help address those challenges
effectively.

There must be help towards creating a national
compact to complement the International Compact and
to assess and reassess the posture of the Iraqi security
forces in countering and preventing terrorist attacks
and criminal activities, including possibly by
broadening the scope of existing initiatives to include,
inter alia, either the permanent members of the
Security Council, as suggested in the report, or even
the newly established Peacebuilding Commission.

Even though our tenure on the Security Council is
coming to an end, Greece will continue to support and
to actively follow all efforts aimed at assisting Iraq's
fledgling democracy to flourish and to thrive so that we
may quickly see a prosperous, unified, pluralistic Iraq
in which there is full respect for the human rights of all
Iraqis and for the rule of law - an Iraq that will be at
peace with itself and with all its neighbours, and a
valuable partner in the international community.

