Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I want
to begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Marie Guehenno, and
the Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Peter Piot, for
their informative briefings and UNAIDS for its report
on the implementation of Security Council resolution
1308 (2000).

Taking action on HIV and AIDS is a key priority
for the United Kingdom Government. The UNAIDS
report sets out in stark and honest terms the particular
threat that the AIDS epidemic poses to social stability
and security. We unreservedly support the efforts being
made across the United Nations, including here in the
Security Council, to ensure that substantial and
concerted action is taken to tackle the pandemic.

We see four broad issues that are relevant to the
links between AIDS and security: first, HIV and AIDS
in military and other uniformed services; secondly,
tackling AIDS in conflict and post-conflict situations
and in humanitarian emergencies; thirdly, AIDS,
conflict and gender; and fourthly, AIDS and fragile
States. The report and our meeting today focus

particularly on the first aspect. However, there are
links among all four broad issues that we must not
ignore.

The UNAIDS report documents some welcome
and encouraging progress. AIDS advisers are now in
place in nine major peacekeeping operations, and there
are focal points in other, smaller operations. Getting
the right people with the right skills on the ground is
the first essential step in tackling the problem.

The report also advocates a single national
monitoring and evaluation framework and the inclusion
of the uniformed services in that system. We agree with
that. As the report sets out, there are still significant
gaps in our knowledge. Infection rates among armed
forces remain, in many places, a matter of guesswork.
A robust mechanism for monitoring and assessing
impact is essential.

So, we welcome the steps that have already been
taken by UNAIDS, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and other stakeholders to assess
the impact of their interventions on national
commitment, knowledge, attitudes and behaviour. We
look forward to reading the results of that work. It will
be critical for UNAIDS to use that learning to guide
their future programming and communications
material. We look forward to welcoming that emphasis
in the forthcoming report.

Tackling HIV and AIDS among peacekeeping
personnel is essential. But, as the report acknowledges,
efforts must not stop there. Peacekeepers and the
communities they are protecting are both vulnerable to
HIV and AIDS. United Nations peacekeeping
operations - with their military, police and civilian
elements - are in an excellent position to engage with
vulnerable communities that have been affected by
conflict in order to ensure that the epidemic does not
gain a foothold among them. So, the United Kingdom
very much welcomes the outreach to local communities
that is being done by peacekeeping operations in
Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire and Eritrea and Ethiopia, and we
would encourage similar activities in other missions.

The past five years have seen considerable
improvements in our knowledge of the epidemic and in
the methods being used to tackle it. There is now much

agreement on best practices and the need for a common
approach by all. We very much welcome the recently
agreed UNAIDS policy position on intensifying
prevention. We urge Member States to apply those best
practices to both their peacekeeping and their national
uniformed personnel. The role and the responsibility of
troop-contributing countries are crucial.

The report also highlights the importance of high-
level political commitment, support and advocacy. We
warmly welcome the leadership of UNAIDS, which
has helped ensure that the issue of HIV and AIDS
remains at the top of the international agenda. The
United Kingdom will play its part to provide political
commitment, sufficient funding and a response that is
coordinated and effective. We are therefore pleased to
be supporting the trust funds of UNAIDS and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. It helps train
HIV counsellors and supports collaborative projects for
peacekeepers and local communities in situations
where expertise is often scarce.

I want to conclude by highlighting some of the
conclusions and recommendations of the UNAIDS
report. First, monitoring and evaluation need to be a
central component of all AIDS programmes in
peacekeeping operations. We cannot hope to tackle the
epidemic without the very best information on the size
and nature of the problem and whether the solutions
which are being used are working.

Secondly, the report highlights the need to link
action on sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations with action on HIV and
AIDS. On their own, sexual abuse and exploitation are
an issue of great concern. Adding the risks of HIV
infection exacerbates the critical and complex nature of
that issue. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and troop and police contributors are now required to
put in place policies and measures to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse. It is essential that those
measures be coordinated and consistent with United
Nations policies and programmes to prevent the spread
of HIV and AIDS. The Under-Secretary-General has
said that the training for peacekeepers is being revised
to take that into account, and that is very welcome.

Thirdly, I welcome the recommendation for
UNAIDS to seek to strengthen the capacity of regional
bodies to engage with AIDS. Providing technical
assistance to those organizations, particularly those
involved in peacekeeping, will further contribute to the
fight against the spread of HIV. That contribution will
not only be directly through the activities of the
regional bodies, but also indirectly through the
dissemination of information to national and local
bodies.

Finally, I want to highlight the recommendation
that gender issues and expertise be fully integrated into
the planning and management of peacekeeping
operations. The United Kingdom very much supports
that. The Council has regularly discussed the issue of
women, peace and security since it agreed on a
resolution on the issue in October 2000. That
resolution, 1325 (2000), referred to the need to include
gender analysis and expertise in peacekeeping
operations. As the UNAIDS report recognizes, women
are especially vulnerable to HIV infection. The gender
component in any national plan for AIDS intervention
in uniformed services is of the utmost importance and
should not only aim to educate uniformed personnel,
but should also work closely with the female
population with which they come into contact.
I confirm our full support for the proposed
presidential statement.

