Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I wish to thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing today and to
assure her of our continued and full support for the
efforts of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
of her Office. It is imperative that her call for the full
backing of the Council and member States be positively
received, respected and acted upon. For the Council,
this means following through on our decisions, in this
case our unanimous decision to refer the situation in
Darfur to the ICC.

Regrettably, once again little has changed since
the Prosecutor last briefed the Council in December
2017 (see S/PV.8132). It is particularly frustrating that
all arrest warrants remain outstanding and that the
suspects remain at large. We reiterate our call on the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate fully with the
Court, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005). In
addition, further steps by the Government of the Sudan
are also needed to ensure justice for the women, men
and children who have been victims of the horrendous
crimes committed during the conflict in Darfur.
Victims' voices must be heard.
The success of the referral of the Darfur situation
to the Office of the Prosecutor continues to depend
heavily on the cooperation of States, in particular States
parties to the Rome Statute. In this regard, it is deeply
concerning that the President of the Sudan has been able
to continue to travel internationally, including to States
parties to the Rome Statute, which have an obligation
to cooperate with the Court in fulfilling its mandate.
Like other States parties, we continue to raise the issue
of non-cooperation with the relevant Governments.
Without its own enforcement mechanism, the Court
relies on States to fulfil its mandate, including by
executing arrest warrants. As we and several other
State parties have stated previously, the Council should
approach cases of non-cooperation in a structured
manner and, as a minimum, discuss which tools it has
for an appropriate response.

Turning to the current situation in Darfur, we
welcome reports that over the last six months, both the
level of violence against civilians and the number of
internally displaced persons have decreased. We are
pleased to observe a continuing improvement in the
overall situation and to see that clashes with the Sudan
Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid remain confined to
Jebel Marra. Nonetheless, we remain concerned about
reports from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur regarding continued attacks on
villages and civilians. In addition, despite the fact that
the number of reported incidents of rape remained
relatively low during the reporting period, sexual and
gender-related violence remains a serious problem
in Darfur.

We agree with Prosecutor Bensouda that for a
lasting peace in Darfur to be achieved, the root causes
of the conflict must be recognized and addressed in a
holistic manner. Adequate steps to do so have yet to
be put in place, for example in response to persistent
poverty, gender inequality, inadequate access to social
services, the adverse effects of climate change, land
issues and violations and abuses of human rights.
Building effective rule-of-law institutions is a critical
part of the process of addressing the remaining
challenges successfully.

In conclusion, let me once again underline the
significant contribution that the Court and the Office
of the Prosecutor have made to ensuring accountability
for perpetrators and justice for victims of serious
international crimes. As supporters and as members
of the international community, we have an obligation
to continue to support its work, including by ensuring
sufficient financial funding for the Court to be able to
carry out its mandate.

