Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran would like to
thank the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council for presenting their reports to the
Council.

Terrorism is one of the gravest threats to
international peace and security. Addressing this
problem requires an integrated and comprehensive
approach. Clearly, the United Nations has made
considerable progress in the areas of both standard-
setting and the implementation of counter-terrorism
measures. However, despite all those efforts and
activities, we have, unfortunately, witnessed an
escalation in terrorist attacks in various parts of the
world.

Genuinely combating terrorism very much
depends upon how we identify its root causes. Foreign
intervention, aggression and occupation, exclusion,
selectivity and expansionist economic and political
policies are among the root causes that create
conditions conducive to the spread of violent acts and
terrorism. Furthermore, the double standard exercised
by certain States in dealing with terrorism has
aggravated the situation. On the one hand, they appear
to confront some terrorist groups while, on the other,
they overlook others. Perhaps one reason for the rise in
terrorist activities in recent years, in terms of frequency
and the advanced tactics used by terrorists, is the
wrong and selective approach by certain States in
dealing with terrorism.

Distancing the international order and today's
dialogues from justice is perhaps among the most
fundamental damage inflicted upon the structure of
fighting for peace. Just peace is a discourse to answer
the challenges of today and the tomorrow's world
peace, including preventing and fighting terrorism.
Based on that discourse, the Islamic Republic of Iran
hosted a two-day conference in Tehran on counter-
terrorism from 15 to 16 May. Peace activists and
representatives of non-governmental organizations
from more than 60 countries took part in the
conference entitled "Global alliance against terrorism
for a just peace". The Conference was an occasion to
work on identifying the concepts and the theoretical
foundations of modern terrorism, its root causes,
actors, tools and consequences for world peace and
security, as well as feasible strategies to counter
terrorism. We are of the belief that establishing a just
peace not only prevents terrorism; it also certainly
strengthens the pillars supporting the world's efforts to
confront terrorism by respecting human dignity. The
conference was a prelude to an international meeting
on countering terrorism to be held late June in Tehran
with the participation of high Government officials and
relevant international organizations.

On the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we believe that it
should not have operative impact on the rights
enshrined in internationally negotiated instruments
such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention, as well as
the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The Islamic Republic of Iran also believes that any
emphasis on the concept of prohibiting access by
non-State actors to weapons of mass destruction and
nuclear materials should not divert the attention of
Member States from nuclear disarmament as the
highest priority of the international community.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has taken serious
steps in implementing the Security Council's
resolutions on terrorism, including resolution 1373
(2001). We have submitted six national reports on our
implementation of that resolution, in which we have set
out the concrete steps that our country has taken to
implement the provisions of that and other relevant
resolutions. Those steps include stepping up border
control security and surveillance measures at border
entry and exit checkpoints. Moreover, we have
intensified our fight against drug trafficking mafias.
Given the fact that this menace constitutes a breeding
ground for terrorism, Iran's efforts in that regard have
undoubtedly made a fundamental contribution to the
global fight against terrorism.

As one of the first victims of terrorism in the
region, Iran has made unwavering efforts to fight it. We
have always strongly condemned this vicious menace
in all its forms and manifestations. As I said earlier, the
application of double standards in dealing with

terrorism and terrorist groups is a matter of grave
concern that seriously undermines the international
community's collective fight against terrorism. The
Islamic Republic of Iran has been subject to various
acts of terrorism by certain terrorist groups over the
past three decades.

In that regard, particular reference should be
made to the Mujahidin-e Khalq Organization terrorist
group, which has thus far perpetrated numerous
terrorist operations in Iran, resulting in the killing and
wounding of tens of thousands of civilians and officials
and damage to private and Government property. That
terrorist group has also devised many atrocious ploys
to incite acts of terrorism inside and outside the
country. This terrorist group was long supported and
sheltered by the former regime in Iraq. It was also
engaged in Saddam's bloody campaigns against the
Iraqi people. Despite its heinous and appalling record
of terrorist acts and incitement to terrorism, some
attempts are being made to delist the group from the
terrorist lists of some States. Any decision in that
regard would be another indication of the selective
approach and double standard with which some States
deal with terrorism. It is obvious that this kind of
attitude towards terrorist groups weakens the
international consensus against terrorism and
encourages terrorists to continue their inhuman
activities. Such support is indeed in clear violation of
the provisions of Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005).

In the past several years, the Jundullah terrorist
group has attacked and killed dozens of people in the
eastern and south-eastern parts of our country, in an
attempt to create an environment of intimidation and
insecurity. At the same time, the group Party for a Free
Life in Kurdistan is active at our western borders, and
recently carried out a number of terrorist attacks.

Those groups also enjoy the support of some
foreign countries. We expect all countries to uphold
their international obligations in this regard.

I would like to reiterate that we should all
strengthen our cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. Only through a coordinated and
comprehensive approach will the international
community's fight against terrorism yield lasting
results.
Before I conclude, I would like to respond to the
reference made to my country by the representative of
the Israeli regime. I should like to place on record that
my delegation rejects the baseless allegations and
distortions made in the Chamber that were intended to
distract the international community's attention from
the facts concerning the State terrorism, criminal
policies and abhorrent atrocities in the region by the
Israeli regime, in particular the heinous crimes
committed against the people of Palestine, Lebanon
and Syria, to say the least. Just in the past few days, at
least 20 people lost their lives at the hands of this
regime's brutal forces in the Golan Heights, Ramallah
and Lebanon.

