Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Secretary-General' s report prepared at
the request of the Security Council on protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations provides us with an opportunity to consider
more profoundly this urgent matter.

Experience shows that without effective
humanitarian assistance to refugees, displaced persons and
other categories of civilians, we cannot expect to succeed
in preventing conflicts from escalating or in promoting
the stabilization of conflict areas, or can we provide
reliable assurances that such conflicts will not be
resumed. That is why as a rule peacekeeping and
humanitarian operations are carried out in parallel, and
very often the humanitarian component becomes one of
the key functions, in the multifaceted peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Security Council.

The Council is often asked to provide active political
support for the work of humanitarian organizations. Such
support provides assurance that the actual work of these
organizations in providing humanitarian assistance will
not only be supported but also protected by the authority
of the Security Council.

At the same time, the work of the Security Council
and that of humanitarian organizations cannot be equated.
While the Council bears primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
humanitarian agencies have their own mandates and deal
with specific tasks distinct from - although often quite
closely related to - the functions of the peacekeeping
contingents. In his report the Secretary-General quite
rightly questions the practical need for maintaining this
functional distinction. Certainly it would be expedient to
establish clearer coordination between the military,
political and humanitarian components of peacekeeping
operations, inter alia through the effective distribution of
operations between the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and the humanitarian coordinators.

We are seriously disturbed about the recent incidents
involving attacks and other uses of force against
international humanitarian personnel. Such illegal actions
cannot be justified in any way whatsoever. At the same
time, we cannot forget that an important requisite for
assuring the safety of humanitarian personnel is not only
the presence of military contingents sent by the Security
Council to protect them, but also strict compliance with
the principle of impartiality in providing humanitarian
assistance. Humanitarian assistance cannot under any

 

circumstance be used as a means of bringing political
influence to bear on either side to a conflict. Otherwise, it
would conflict with its basic objective. Instead of being an
effective means for stabilizing situations and supporting
political settlements, it would contribute to the escalation of
conflicts. The sad examples of Somalia and Rwanda force
us to give serious thought to these matters.

We fully agree with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General on the need to develop in the mandates
for peacekeeping operations clear and feasible humanitarian
tasks - backed by adequate human, material and financial
resources.

There is a real need for broader consultation and
cooperation between the Security Council and humanitarian
agencies, including primarily the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), at
the stage of planning and preparing for peacekeeping
operations that involve humanitarian tasks. In this context,
we are pleased to note increased activity by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and its close
cooperation with the Security Council.

The use of force by the international community is an
extreme means of bringing pressure to bear on the
conflicting parties with a View to the settlement of crises
and conflicts. This applies fully in the humanitarian area
also. One cannot fully exclude the use of the military, or
force, factor in ensuring the safety of humanitarian
personnel and the delivery of humanitarian assistance.

However, the notion of humanitarian coercion or
humanitarian intervention raises quite a number of general
and extremely practical issues. In any event, the functions
and prerogatives of the Security Council are enshrined in
the United Nations Charter and cannot be interfered with,
including, primarily, the Council's exclusive authority to
provide humanitarian operations with elements of coercion.

The specific parameters and limits for the use of force
must be very carefully worked through, depending on the
actual situation, and must be clearly set forth in mandates
for operations approved by the Security Council. A
comprehensive, critical assessment is required, inter alia, of
the experience in establishing "safe areas" and
"humanitarian corridors". Civilian populations must not be
used as hostages in actions involving force, which are not
always impartial, even when these actions are officially
considered to be purely humanitarian.

Curbing the flow of arms into conflict areas is one
of the main stabilizing factors which can help solve
humanitarian issues. The Secretary-General's report
touches on the burning issue of enhancing the
effectiveness of arms embargoes imposed by the Security
Council. This is an area for focusing collective efforts,
primarily by the members of the Council. Arms
embargoes with holes in them can simply intensify the
military confrontation of the parties to the conflict and,
indeed, undermine the authority of the Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole.

We trust that today's debate will help ensure more
effective humanitarian assistance, through the United
Nations, in the maintenance of international peace and
security. This task is, of course, broader than simply
protecting humanitarian assistance. We need here a
comprehensive and all-encompassing approach, as has
been very rightly noted by the Secretary-General. The
Russian Federation will continue to make an active
contribution to the preparation and implementation of
such an approach.
