Mr. de Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): The
convening of this open debate bears witness to the
recognition that all States must be involved in
combating terrorism, and that is why I am grateful to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this debate. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Andrey Denisov,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
for his introduction of the Committee's plan for the
final quarter of the year, and to tell him that my
country fully supports him in his functions.

Simply stated, Peru has zero tolerance for
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
and by whomever such acts may be committed. We
fought against that scourge for 13 years and managed
to overcome it. We are not novices in combating
terrorism, and as a result we are happy to make all of
our experience available to the international
community.

Based upon our successful experience in
combating terrorism, my country is in a position to
testify that one cannot effectively combat that scourge
without an integrated approach, including legal aspects
such as new legislation, but also including social and
political aspects and, above all, operational and
intelligence aspects, which are often even more
productive than armed confrontation.

It is vital for that comprehensive struggle to be
carried out with respect for human rights and
international law. The State can never win the battle
against terrorism if it uses the same methods as the
terrorists, because it will thus lose its legitimacy.
Another long-term aspect of the integrated approach
against terrorism is to combat social marginalization,
poverty and resentment, because those are the areas in
which the virus of terrorism grows and flourishes.

The Committee's work against terrorism must be
carried out in a coordinated manner, in close
cooperation with other organs of the Council that are
also concerned with terrorism, but also with other units
in the United Nations, as well as with other
international, regional and subregional organizations,
in order to focus our efforts and avoid redundancy.
With regard to reporting, my country welcomes
the rapidity and effectiveness with which the
Committee works in examining the reports. However,
we note that while some countries will soon be
preparing their fifth report, others have only presented
two. According to the numbers cited by the Chairman
of the Committee, while 191 Member States have
presented their first report, 160 have presented a
second and 117 have presented a third, only 78 have
presented their fourth. In the opinion of my delegation,
the Committee must continue to collaborate closely
with States that have not been able to discharge their
obligation to report by identifying the reasons Why
such a great number of States are lagging behind.

Despite its great experience in the field, Peru,
along with other developing countries, must still make
tremendous efforts to honour the requests for
information presented by the Committee. That must be
taken into consideration when sending successive
requests for more information. It might be a good idea
for the reports to be drawn up in light of the particular
features of the situation in a given State - in
particular, the experience a country may have in
combating terrorism. When analysing a country's
legislation, experts familiar with the country's legal
system should participate.

As for the hiring of personnel and experts for the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate, my delegation
considers that, in addition to making certain that
persons of the highest degree of ability and
competence be included, we must have professionals
from all the geographical regions and all the legal
traditions - some with governmental experience and
others with non-governmental experience, including
those who possess strategic abilities in terms of
combating terrorism.

Finally, we believe that in complying with the
terms of resolution 1566 (2004), the Council or the
Committee should hold open meetings where we can
learn from the experience of countries that have
successfully confronted terrorism. That would be a
valuable way to share lessons learned, to correct errors
and to formulate better methods.

