The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Croatia, Egypt,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Pakistan, Poland, Turkey
and Ukraine, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nesho
(Albania), Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina),
Mr. Fowler (Canada), Mr. Simonovic' (Croatia),
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Eitel (Germany),
Mr. Zacharakis (Greece), Mr. Erdds (Hungary),
Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy), Mr. Kamal (Pakistan),
Mr. Wyzner (Poland), Mr. Tang (Turkey) and
Mr. Yel'ehenko (Ukraine) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I have received a request dated 31
March 1998 from Mr. Vladislav Jovanovie to address the
Council. With the consent of the Council, I would propose
to invite him to address the Council in the course of its
discussion of the item before it.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The President: The Security Council will now begin

its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 11 March 1998 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council, document
S/1998/223, and the letter dated 27 March 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, document S/1998/272.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1998/284, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
Portugal, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/1998/225, identical letters dated 11 March 1998 from
the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission
of Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General and to the President of the General
Assembly; S/1998/229, S/1998/240 and S/1998/250,
letters dated 12, 16 and 18 March 1998, respectively,
from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent
Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General; S/1998/234, letter dated 13 March
1998 from the Permanent Representative of Bulgaria to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General;
and S/1998/246, letter dated 17 March 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Poland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Members of the Council have received photocopies
of a letter dated 30 March 1998 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council, which will be issued as
document S/1998/285.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.

 


