Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov and Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien for their briefings today. Let me begin
by discussing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict before
moving out 0 Iraq and Syria.

We appreciate the briefing that we received today
on the troubling political, security, humanitarian and
economic conditions in Gaza. More than two years
after the last conflict in Gaza, reconstruction efforts are
beginning to bear fruit. However, a recent International
Monetary Fund report put the area's unemployment
rate at a staggering 41 per cent. The United States
fulfilled 100 per cent of the $414-million commitment
we made at the 2014 International Cairo Conference on
Palestine "Reconstructing Gaza", yet of the $3.5 billion
in pledges made at the Conference, just 46 per cent
have materialized thus far. Words of concern should be
matched with real resources.

As some have already mentioned, last week the
Security Council held an Arria-Formula meeting
on settlements, including panelists from the
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) Americans
for Peace Now and B'Tselem. As I stated at that meeting
and reiterate again today, the United States would like to
thank those NGOs for sharing their technical expertise
regarding developments on the ground in Israel and the
West Bank. Just as we recognize the contributions of
non-governmental organizations around the world that
are working tirelessly to shed light on difficult issues,
it is vital that all Governments promote and protect an
atmosphere in which all voices can be heard.

The United States remains deeply concerned about
continuing terrorism, violence, incitement to violence
and militant activity. On 9 October, a horrific attack
in Jerusalem killed two Israelis and injured several
others. The United States strongly condemns this act
of terrorism and all statements glorifying it, and we
send our deepest condolences to the victims and their
families.

All Council members must make clear that terrorism
is unacceptable and unequivocally unjustifiable. Those
who commit or encourage acts of violence send a
message that they are not committed to peace. Hamas is
a terrorist organization. Hamas clearly opposes efforts
to find a peaceful diplomatic solution to the conflict.
Hamas denies Israel's right to exist. Hamas has been
responsible for the most explicit and widespread forms
of incitement and has built up illicit arms and undertaken
militant activity in Gaza, obviously refusing to abide
by the Quartet principles.

As Secretary of State John Kerry recently stressed,
Israel must decide between expanding settlements
and preserving the possibility of a two-State solution.
Proceeding with steps such as the recent announcement
of a new West Bank settlement only moves Israel closer
towards cementing a one-State reality of perpetual
occupation that is fundamentally inconsistent with
Israel's future as a Jewish and democratic State.

Over the past three months, we have seen the
advancement of over 2,400 settlement units in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, together with the
retroactive legalization of unauthorized settlements
and the demolition of nearly 300 Palestinian structures.
The United States Government believes that these
developments are part of a broader trend of legalizing
outposts, seizing land and expanding settlements, all of
which systematically undermine the two-State solution.

The Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex) calls on
both sides to take affirmative steps to reverse current
trends and advance the two-State solution, but frankly
we have witnessed the opposite since the report was
released three month ago. As we have stressed, we
need to start implementing the two-State solution on
the ground right now. The Quartet report includes
recommendations that we had hoped the parties would
take seriously. We all understand that a permanent
status agreement that finally ends the conflict can be
achieved only through direct bilateral negotiations
between the parties, but significant progress can be
made by the parties now that will preserve prospects
for two States. The United States will continue to call
on both sides to demonstrate, through policies and
actions, a genuine commitment to a two-State solution
and we will continue to oppose efforts that undermine
that goal.

Turning to Iraq, the United States is confident
that the Iraqi security forces, including the Kurdish
Peshmerga, will prevail in their offensive against
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Mosul.
But as Under-Secretary-General O'Brien has reminded
us today, this will be a hard-fought battle with serious
humanitarian consequences. We have all seen the
brutal tactics used by ISIL to defend its territory:
hiding improvised explosive devices, booby-trapping
buildings and deploying civilians as human shields.
The United States will continue to urge all parties to
comply with international humanitarian law and allow
access to humanitarian aid. However, a victory in
Mosul will not be sufficient to stabilize Iraq on its own.
Member States need to assist with reconciliation efforts
that support more inclusive governance in Iraq, which
will help to support the communities that have suffered
under ISIL terror.

Let me conclude with Syria. Here at the Security
Council open debate and tomorrow at a meeting of the
General Assembly, all United Nations Member States
will have the chance to make their views on Syria
heard. Member States must do more than decry the
violence; they need to recognize those responsible for
it. Russia and the Al-Assad regime have launched an
all-out campaign to seize eastern Aleppo by force. As
United Nations Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura has
said, Russia and the regime cannot use the presence of
several hundred extremists as an easy alibi to destroy
an area of the city with more than 275,000 civilians
whose lives hang in peril.

Anguish over the violence is appropriate, but so too
is clarity with respect to who is responsible for it. We
must be equally clear that Russia and Al-Assad need
to stop hiding behind alibis while their bombs kill and
maim children. No more alibis; it is time to stop the
bombing of eastern Aleppo.

Russia and the regime have announced a
momentary pause in the bombing ahead of an eight-hour
humanitarian pause on Thursday. However, Russia's
total unwillingness to coordinate this unilateral pause
with the United Nations and other partners prevents
humanitarian partners from organizing any deliveries
of aid. As the United Nations has made clear, an eight-
hour pause does not even begin to address the city's
humanitarian needs. The last delivery of food there was
on 7 July. The remaining food stocks are nearly depleted.
A population of hundreds of thousands is about to run
out of food and is at risk of literal starvation.

Strikes from the offensive carried out by Russia
and the regime have destroyed or damaged every single
hospital in eastern Aleppo and killed doctors and first
responders. The siege keeps medicine out and traps in
at least 200 critically injured Syrians who desperately
need medical evacuation. The United Nations has said
that there is food and medicine available in western
Aleppo, mere meters away, but the Al-Assad regime
will not give permission to deliver it. As Al-Assad's
cruelty across Syria continues, the regime is besieging
14 other towns with 452,000 Syrians inside, according
to United Nations estimates. In these places, we
see the same tactics the regime employs in eastern
Aleppo 4 unrelenting air strikes along with denial of
aid to communities that are sometimes besieged for
years on end.

As the Joint Investigative Mechanism has stated,
both the Al-Assad regime and ISIL have used chemical
weapons against the Syrian people. We have heard
that some may still harbour doubts that Al-Assad used
chemical weapons, but these doubts are not grounded
in fact. The Council established the Joint Investigative
Mechanism to make an objective determination when
Council members could not agree upon who was involved
in the attacks. Those with doubts may have hoped for
different conclusions from the Joint Investigative
Mechanism. But they are not entitled to change the
conclusions after the investigation 4 which everyone
on the Council supported - is over. The investigation
dictates the conclusions, not the other way around.
And the investigation found the Al-Assad regime
responsible, together with ISIL. It is therefore time
to stop debating the Joint Investigative Mechanism's
methodology and begin holding accountable those
involved in using chemical weapons.

The United States will do whatever we can to
find a political solution to the conflict and end the
violence. That is why Secretary of State John Kerry
convened a meeting in Lausanne this past Saturday
with stakeholders from across the region. But it is a
simple fact that for political talks to work, Russia and
the Al-Assad regime must stop bombing the people
of eastern Aleppo. And there will need to be a true
cessation of hostilities across Syri, that is, one that
does not allow Russia and the regime to launch the
bombardment they have launched under pretence of
counter-terrorism.

This week a video, reported to be from eastern
Aleppo, emerged. It showed a 16-year-old boy named
Maroufdangling by his legs from the top ofan apartment
building that had been hit by an air strike. Marouf was
quite literally hanging in the air with his legs pinned
between blocks of concrete and his hands wrapped
around bits of rubble. Eventually a first responder
managed to pry Marouf free from the rubble with a
cherry-picker. I am sorry, but Marouf was no Al-Nusra
terrorist when he was pinned under the rubble. He posed
no threat to Russia or the Al-Assad regime. Yet there he
was, a few inches from plummeting to the ground. Most
striking, perhaps, when one watches the video, was
Marouf's yellow T-shirt, which had a simple message
on it saying "Don't shoot". Of course, the fighter pilots
that have dropped bombs on eastern Aleppo could not
read Marouf's T-shirt. But we, as Members of this
Organization, can reiterate that message and demand
that Russia and the Al-Assad regime halt their attacks.

