Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Nigeria
for having inscribed on the agenda the important issue
of maritime piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General and the representatives of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission for
their important contributions to today's debate.

The region of the Gulf of Guinea, which includes
my country, has the two-fold advantage of being rich in
fishing and oil resources as well as an area of great
geopolitical and geostrategic importance. Recent
events in the Gulf of Guinea - especially in Benin and
Nigeria - show the point to which piracy has become
a real threat to international peace and security.

My country welcomes the constant efforts of
Nigeria in the fight against this phenomenon in the
Gulf of Guinea region. We support the initiatives in
that regard undertaken by Benin and your own country,
Madame President, including the upcoming summit to
develop a regional strategy to combat piracy in the
region.

Given the ongoing nature of the piracy
phenomenon, we support the Secretary-General's plan
to deploy an assessment mission to the region to
explore the possibility of a United Nations role.

I should now like to turn to Gabon's efforts in the
fight against piracy, efforts at the regional level and
efforts at the international level.

At the national level, Gabon is party to the
principal legal instruments pertaining to maritime
piracy, specifically, the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea and the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Maritime Navigation, signed in Rome in 1988,
including its additional Protocol. Moreover, my
country has participated in enforcing those legal
instruments and their means of suppressing maritime
piracy.

At the regional level, there is a need to strengthen
inter-State cooperation in the fight against maritime
piracy; while, at the international level, there is a need
to strengthen legal instruments and the means of
enforcing them. In that regard, Gabon would like to
highlight the efforts made by regional economic
communities, namely, the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and ECOWAS. In
Central Africa, for instance, Cameroon, Equatorial
Guinea and my own country signed a technical
agreement in May 2009 on carrying out regular joint
patrols in the three areas under maritime surveillance
identified by ECCAS. Likewise, a mechanism for
combating maritime piracy has been put in place in the
subregion.

I also support the idea that the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa and the United
Nations Office in West Africa cooperate closely in the
fight against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

For its part, the African Union has put together a
comprehensive regional programme to combat
maritime crime. As part of its implementation, with the
support of the Africa Center for Strategic Studies and
the United States Africa Command, a process has been
launched to bring the two regional centres into closer
communication in order to strengthen their cooperation
in the fight against, and eradication of, the threats
related to maritime activities.

At the international level, the meetings among the
countries of the Gulf of Guinea held in Stuttgart and
Garmisch, Germany, in June and July are also part of
such efforts.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to welcome the military assistance that the United
States, France and Germany have provided to the
countries of the Gulf of Guinea in their fight against
this phenomenon.

Thanks to these partnerships, regional
cooperation has already produced noteworthy results.
However, that cooperation should be strengthened in
terms of training for coast guard units, financing for
equipment and infrastructure, and bolstering
information and cooperation mechanisms between
existing regional forces.

Many countries, including mine, believe that
while these conventional mechanisms are important,
they do not take into account the specificities of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea. It is for this reason that Gabon
has sought to work with other Gulf of Guinea countries
to strengthen national and subregional measures to
combat maritime piracy, as well as the confidence-
building measures undertaken in the context of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa.

At the international level, Gabon supports the
drafting and adoption of a general convention against
maritime piracy. The effectiveness of such an
instrument would strengthen the mechanisms already
in place in this area.
