Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I
congratulate you once again, Madam President, on your
presidency. I thank our colleagues from Kuwait, the
United Kingdom and Peru for their work in arranging
the visit. I also thank the Governments of Kuwait,
Bangladesh and Burma for hosting the Security Council.

It was absolutely critical for the Security Council
to see at first-hand the crisis in Rakhine state and the
challenges facing Rohingya refugees. One of the main
reasons for the trip is the continuing disheartening
response from the Burmese Government. Judging
from the reaction of the Government and the Burmese
military, it seems as though they have failed to
acknowledge their role in the crisis. That is unacceptable
and unsustainable if we are to make any progress in
ending the violence in Rakhine state.

We are thankful to the Government of Bangladesh
for everything that it has done to support the Rohingya
refugee population and for its willingness to work with
the relevant United Nations agencies to meet their needs.
International support for humanitarian assistance to the
refugees in Bangladesh is more critical now than ever
before. We must continue to support them. More than
that, we must have the will as a Council to do something
now. Time is not on our side.

The monsoon season has already begun and is
putting hundreds of thousands of refugees at further
risk. We must continue to work with Bangladesh and
United Nations agencies to ensure that the refugees
have what they need as the rain begins to fall, while
flooding the land beneath their feet and eroding
the hills in which they shelter. We cannot allow the
refugees to remain in unsafe and unsanitary conditions.
The ultimate solution does not lie in Bangladesh. It is
for the refugees to return to their homes and their own
land. We, the Security Council, must remain focused on
creating the conditions for the voluntary, safe, dignified
and sustainable return of the Rohingya people and
of all displaced communities to their places of origin
in Burma. We were glad to see some cooperation
between the Governments of Bangladesh and Burma
in achieving that goal, but the ultimate responsibility
for creating such conditions rests squarely with
Burmese authorities.

We appreciate the transparency of the Burmese
Government demonstrated during the visit. However,
Burma must do far more to accept its responsibilities
and take the steps needed to end the crisis. Burma
must work with the international community to focus
on real solutions. That means focusing its energy on
working with the United Nations and others to create
the conditions on the ground that will reassure the
Rohingya who fled that they will be safe to return in a
dignified and voluntary manner.

Justice is an essential precondition for the voluntary
return of refugees. It is important for Burma to cooperate
with credible, independent investigations into reports
of atrocities. There needs to be accountability for the
perpetrators, including those in the security services.
Impunity cannot continue to be the order of the day.
As part of that effort, the Burmese Government should
allow access to the United Nations fact-finding mission
and restore access for the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Burma.

Burma must also demonstrate respect for the
fundamental human rights of the Rohingya, including
respecting their freedom of movement and freedom of
religion. It must address the conditions that are causing
people to continue to flee Rakhine state. Burma needs
to do more to address the root causes of the crisis by
comprehensively implementing the recommendations
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State,
including those related to citizenship.

Burma also needs to recognize the scope of the
physical and logistical challenges involved in creating
the proper conditions for the safe, dignified, voluntary
and sustainable return for more than 1 million refugees.
No country could handle that challenge alone, and
Burma should accept the expert help that the relevant
United Nations-mandated agencies have offered.
The United States stands ready to support Burma in
addressing both the immediate crisis as well as a long-
term solution. A democratic, pluralistic Government
that protects the rights of all minority communities,
including the Rohingya, is the only sustainable solution.
As a sign of good faith, Burma should immediately sign
the memorandum of understanding with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Development Programme.
Burma should also allow the United Nations and all
other humanitarian partners immediate and unhindered
access into Rakhine state. That is critical to building
the confidence of not only the international community,
but of the refugees.

As well, the Burmese Government should provide
the media with immediate and unhindered access to
Rakhine state, and provide for the protection of press
freedoms, including the safety ofjournalists. We once
again call on the Government of Burma to release the
two Reuters journalists who remain jailed and on trial
simply for reporting and documenting atrocities in
Rakhin state.

The active involvement of the Security Council is
essential to bring an end the Rohingya crisis. We know
what we need to do. We cannot allow politics and short-
term economic interests to keep us from doing what
is right. We have unique tools to encourage Burma to
take real steps towards resolving this crisis, and we
must use them. We should move quickly to adopt a
draft resolution that institutes real steps to resolve this
enormous and growing humanitarian and human rights
crisis. That, too, will be a challenge, as some members
of the Council have kept us from taking action for
cynical and self-interested reasons. Some undermine
the unity of the Council demonstrated during the trip
with unhelpful edits that only weaken the Council's
message. We have all heard horrifying accounts of
what the Rohingya people have suffered, what ethnic
cleansing means to those on the ground. Now members
of the Council have seen with their own eyes what the
crisis has wrought. That leaves us with no choice but to
act now.

