Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I thank you very
much, Sir, for this opportunity once again to debate the
issue of peacekeeping operations. This discussion
demonstrates the ongoing and tireless support of the
Security Council for these operations, in particular
today in the presence of our Force Commanders and
heads of the military components of our operations. I
believe that those who work on the front lines of those
operations are very pleased and proud to be able to
address the Council themselves.

My statement will be brief because the Council
has had regular opportunities to hear me speak in the
past months. Today's meeting will, instead, offer the
opportunity for interaction with the Force
Commanders.

I simply wish to note that there are currently
deployed 15 peacekeeping operations, in the strict
sense of the word. The Council has opted to hear
representatives from five of these, whom you named a
moment ago, Sir. All the others are seated behind us
and are prepared to answer any question that the
members of the Council should care to address to them.
Unfortunately, as Council members are aware, two of
10-47717
them had to leave New York recently, at my request,
due to heightened tensions concerning their operations.
They are Major General Asarta Cuevas, Force
Commander of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNMIL), whom I asked to return to preside
over the important tripartite meeting held on
Wednesday evening, and Lieutenant General
Nyamvumba, Force Commander of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, who was
compelled to return to his core tasks in the field to
address the current tensions in certain camps in Darfur.

Among those who will speak, we have chosen a
panel that is very representative of the broad diversity
of our peacekeeping operations, from the oldest - the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization,
created in 1948 - to such multidimensional operations
as the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.

(spoke in English)

I should just like to remind the Council of the
current figures. As of 31 July, we had almost 120,000
peacekeepers deployed, among them 84,000 military,
13,000 police officers, and 22,000 civilians. Thus, we
have almost 100,000 people in uniform, plus 22,000
civilians. There has been, of course, a drawdown of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad and MONUSCO, but we are still at
a very significant level. We cannot speak of a really
important drawdown; we consider that we have come
from a period of surge to a period of consolidation. We
are now at a plateau in consolidation, because we do
not see any new peacekeeping operation on the way.
We do not complain about that.

I just want to mention that this consolidation
phase will be used by us to consolidate and improve
our efficiency in so many fields: planning, oversight,
drafting protection of civilians strategies and robust
peacekeeping - in brief, our reform agenda. I also
want to mention that, of course, we are maintaining our
commitment to our reform agenda. Our New Horizon
process is going well. In September, the Council will
receive our first progress report. I must also note that
Susana Malcorra is working quite well and progressing
on the global field support strategy, on which the
Council will also receive a report very soon.
10-47717
To conclude, since I said that I would be very
brief, I should like to point out to the Council that
Lieutenant General Obiakor will complete his tour of
duty in early September. On behalf of the Secretariat, I
should like to thank him for his outstanding
commitment to the United Nations, first as the Force
Commander of UNMIL in Liberia, under very difficult
conditions, and for the past two years as Military
Adviser. We have greatly benefited from his experience
and wise advice. We are extremely thankful and
grateful to him, and wish him the best for the future.

