Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you especially,
Madam President, for organizing this open debate.
Brazil warmly welcomes the participation of Minister
for Foreign Affairs Moreno Charme of Chile. I also
recognize the speakers who preceded me: the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Latvia and the First Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba. Brazil also thanks
the Secretary-General for his briefing.

It is clear from the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/341) and from the concept note prepared for
this debate (S/2014/75, annex) that increased attention
has been paid to the need to strengthen and promote
the rule of law when implementing mandates related
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
The United Nations is therefore correct in seeking to
ensure greater system-wide coordination when trying
to improve the implementation of its mandate related
to the rule of law. In order to result in meaningful and
long-lasting consequences for the lives of millions
around the world, such initiatives must be built upon
certain premises, which Brazil would like to highlight.

First, there must be a holistic approach in supporting
the host country in its efforts to address the root
causes of conflict, advance peace and reconciliation
and enhance stability in the post-conflict period.
Tailoring and refining the implementation of rule-of-
law mandates to local circumstances and needs is key
to ensuring national ownership, without which the
sustainability of activities will be impaired.

In Haiti, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti has helped Haitian authorities in the establishment
and strengthening of rule-of-law institutions, including
the development of the Haitian National Police. At
the same time, the Mission has carried out important
community Violence-reduction programmes and
quick-impact projects, which are key to sustaining the
population's confidence in the mandate and in the peace
dividends of stabilization.

Secondly, there must be an understanding that the
rule of law is not only a cause of development, but also
a consequence thereof. There is a crucial need for long-
term commitment by the international community in
supporting national efforts to build structural changes.
That presupposes a departure from all-too-common
short attention spans for countries in post-conflict
situations.

In the complex and non-linear path to sustainable
peace, let me single out the enormous potential of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which Brazil
is honoured to chair. Brazil underscores the PBC's
contribution as a uniquely designed political platform
that is able to bring together key actors and help forge
greater harmony among the subregional, regional and
international levels. There is also ample room in the
PBC for the promotion of rule-of-law institutions and
the empowerment of women and minority groups.

Third is a conceptual reflection. In Latin
languages, "rule of law" is translated as something
equivalent to "state of right". In a broad sense, the true
name of the rule of law is social justice. What we are
actually seeking with the notion of the rule of law is a
State of rights in the plural - the establishment or the
improvement of a State capable of protecting rights and
promoting equal access, including legal access for all
citizens irrespective of their origin, sex, creed, political
affiliation or race.

We appreciate the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the rule oflaw. It is worth recalling,
nevertheless, that there is no agreed or universal basis
on how to assess the levels of implementation of the
rule of law. The report itself clearly acknowledges
that measuring and evaluating the impact of rule-of-
law activities poses a number of challenges, as many
of those processes are non-quantifiable, outcomes may
take generations to be fully grasped and data collection
may prove to be particularly elusive on rule-of-law
activities. One should concentrate on the ability to have a
sophisticated, long-term, comprehensive understanding
of the plurality of countries" circumstances, histories
and challenges.

A debate in the Council should be an occasion to
discuss the international dimension of the rule of law
as well. In today's world, we are, fortunately, heading
for new models of global governance in many areas,
in which participation will necessarily be larger.
New actors, in particular developing countries, are
participating more fully in debates on extremely
important and vital areas such as human rights, trade,
finance and sustainable development.

Regarding the environment, for instance, global
governance has already included wide-ranging
participation by developing countries. No one would
dream of discussing climate change or biodiversity
without the important participation of all of the
stakeholder countries, including civil society and
academia.

In all of these cases, it is clear that this enlarged
participation has made a positive contribution to global
governance. Unfortunately, in the field of international
peace and security, progress has been much slower, but
is no less necessary.

The rule of law at the international level is essential
to remind us that no State is above the law and that
claims of exceptionalism are unacceptable in themselves
and extremely damaging to the multilateral system.
Multilateral cooperation for peace and security rests on
the foundation of the sovereign equality of States. We
must be aware of doctrines that seek to erode respect
for sovereignty in advancing unilateral agendas. The
more multipolar the world becomes, the stronger our
reliance must be on the rule of law at the international
level as a cornerstone of sustainable peace.

Upholding the rule of law at the international level
is part of the responsibilities of the Security Council.
We expect the Council to raise its voice against breaches
of the primacy of law in international affairs, such as
the acquisition of territory by force, disregard for and
lack of compliance with international commitments
and United Nations resolutions, be it for humanitarian
access or the elimination of nuclear weapons, and the
illicit flow of arms to conflict zones. These are goals
that we must pursue together.

