Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): The international
community has been extremely disheartened and alarmed
at the tragic developments in eastern Zaire over the last
few weeks. Hundreds of thousands of displaced refugees
and inhabitants are facing the danger of mass death by
starvation. The creation of secure conditions for the
immediate delivery of humanitarian assistance in order to
provide food, shelter and security to the displaced persons
is urgently called for. The consequences of failing to do
so would be stark and tragic. The looming humanitarian
catastrophe, unless tackled properly by the international
community now, is bound to have serious consequences,

 

threatening peace and security in the entire Great Lakes
region.

My delegation highly appreciates the valiant and
expeditious efforts of the Canadian Government in taking
the lead and ensuring broad participation by the
international community in the formation of a temporary
multinational force to facilitate the effective delivery of
humanitarian aid and the voluntary, orderly and safe
repatriation of refugees. We also pay a resounding tribute
to Africa's readiness to contribute troops to the proposed
international force, as declared by the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) on 11 November, and to all other
members of the international community that have pledged
their firm commitment to this noble humanitarian cause.
The Republic of Korea is poignantly reminded of the
responsibility that each and every member of the
international community must assume in the face of such an
impending humanitarian disaster as we are now witnessing
in the Great Lakes region. In this regard, I wish to state
that my Government stands ready duly to contribute to the
cause of the multinational force. In expressing our full
support for the immediate deployment of a multinational
force on a temporary basis in the Great Lakes region, we
would like to add a few observations.

First, the task of the multinational force will by no
means be easy because of the insecure environment in
which it has to operate. It will therefore be of paramount
importance that all parties concerned provide the fullest
cooperation to the multilateral force. We strongly urge them
not to stand in the way of the multinational operation on
any pretext or in any way whatsoever.

Secondly, we would like to underline that the
precarious situation in the Great Lakes region does not
allow room for partial solutions. We believe that the second
part of the mandate of the multinational force, namely
facilitating the voluntary and orderly repatriation of
refugees, is particularly essential because any long-term
solution to the complex problems in the region would be
inconceivable without the repatriation of refugees to their
country of origin. In addition, although we understand the
difficulty and the risk of translating into reality the need to
separate people who are intimidating others from bona fide
refugees, we still believe that every possible avenue should
be explored in the course of the multinational operation to
help facilitate the non-enforced and gradual separation of
refugees. My delegation is confident that the multinational
force will mark the beginning of a solution to the
multifaceted problems from which the Great Lakes region
has been suffering for many years.

 

T hirdly, in devising the operational plan for the
repatriation of refugees, I fully agree with views on the
importance of the treatment the first refugees voluntarily
returning to their home countries will receive, as pointed
out by the representative of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) at
yesterday's briefing. We have to make every effort to
ensure that conditions in their home countries will be
acceptable for those first returnees so that other refugees
who are more cautious or hesitant to return will be
encouraged to follow suit.

Fourthly, we believe that the international
community, building upon the valuable momentum to be
created by the painstaking efforts of the States
participating in the multinational force, should take timely
and appropriate follow-up action as envisaged in the draft
resolution and through the convening of an international
conference as set out in resolution 1078 (1996). In this
regard, we look forward to the recommendations that the
Secretary-General will make after undertaking the
necessary preparation with Member States and relevant
organizations.

In concluding, we would like to express our sincere
hope that the operation of the planned multinational force
will achieve the objectives of resuming urgently
humanitarian relief and paving the way for the
repatriation of refugees within the planned timetable and
framework. My delegation, as one of the sponsors, will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before the Council.

