Mr. Nambiar (India): Mr. President, I
congratulate you on Chile's presidency of the Council
for the month of January. We also congratulate
Bulgaria for its steering of the Council in December.
We welcome the presence of new members of the
Council - Algeria, Benin, Brazil, Philippines and
Romania, and extend our good wishes to them.

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate of the Security Council on small arms.
India attaches importance to this issue and is
committed to the eradication of illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. In keeping with this
commitment, we have been closely following this issue
in both the General Assembly and the Security
Council, and have actively contributed to cooperative
international efforts in addressing this multi-faceted
issue.

India is particularly aware of the complexity and
lethal nature of the problem of illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons. Since 1990 the
Government of India has seized in its states in the
north-east and in the north, approximately 39,000
weapons of all types. Their markings clearly indicate
that the sources of these weapons lie outside India.
Over the last two decades, thousands of innocent
civilians in India have fallen victim to the acts of
terrorists who use such illicitly obtained weapons for
their nefarious activities. We have also paid a high
developmental cost as a result.

India has, therefore, been actively associated with
the various initiatives under the aegis of the United
Nations to address the problem of illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and welcomed the
adoption of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in
July 2001. Since then, India has been engaged in the
comprehensive and effective implementation of the
Programme of Action. We reiterate that commitment
today.

India welcomes the report of the United Nations
Secretary-General contained in document S/2003/l2l7,
on the ways and means by which the Security Council
could contribute to that issue. Since almost all terrorist
activities involve the use of illegal weapons, including
small arms, addressing that issue would also contribute
to the larger goal of combating terrorism.

There were also a number of recommendations in
the Secretary-General's report of 2002 (S/2002/1053),
which could go a long way towards combating the
problem of small arms. India is particularly pleased to
see that definite progress has been made in the
implementation of some of those recommendations.

An important recommendation was made with
regard to the development of an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace, in a
timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms and light
weapons. India had the honour of chairing the Group of
Governmental Experts constituted by the Secretary-
General pursuant to General Assembly resolution
56/24 V of 24 December 2001 to study the feasibility
of developing such an international instrument. The
group recommended by consensus that it was both
desirable and feasible to commence work on such an
instrument under United Nations auspices - a
recommendation which was endorsed by the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. India would
continue to contribute in the efforts for the early
finalization of such an instrument. We believe that
would be a significant step in our efforts to combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

India was also associated with the Group of
Governmental Experts constituted to study the
continued operation of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and its further development. The
Group was able to adopt by consensus its report in
which it agreed to the inclusion of man-portable air
defence systems within the scope of the Register.
Further, the group was also able to recommend that
interested States may, on a voluntary basis, report on
the transfers of small arms and light weapons as well.
As we are all aware, those weapons have become
instruments of choice of terrorists to execute their acts.
We hope that these steps, which are in keeping with the
recommendations of the United Nations Plan of Action,
would help in reinforcing our collective efforts to deal
with this scourge.

Illicit trade occurs because of illicit production or
because licit production or licit stocks enter the gray
and black markets, thus swelling the illicit weapons
market. Those weapons end up in the possession of
criminals, thereby exacerbating problems for law
enforcement agencies and, worse, getting into the
hands of unscrupulous arms brokers, ending up in areas
of conflict and into the hands of extremists and
terrorists. The Programme of Action recognizes that
measures are needed to ensure that there are effective
controls over legal transfers of small arms and light
weapons.

India follows a very strict policy with regard to
the export of small arms and light weapons that
includes the requirement for end-user certificates on a
Government-to-Government basis, and a ban on
exports to countries under United Nations embargo. It
is our hope that all other States would also undertake
an obligation not to supply such weapons to non-State
actors and would insist on authenticated end-user
certificates to ensure effective control over the export
and transit of such weapons. The international
community, for its part, must also ensure that the trade
in arms flows only through channels authorized by both
the exporting and importing Governments.

Greater exchange of information and
collaboration between Governments would be essential
in order to effectively address the problem. In that
context, we support the need to strengthen the
effectiveness of the International Criminal Police
Organization's (Interpol) International Weapons and
Explosive Tracking System (IWETS). We are happy to
note that Interpol is presently undertaking technical
evaluation to integrate the IWETS with its
communications systems and hope that that would be
completed soon. This would provide an additional tool
for Member States to fight terrorism and other crimes
associated with the illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons.

Linkages among illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons, the illicit exploitation of natural and
other resources, as well as the trade in narcotic drugs,
are important in the context of Somalia and Liberia as
brought out in the report of the Secretary-General. We
trust that careful consideration would be given by the
Security Council to the recommendations and findings
of committees constituted to investigate such linkages.
For its part, the international community must also
extend all the assistance necessary to help with the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes in the relevant post-conflict situations.

Although the Programme of Action provides an
adequate basis for further work at all levels - national,
regional and global - and the primary responsibility
rests with the Member States themselves to address the
problem, we trust that the Security Council will take
effective and practical steps, based on this report, in
respect of those recommendations which are directly
within its competence. Such steps would restrict the
availability and use of illicit small arms and further
help the implementation of the Programme of Action.

