Mr. Pascoe: This reporting period has seen a
number of significant developments in the region. On
30 July, Prime Minister Olmert announced that he will
not be seeking rc-election as leader of the Kadima
party in a primary scheduled for 17 September, and
will therefore be stepping down as Prime Minister. Mr.
Olmert is expected to remain in office until either a
new government is formed by the new party leader or
after general elections are held.

Despite that development, the Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations continue, as do the indirect talks with
Syria. There was a rise of internal Palestinian violence
as Hamas took action to consolidate its hold over the
Gaza Strip. The fragile ceasefire between Hamas and
Israel continues to hold, but the situation on the ground
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem remains a cause
for concern.

The negotiations with the Palestinians as part of
the Annapolis process are ongoing at both a political
and a technical level, and on 6 August, Prime Minister
Olmert met again with President Abbas. It would
appear that the gaps between the parties' positions
remain, and l reiterate the Secretary-General's call for
the need to press ahead to make real progress in
overcoming differences to reach the goal of an
2
agreement by the end of this year, despite the political
constraints.

During this reporting period, there was a major
increase in Palestinian internal violence, contributing
to an overall total of 43 Palestinians killed and 366
injured. One Israeli soldier died of injuries sustained
on 11 July in East Jerusalem, and nine Israelis were
reported injured.

The rise in internal Palestinian violence stemmed
from an incident on 25 July in which five Hamas
members and a child were killed in a beachside
bombing in Gaza. Hamas claimed that the Fatah-
affiliated Hillis clan were sheltering the perpetrators
and attacked the clan's stronghold in eastern Gaza City,
the last bastion of the Fatah military presence in the
Gaza Strip. The ensuing violence left 10 members of
the Hillis family dead, and dozens of members of the
clan fled to the West Bank through Israel. Members of
the Hillis family were detained by Hamas along with
dozens of Fatah and other activists, and there have
been allegations of torture committed by Hamas
against detainees.

Following the 25 July bombing, Hamas initiated a
well-orchestrated campaign for total control of the
Gaza Strip. Hamas forces raided over 200 community-
based organizations in Gaza and closed them down.
The closures of those organizations disrupted activities
involving thousands of beneficiaries, as 23 of the
institutions are supported by United Nations agencies.
Eighty of the organizations have been re-opened
following Hamas review of their operations. Hamas
also seized control of the last remaining Palestinian
Authority institutions within the Strip, most notably the
Governorates, which Hamas had previously recognized
as legitimate Palestinian Authority structures and
which had continued to report to President Abbas.
Three Governors were detained by Hamas forces and
two Governors are still in prison. Those actions
severely prejudice the prospects for Palestinian
reunification within the framework of the legitimate
Palestinian Authority. We are also concerned at the
potential consequences for United Nations operations
in Gaza.

In reaction to Hamas's actions in Gaza,
Palestinian security forces in the West Bank arrested
dozens of Hamas activists, most of whom were later
freed on the orders of President Abbas. Palestinian
Authority security forces closed a number of Hamas-
08-46697
linked institutions in the West Bank. Hamas and the
Palestinian Authority should both release detainees
seized as a result of the recent violence. That could
serve as a first step in a process leading to
reconciliation and the reunification of Gaza and the
West Bank under the Palestinian Authority, to which
the Secretary-General remains committed.

The Egyptian-mediated ceasefire that began on
19 June has largely held but remains fragile. Ten
rockets and one mortar were fired from Gaza into
Israel, without causing casualties. During this reporting
period, no Israel Defense Forces (IDF) air strikes or
incursions were reported, although one Palestinian
child was injured by IDF shooting near the border.
Twelve other Palestinians were killed and 34 were
injured due to the collapse of tunnels along the Gaza-
Egypt border. Over 25 tunnels were closed as a result
of Egyptian efforts against smuggling.

Talks for the release of Israeli captive Gilad
Shalit are stalled. The International Committee of the
Red Cross has still not been provided with access to
him after two years in captivity. We welcome Israel's
decision on 17 August to release approximately 200
Palestinian prisoners as a goodwill gesture to President
Abbas.

In the West Bank, three Palestinians, including
two children, were killed, and 185, including 47
children, were injured during the reporting period.
Both children that were killed were shot by the IDF
using live ammunition against Palestinian
demonstrators at Naalin village. There has also been a
rise in settler violence during the reporting period,
including at least 34 settler attacks on Palestinians,
resulting in 35 injuries, including nine children, and
extensive property damage, including an attempt to set
fire to the Ar-Ras mosque in Hebron on 13 August.

Settlement activity continues across the West
Bank, and particularly in East Jerusalem. On 24 July,
approval was given for 20 permanent housing units at
Maskiyot in the West Bank, outside the footprint of any
existing settlement. We are also concerned at reports
that the trailers of the Migron settlement outpost are to
be evacuated in exchange for the construction of
permanent residential units in other nearby settlements.
Also in this reporting period, tenders were announced
for over 400 new settlement units in East Jerusalem.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly stated that all
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
08-46697

including East Jerusalem, is contrary to the Fourth
Geneva Convention and Israel's commitments under
the Road Map and the Annapolis process.

On 10 August, two major checkpoints in the West
Bank were partially reopened for Palestinian traffic,
leading to significant improvements in access to those
areas. However, the overall number of closures during
the reporting period remains unchanged at 608, as
some previously removed obstacles were reinstalled.
The weekly average of flying checkpoints stood at 80.
Construction of the barrier around East Jerusalem and
within the West Bank continues, in deviation from the
Green Line and contrary to the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice.

The Palestinian Authority faces a budget shortfall
of approximately $400 million from October to the end
of the year, meaning that Palestinian Authority salaries
may not be paid from the end of September. We urge,
again, donors to fulfil outstanding pledges and direct
external assistance to budget support. The fiscal
performance of the Palestinian Authority has
continuously improved and measures have been taken
to strengthen the line ministries' capacity for preparing
the 2009 budget and a medium-term expenditure
framework for 2009-2011.

The implementation of Quartet Representative
Tony Blair's May 2008 package advanced during the
reporting period. Selected obstacles to movement have
been eased, and on 28 July a telecommunications
contract was signed between the Government of Israel
and the Palestinian Authority, enabling a second mobile
phone operator to launch in the occupied Palestinian
territory. This deal was an important part of the
package intended to stimulate economic growth.
However, to achieve significant economic impact, all
outstanding measures need to be implemented rapidly
and as originally negotiated.

While the number of trucks entering Gaza during
this reporting period increased by over 75 per cent
compared to the previous period, it represented only 54
per cent of that in May 2007. Most basic commodities,
from school stationery to mechanical spare parts to
bedding, remain in short supply. F orty-two per cent of
the imports were gravel, while the import of necessary
complementary building materials, such as cement,
steel bars and flooring materials, et cetera, remained
low. Ninety-five per cent of Gaza's local industry
remains closed.
3

There is a severe lack of fuel in the Gaza Strip,
which has an impact on agriculture, as farmers are
unable to run water pumps for irrigation. A lack of both
fuel and spare parts means that approximately 84,000
litres of raw and partially treated sewage continue to be
dumped into the Mediterranean Sea every day. Power
cuts continue to occur for at least four to five hours a
day across Gaza.

Normal economic and daily life is extremely
difficult throughout Gaza, due to petrol shortages and
the corresponding lack of transportation. The benefits
of the ceasefire have not yet translated into any
significant improvement in the living conditions of the
people of Gaza.

Further to the Secretary-General's discussions
with Prime Minister Olmert in Paris last month
concerning stalled United Nations projects in Gaza, the
Israeli authorities are positively considering the import
of additional quantities of construction materials for
United Nations priority projects focusing on housing,
school construction and water sanitation. We welcome
movement in this regard and hope for the early
resumption of all suspended United Nations projects in
Gaza.

On 29 July, a further round of indirect Syrian-
Israeli talks was held under Turkish auspices. Another
round of talks scheduled for this month has not yet
been held, following the announcement of Prime
Minister's Olmert's decision not to take part in the
Kadima party primary. The situation in the occupied
Syrian Golan remained quiet during the reporting
period, with one incident of a Syrian infiltrator lightly
wounded by the IDF on 14 August. Settlement activity
in the Golan continues.

If I may turn now to Lebanon, the past month was
marked both by positive political developments and
continued security concerns. After several weeks of
discussion among members of the national unity
Government, the cabinet's ministerial declaration was
agreed upon and presented to parliament. The
parliamentary session that followed witnessed
differences of opinion on certain elements of the
proposed ministerial declaration, including the role of
Hizbullah's weapons. On 12 August, the declaration
received a vote of confidence through an
overwhelming majority of the members of parliament.
That vote represents a new and important milestone in
the implementation of the Doha agreement. We
welcome the intention to begin the national dialogue
led by the President of the Republic, as referred to in
the ministerial declaration and to consolidate the
sovereignty, stability and security of the Lebanese
State. The United Nations looks forward to working
closely with the new Government to meet those
objectives and Lebanon's obligations under the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

On 13 August, Presidents Sleiman and Assad met
in Damascus in their first summit meeting since the
Lebanese President was elected in May. Among other
commitments, the two heads of State agreed to
establish diplomatic relations, to reactivate a joint
committee charged with the delineation of their two
countries' common borders and to take joint action to
address cross-border smuggling activities. The
Secretary-General welcomed those constructive
decisions and encouraged both parties to begin
implementation as soon as possible, in keeping with
relevant Security Council resolutions.

These positive developments were shadowed by
security incidents, which continue to take place in and
around the northern city of Tripoli. On 13 August,
hours before the Damascus summit, an improvised
explosive device was detonated at a bus stop frequently
used by Lebanese army soldiers in Tripoli. Fifteen
people were killed in the bombing, including 10
soldiers. The Secretary-General and the Security
Council vigorously condemned that brutal attack. We
welcome the steps taken by the Government of
Lebanon to contain the violence in Tripoli and to
address the root causes of the situation.

During the period since the last Security Council
briefing, the area of operations of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has remained
generally quiet. UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed
Forces have continued coordinated operational
activities throughout the area south of the Litani River,
in accordance with their responsibilities under
resolution 1701 (2006). UNIFIL continues to record
Israeli air violations, which have occurred on an
almost-daily basis.

The Quartet will meet here in New York on the
margins of the General Assembly in September. That
will be followed by an iftar hosted by the Secretary-
General with Arab partners, as well as by a meeting of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee. Those occasions will
enable us to take stock of the progress that has been
08-46697
made and the gaps that remain to be bridged, as well as
to assist urgently in the implementation of donor
pledges to address the impending Palestinian budget
crisis.

The Secretary-General remains committed to a
just and lasting comprehensive regional peace in the
Middle East, based on Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003).
08-46697
