Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I would like to welcome
Special Representative Sergio Vieira de Mello and
Mr. Ramos-Horta. Later in today's debate Belgium, as
President of the European Union, will be making a
statement to which Ireland fully subscribes. I make the
following points in my national capacity.
It is not an exaggeration to state that today's
meeting takes place at an historic time for East Timor,
as the country approaches elections to the Constituent
Assembly, the drafting of the constitution and the
achievement of independence. An enormous amount
has been accomplished in the last two years, but as
Mr. Vieira de Mello has confirmed today, much
remains to be done.

The Secretary-General in his report of last
January stated that, once independent, East Timor
would still require substantial international support
through an integrated mission mandated by the
Security Council and funded from assessed
contributions. We are pleased to note in the current
report that planning for such a presence is being
undertaken by the Working Group on the Post-
UNTAET Planning in East Timor, together with an
Integrated Mission Task Force in New York. We also
note from the Secretary-General's report that the plan
will be refined to reflect the structure of an
independent Government of East Timor, which of
course will only become clear once the Constituent
Assembly's deliberations have progressed.

We strongly believe that the international
presence in East Timor should be commensurate with
actual requirements and calibrated to a careful
timetable of scrutiny and review. In this context we
have taken careful note of Mr. Ramos-Horta's appeal
that the desirable downsizing of the United Nations
presence should take full account of the ongoing needs
of East Timor. The recommendation in the Secretary-
General's report that international staff should act
increasingly in an advisory capacity and in technical
areas where local expertise has not yet developed is
most sensible and worthy of further consideration. We
believe that this assistance is vital for the process of
Timorization, whereby East Timor will acquire the
administrative strength and institutional capacity to
successfully manage its own affairs.

We agree with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that an effective human rights
component should be an important part of the successor
mission, and we are encouraged by the important
human rights work currently being carried out by the
Human Rights Unit of UNTAET.

Yet despite the encouraging political
developments, we remain concerned about the security
situation in East Timor. In particular, as we were
reminded on the weekend, the situation on the border
with West Timor is of concern. In this respect we note
the reference in the Secretary-General's report to
illegal cross-border trade and movement, which have
been associated with serious security incidents. This is
deeply worrying.

Equally disturbing is the concern expressed in the
report that some militia elements have adopted a
strategy of biding their time until independence in the
belief that the international military presence will be
removed from East Timor. The militias must not be
given such hope, no matter how false or groundless.
Moreover, they must be disarmed and disbanded.

As regards the presence of international troops,
we believe that the significant efforts of the
international community should not be compromised or
endangered by a premature reduction in military
strength. Concrete decisions should not be taken at this
time, particularly about the peacekeeping and policing
components. We should reflect on the recommendation
of the Secretary-General and monitor developments on
the ground, especially during the election period.
Before we make decisions in this regard we should
await the report that the Secretary-General has said he
will issue in October. We believe that, pending that
report, the military component of UNTAET should be
maintained in its present form until the new
Government in East Timor has established itself.

The long-term stability and prosperity of East
Timor will be greatly enhanced through a close and
harmonious relationship with its neighbour, Indonesia.
These are challenging times for Indonesia, but there is
no doubt that the international standing of the new
Government in Jakarta would be significantly
strengthened if it were to take early action in relation to
a number of issues regarding its relations with East
Timor. These include active implementation of the
memorandum of understanding, concluded in 2000, on
cooperation in legal, judicial and human rights matters.
They also include cooperation with UNTAET and
subsequently with the independent East Timorese
authorities in prosecuting crimes against humanity and
humanitarian law in East Timor, and the pursuit of an
early appeal against the extremely light sentences
given to the six individuals guilty of the murder of the
three staff of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in Atambua on
6 September 2000.

Another such action would be an indication that
those refugees who for the moment have apparently
elected to remain in West Timor would, were they to
change their minds, be allowed to return to East Timor
in full security. Finally, we would urge full cooperation
in investigating the allegations raised by Ireland in
May that some women, abducted from East Timor
during the conflict, are being held in West Timor in
conditions of sexual slavery.

Ireland is fully committed to a sustained
involvement in East Timor, both bilaterally and on the
part of the United Nations. Considerable and
encouraging progress has been made in East Timor.
This is a tribute both to the courage and vision of the
East Timorese people and their leadership and to the
professionalism and dedication of the staff of
UNTAET. We are in a critical stage of the national self-
realization of East Timor. We very much hope that
when we look at the Secretary-General's next report, in
October, further challenges will have been met, that the
elections will have been successfully held and that the
drafting of East Timor's constitution will be well under
way. This is a crucial phase, and it is important that
this Council continue to show its strong and steadfast
support for East Timor.

