I join others in extending our deepest condolences to the Syrians who lost family members in the Beirut explosion, as well as to the Russian Federation for the loss of a major general in eastern Syria yesterday. Let me convey my best wishes to Deputy Special Envoy Matar for a speedy recovery. I would like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing. I would like to welcome the new Permanent Representative of Belgium, Mr. Philippe Kridelka, to the United Nations family and the Security Council, and I wish him best of luck. I would also like to welcome the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, Mr. Bashar Ja'afari, to this meeting. It is only a few days until the next session of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva. As progress has been insufficient for months, we all have long been waiting for the reconvening of the Committee. My delegation therefore encourages the members of the Committee to show goodwill and actively engage in constructive dialogue. A productive session will subsequently serve as a good basis to facilitate the broader political process. Like other Council members, Viet Nam remains a strong supporter of the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process facilitated by the United Nations, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015), in full compliance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations and with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria and non-interference in its internal affairs. That is the only way to bring about long-term peace and stability, thereby ending the untold suffering of the Syrian people. We would also like to take this opportunity to commend the efforts of the Special Envoy and his team to bring the parties together. We will continue to support their important work. While there is hope for progress on the political track, the overall situation on the ground remains a source of concern. Regarding the security situation, while Viet Nam is pleased to see that the ceasefire agreement in Idlib continues to generally hold and commends the efforts of the parties concerned to that end, there has not been any reduction in the number of worrisome security incidents in that area. We are also troubled by the reported resurgence of terrorist activities in different parts of Syria. We would like to reiterate our call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint and refrain from violence. Ensuring a sustained period of calm is of vital importance to unlocking progress in the political domain. It is also critical to continuing efforts to eradicate terrorism, in line with responsibilities under international law, including international humanitarian law. In addition, the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation are regrettably becoming increasingly volatile. While people are struggling with their daily lives due to the impact of the severe economic crisis, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is hitting that country harder day after day. It is alarming to witness that the number of COVID-19 cases has increased by more than 60 per cent in north-eastern Syria in just one week. Controlling the spread of the virus and minimizing its impact on the Syrian people are now among the most important tasks. It is particularly relevant to ensure that sanctions do not undermine the capacity of the Syrian people to ensure their basic daily needs, especially in terms of food and health care during the brutal pandemic. We reiterate our call on the international community to provide unwavering support for Syrians in all areas by all means, especially during this challenging time. It is of critical importance that we should not let the situation deteriorate. Syria cannot afford that at the moment.
