Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is an honour
and pleasure for my delegation to see you, Sir,
presiding over this important meeting of the Security
Council. We very much appreciate your taking the time
out to come here and encourage us with your presence.

The HIV/AIDS pandemic is now increasingly
recognized as being more than a public health problem.
Its nature and extent has made it a development
problem for the vast majority of countries. It has the
potential to cause violence and social destabilization
through the enormous toll it can take on the active
members of a society. In the broader context of
security, it also has a security dimension.
The world is facing an alarming situation with
AIDS. The United Nations has already declared it the
worst infectious disease catastrophe since the bubonic
plague, which killed a third of the European population
in the fourteenth century. All are aware of the
frightening statistics of HIV/AIDS and I will not repeat
them.

HIV/AIDS is most prevalent in Africa, but no
single country is immune. In Asia, new HIV infections
increased by 70 per cent between 1996 and 1998. This
rapid spread shows that unless drastic measures are
immediately taken, it could be as great a scourge in
many other countries and regions around the world as it
is in sub-Saharan Africa.

For a secure future, we have no choice but to
make every effort to halt the spread and impact of the
pandemic. The effort should be directed to, and from,
all levels. I will briefly mention a few points which we
believe would help our efforts against this global
scourge. First, with regard to targets, we should focus
our strategy on a time-bound target for reducing
HIV/AIDS. We welcome the Secretary-General's call,
in his millennium report, for a reduction of HIV
infection rates in people from 15 to 24 years of age by
25 per cent globally before 2010. This target is based
on agreement at the 1999 special session of the General
Assembly on the follow-up to the International
Conference on Population and Development, and we
should all make every effort to achieve this goal.

Secondly, one of the issues that emerged from the
10 January meeting of the Council was the need for
better coordination and exchange of information
between and among the bodies working on AIDS. This
must be forcefully sought so that better programmes
can be implemented. Following the Council meeting in
January, Dr. Peter Piot, the Executive Director of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), informed us of a specific plan for the major
intensification and mobilization of efforts to address
AIDS. We appreciate his statement today, which was in
keeping with his commitment to brief the Council
regularly on the status of the plan.

Thirdly, there should be a strong partnership
between Governments, international organizations and
civil society, particularly the private sector so that the
pharmaceutical companies, in partnership with the
donor nations, can come up with affordable vaccines to
prevent infection. As this affliction is concentrated
mostly in the poorer countries, there is no way that,
without major political and resource commitments,
AIDS prevalence can be reduced to any significant
extent.

Fourth, with regard to knowledge and education,
there is a stigma associated with open discussion of
HIV/AIDS in many of our societies. This deprives the
potential victims of useful knowledge needed for
avoiding infection, and for preventing those already
infected with HIV from transmitting it to others. There
should be a systematic approach for the dissemination
of knowledge, particularly among the young. It is
worth noting that, globally, six people under the age of
25 contract HIV every minute. They account for 40 per
cent of all new infections.

Finally, at the thirteenth International AIDS
Conference, which concluded in Durban last week,
there were signs of increased commitment and
heightened efforts by all to combat AIDS. We hope that
such cooperation will result in the achievement of the
target that we set for ourselves.

We believe that in View of the broader dimension
of HIV/AIDS and its wider impact on societies, the
draft resolution that the Council is working on should
focus more on that aspect in its operative part.

Before concluding, allow me to commend the
initiative of the United States presidency in January for
its efforts to put HIV/AIDS in the limelight by having
the problem discussed in the Security Council. Our
particular appreciation goes to Ambassador Holbrooke
for his pioneering initiative on the draft resolution that
the Council will vote on later, and his efforts in
mobilizing the Council, as well as other United Nations
bodies, inspiring their efforts in their fight against
HIV/AIDS.

