The President: I would now like to make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United States.

The United States has engaged intensively to
encourage Israel and the Palestinian Authority to take
concrete steps towards the implementation of a road
map to peace that has broad support within the
international community and the United Nations. We
are not as far along in that process as we had hoped,
largely due to the destructive impact of terrorist
bombings and the failure to dismantle the organizations
and infrastructure that encourage those acts.

Just 10 days ago, a suicide bomber killed 20
innocent people in Haifa. The Palestinian Islamic Jihad
took responsibility for that attack. Terrorist groups
such as Islamic Jihad, Hamas and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs
Brigade prevent peace and highjack any prospect for
real dialogue. We have noted repeatedly that Israel has
the right to defend itself against those insidious attacks.

In our view, all parties have responsibilities to
bring peace to the Middle East. Ending terrorism must
be the highest priority. Any resolution concerning the
Middle East must take into account the larger
picture - that of the current security situation,
including the devastating suicide attacks that Israelis
have had to endure over the last three years. That is the
broader context of the debate we are holding today.

The United States views on the construction of
the Israeli fence have been clear. As National Security
Adviser Condoleezza Rice said recently,

"This wall is not really consistent with our view
of what the Middle East will one day have to look
like: two States living side by side in peace. We
understand the Israelis have security concerns. It
is extremely important, if it is going to be built,
that it not intrude on the lives of Palestinians and,
most importantly, that it not look as if it is trying
to prejudge the outcome of a peace agreement."

We have urged Israel to consider carefully the
consequences of its actions. In addition, senior United
States Administration officials are engaging directly
with Israel on the matter of the fence. We do not
believe that a Security Council resolution focused on
the fence furthers the goals of peace and security in the
region. We also urge both parties to avoid actions that
exacerbate the situation.

For its part, the United States, along with Quartet
partners, will continue to work towards the
implementation of President Bush's vision of a two-
State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as set
forth in the road map. Our diplomatic personnel -
including Secretary of State Powell, Ambassador John
Wolfe and our missions in the region - are actively
involved with both parties at the highest levels. We
remain committed to the road map as the way forward
towards the overarching goal of the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples living side by side in peace and
security.

I shall now resume my function as President of
the Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States, to
whom I give the floor.

