Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister of
Guinea-Bissau. I congratulate him on taking office
and wish him every success in stabilizing his friendly
country. I would also like to welcome Mr. Jose Viegas
Filho, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau, who is here with us in the Security
Council for the first time. I wish him success in his
tasks, especially at this critical moment ofthe country's
history, and we support him fully. I also thank him for
his valuable briefing.

I thank as well Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba,
Ambassador Mauro Vieira and Ms. Elisa Maria Tavares
Pinto for their informative briefings.

Today, I would like to focus in my statement on
three issues: the political situation, the upcoming
elections, and transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking.

First, we reiterate our welcome of the effective
steps taken by all relevant parties to make progress on
implementing the first three demands of the Conakry
Agreement. However, we believe that there is still
room for more progress. We urge all parties concerned
to cooperate and implement the remaining provisions
of the Agreement in the coming period, especially
the necessary reforms mentioned therein, including
the review of the national Constitution. I reiterate my
country's support for the decisive efforts of the African
Union, the United Nations, the European Union, the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, and in
particular the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), which has been continuously
engaged in this matter and helped to achieve the
progress that we have seen recently.

Secondly, regarding the legislative elections
scheduled to be held in November, we share the concerns
of the Secretary-General in his most recent report
(S/20l8/771) regarding the slow implementation of the
agreed timetable pertaining to the preparations for the
elections. We urge the Government of Guinea-Bissau
to step up its efforts to ensure that the elections are
held on time and in a transparent and credible manner.
My country welcomes the ongoing support provided
by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) to facilitate the
preparations for the elections, pursuant to its mandate
as set out in resolution 2404 (2018). We welcome the
continued support of international partners to fund the
elections, especially the financial support announced
by ECOWAS in its final summit communique of 31 July.
Thirdly and finally, we are pleased to see the
increased efforts ofthe United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to prevent drug trafficking and organized
crime since the renewal of the UNIOGBIS mandate last
February. This matter threatens peace and stability not
only in Guinea-Bissau, but also in the region as a whole.
In that regard, we call on UNIOGBIS to maintain this
approach and to provide the necessary support to all
the relevant authorities in the country in order to build
local capacity and address this matter.

