Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to express to you, Sir, my
delegation's congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We trust that
your experience of international affairs and your
intimate understanding of the United Nations system
will help you effectively to fulfil the critical tasks you
are facing. Allow me to commend your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Germany, Mr. Gunter
Pleuger, on his remarkable efforts and guidance of the
Council last month. I also wish to place on record our
thanks to the delegation of Malaysia for its initiative in
requesting, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
this open debate on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait.

The extremely delicate and critical circumstances
in which the Council is meeting are of the greatest
significance for international peace and security, as
well as for the United Nations system, which was
created to embody international law and to provide a
framework for constructive dialogue and collective
action in order to prevent war and to promote security
for all humankind.

We listened carefully to the updates given last
Friday by Mr. Hans Blix, Executive Chairman of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC), and Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We took note of the
progress made by the inspection regime and of the as
yet unfinished tasks to ensure that Iraq is free of
weapons of mass destruction.

No one disputes that the way the Security Council
eventually acts on the Iraq crisis will have critical
repercussions for the future of the States of the Middle
East region, for the global system of checks and
balances and, subsequently, for the United Nations
system.

In the light of those considerations, the recent
Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Arab
League Summit at Sharm-el-Sheikh and the
Extraordinary Session of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference all affirm the need to make all
possible efforts to resolve the Iraqi crisis peacefully
and in a way that will maintain the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq, in accordance with
international legitimacy. They also affirmed that Iraq
should complete its implementation of resolution 1441
(2002) and that the inspection teams should be given an
adequate time frame to complete their mandate in Iraq.

My country, in all international forums, and in the
Security Council just three weeks ago, expressed the
need to address this crisis peacefully, based on the
basis implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and on the need to spare the Iraqi
people and the peoples of the region the tragic
consequences of a new war, where no one can predict
the political, humanitarian and economic implications.
At the same time, Iraq is required to maintain proactive
and positive cooperation with the international
inspectors of UNMOVIC and the IAEA.

Due to its unique geographical location, the
Kingdom of Morocco, over the centuries, has
participated in a fruitful dialogue among civilizations
and religions and plays a vital role as a link between
the Arab world, Africa and Europe. It remains firmly
committed to the virtue of dialogue and to exhausting
all possible avenues under the United Nations Charter
to resolve all disputes by peaceful means. Our defence
of international legality and the system of multilateral
diplomacy, as embodied by the United Nations, is
founded on the established principles of the foreign
policy of the Kingdom of Morocco and on our belief in
the relevance of the United Nations and the need to
support it as the only forum available to the developing
countries for debating on international issues and for
bringing together the viewpoints of its members.

My country remains hopeful that reason and
rationality will prevail in dealing with the question of
Iraq and that the major partners in the United Nations,
especially on the Security Council, will strive in the
next few days - I emphasize, the next few days - to
find a peaceful solution to this dilemma that will
preserve the authority and credibility of the Security
Council, while strengthening the noble values that
constitute the foundation of the Organization.

