Ms. Landgren: I would like to say at the outset
on behalf of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) that our hearts are with the people of Haiti
and with our colleagues in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and their families in this
time of sorrow and uncertainty.

It is three years since the Security Council
authorized the deployment of UNMIN, at the request of
the then Seven-Party Alliance and the then Communist
Party of Nepal (Maoist) (CPN-M). The Mission's
election-related tasks were completed, with some
delays, in April 2008. UNMIN's continued support of
the peace process, in particular through the monitoring
of the management of arms and armies and the
chairmanship of the Joint Monitoring Coordination
Committee, has yet to be concluded.

The report of the Secretary-General now with the
Council (S/2010/17) reflects a turbulent period, with
contentious actions and statements by the parties. It
warns of the grave danger that the prolonged period of
polarization and growing confrontation poses to the
peace process. As I reported on 6 November (see S/PV.6214), the fragility of the peace process, and the
concerns that it could be derailed, remain real. In the
past weeks, however, the leaders of the principal
parties have demonstrated a renewed urgency in
focusing on core peace-related matters. The 28 May
deadline for the promulgation of Nepal's new
constitution and the need to create the conditions that
will allow UNMIN's role to be brought to an orderly
end have generated intense discussion and reflection
within and among the parties. Although the hour is late,
the recent actions by the Government and the parties, if
followed through with vigour, have the potential to
usher in constructive actions for the next stage of
Nepal's democratic transition.

Since the middle of December, activity has
revived on several fronts. The Unified Communist
Party of Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M) stopped obstructing
the work of the Legislature-Parliament; the long-
discussed high-level political mechanism was set up;
the first discharge of the disqualified Maoist army
personnel took place under the newly agreed action
10-21022
plan; and the Special Committee is now discussing a
timeline for integration and rehabilitation of the Maoist
army personnel. These developments may strengthen a
consensual basis for moving forward.

On 23 December, the UCPN-M. lifted its blockade
of the Legislature-Parliament, apparently without the
preconditions that had been under discussion since
August, saying that they took this step in the interest of
the peace process and to prevent relations with other
parties from deteriorating further. I have repeatedly
called on the Maoist leadership to allow the
Legislature-Parliament to function and to respect and
rely on democratic and institutional channels.

Last week, on 8 January, the leaders of the three
major parties announced the establishment of a high-
level political mechanism dedicated to resolving
outstanding peace-process issues, notably the
integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army
personnel, as well as constitutional issues. The initial
members are the Chair, Mr. Girija Prasad Koirala,
President of the Nepali Congress Party and former
Prime Minister; Mr. Jhala Nath Khanal, Chairman of
the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist Leninist); and Mr. Pushpa Kamal Dahal "Prachanda",
Chairman of the UCPN-M, with Prime Minister
Madhav Kumar Nepal as an invited member. UNMIN
has long underlined the need for an effective
framework within which the peace process can be
taken forward.

In a third positive and long-awaited development,
the discharge of the 4,008 personnel disqualified in 2007
as minors and late recruits began last week. As the
Council will recall, nearly 3,000 of this group are persons
disqualified as having been below the age of 18 at the
time of the signing of the ceasefire in May 2006. After an
arduous process of discussions, an agreement was secured
on 16 December on an action plan for the discharge of the
minors, signed by the Government, the UCPN-M. and the
United Nations country team, and witnessed by the
Minister for Peace and Reconstruction, Mr. Rakam
Chemjong; Chairman Prachanda; the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy; and myself.

Agreement on the discharge of the disqualified
was a significant step and came after a protracted
period of inaction on resolving the issue of personnel
in the cantonments. Many of the disqualified appear
already to have left the cantonments. The first
discharge took place in main cantonment site 2,
Sindhuli, on 7 January. Two hundred and one of the
originally registered 372 persons disqualified at this
site received new civilian identity cards, and were
offered a duffel bag with civilian clothing, a 10,000-
rupee transition allowance from the United Nations and
12,000 rupees from the UCPN-M, as well as bus
transport to six main destinations.

At the first discharge ceremony, Maoist army
commander Nanda Kishore Pun "Pasang" encouraged
those who were about to depart to go on to new
achievements. The process was smooth and the
atmosphere jubilant. The scheduled end date is
8 February, and a United Nations team, referred to as
the Monitoring Mechanism, will follow up for six
months those who were verified as minors and
discharged. UNICEF will lead the Monitoring
Mechanism, with the participation of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. Operational
guidelines for monitoring are being developed.

The Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction will
make available educational and vocational support to
the discharged personnel on an individual basis, with
the support of the United Nations, which has worked
diligently on the components of these support
packages. I would like to pay tribute to the exemplary
cooperation between the Mission and the United
Nations country team. I would also like to
acknowledge the valuable visit paid by Special
Representative Coomaraswamy and her staff at a
critical moment in the discussions leading to the
signing of the action plan.

Finally, the Special Committee established to
address the supervision, integration and rehabilitation
of Maoist army personnel has resumed meeting and is
considering a timetable within which the future of the
more than 19,000 former combatants is to be resolved.
The Special Committee has experienced significant
delays under successive Governments. We encourage
the parties to come to rapid agreement on the details of
the modalities of integration into the security forces,
and on rehabilitation. This is a critical element in the
peace process, not only from the perspective of
completing UNMIN's arms monitoring work, but, more
important, for the future stability of Nepal. The
integration and rehabilitation exercise pertains to the
lives of close to 20,000 men and women who have
military and combat experience fighting for a political
cause. The proper integration of an agreed number into
the security forces and the re-absorption of others into
society - with productive and meaningful lives ahead
of them - require careful planning and
implementation and an enabling political environment.
UNMIN and the United Nations system as a whole
remain available to extend appropriate support in that
regard.

UNMIN has engaged in active efforts to
encourage the Government and the parties to take the
steps that would allow UNMIN to complete its tasks
and withdraw in a well-ordered manner. A timeline
with benchmarks agreed upon by the major peace
process actors is absolutely essential for that.

The Government wishes to see the integration
and rehabilitation of the Maoist army before the new
Constitution is promulgated. The interim constitution
does not address the sequencing of those two events
directly, nor does it link them. But the drafters assumed
that integration and rehabilitation could take place
within six months, while the constitution-drafting was
expected to require two years and be completed by
28 May 2010.

The question of whether or not the term of the
current Constituent Assembly can be extended should
more time be needed for constitution-drafting has been
widely debated. Views differ on this and on the legal
situation that would prevail should there be neither an
extension nor a constitution by 28 May. It is important
to ensure that steps be taken in a timely fashion so as
not to create a constitutional vacuum.

The uncertainty surrounding the post-28 May
situation is one more reason for the parties to move
ahead speedily with the integration and rehabilitation
of the Maoist army personnel, with the conclusion of
the constitution-drafting process and with the fresh
elections that are to follow. As encouraging as recent
developments have been, it is imperative to follow
through and resolve the outstanding main tasks in the
peace process. Until that happens, the peace process
will remain at risk.

There are various challenges facing the high-level
political mechanism, including opposition within some
of the political parties, while the proposed action plan
for integration and rehabilitation appears still to require
significant negotiation.

There have been other signs of continued
volatility in Nepal, including the fatal violent clashes
in the far-western district of Kailali on 6 December
and, more recently, among youth groups affiliated with
political parties in several areas of the country, as well
as the serious clash in Kathmandu on 20 December. In
Bara district, members of the Terai Mukti Morcha
reportedly shot and killed three members of the
UCPN-M. on 6 January, with two others seriously
injured.

Fresh recruitment into the Nepal Army - in
UNMIN's view, in violation of past agreements -
continues to be mooted. While the Government
recently announced its intention to review the structure
of the security sector, it remains unclear how the right-
sizing and democratization of the Army will be
approached.

The Maoists, having returned land in many parts
of the country that they had seized during the conflict,
undertook a new and concerted land grab in the
southern Tarai belt, as well as crop seizures, mostly in
mid- and far-western districts. While the Maoists'
declaration of autonomous provinces last month was
largely peaceful, it was regarded as provocative in the
light of the Constituent Assembly's responsibility for
determining the new federal structure of Nepal. Several
ethnically based organizations, some of them militant,
are prepared to agitate for their respective agendas,
including the establishment of ethnic-based states.

In the prevailing climate of political pressure and
impunity for crimes and human rights violations, it has
become extremely difficult for civil society and the
media to speak forthrightly about excesses. The past
year was bookended by savage attacks on two female
journalists - Uma Singh, who was killed in Janakpur
on 11 January 2009, and Tika Bista, who survived her
attack in Rolpa on 8 December.

The serious clashes and provocations of late 2009
led many to draw UNMIN's attention to what they
called breaches of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). Those allegations underscore the
absence of a credible and independent national
monitoring mechanism to determine whether or not the
CPA is being implemented as foreseen. As the Council
is aware, UNMIN's monitoring tasks concern breaches
of the Agreement on the Monitoring of the
Management of Arms and Armies, and not the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement as a whole.

There have also been repeated allegations of
breaches of the Agreement on the Monitoring of the
10-21022
Management of Arms and Armies. Those are rules that
the parties themselves agreed to place on the Nepal
Army and the Maoist army. For the record, the parties
have made three agreements over weaponry outside the
weapon storage containers: the Agreement on the
Monitoring of the Management of Arms and Armies
itself, which provides for the storage of most Maoist
army weapons and of an equal number of Nepal Army
weapons, and the use of 30 weapons for perimeter
security at each main cantonment site and 15 at each
satellite site; the agreement on the security of the
Maoist leadership, which was signed in late June 2007
and which allowed 42 weapons of varying calibre to be
carried by designated security personnel; and, finally,
an informal understanding, amply referenced in the
records of the Joint Monitoring Coordination
Committee, that permits a weapon to be carried by
Maoist divisional commanders, deputy divisional
commanders and brigade commanders who command
troops. The agreements on arms and armies have been
respected by the parties to a significant degree. They
are, however, increasingly under strain, which is all the
more reason to move expeditiously towards completing
the political steps foreseen for the peace process.

The parties have recently sought greater common
ground, giving rise to cautious optimism that progress
can be made in the peace process. There are positions
on the political left and right alike, however, that argue
against the merits of peaceful resolution and adherence
to the original agreements. Some speak of a fresh
confrontation as being inevitable. Fears have not fully
receded that the Maoists have reneged on their
acceptance of the democratic principles laid down in
the peace agreements, and that the Government lacks
sincerity in implementing critical reforms. Some actors
maintain uncompromising positions. Threats, taunts
and provocations continue to leach into the public
discourse. The parties are quick to assert that fault for
the failure of the peace process lies with the other side.

The parties should be encouraged to make
maximum use of the new space for constructive
dialogue, which has been an area of strength overall in
Nepal's peace process. The Government has requested
the extension of UNMIN's mandate for three months
and three weeks. That is linked to an ambitious
timetable for the integration and rehabilitation of the
cantoned Maoist army personnel, paving the way for
UNMIN to depart with its task completed. We welcome
that development. Should the Council decide to extend
UNMIN's mandate as requested, we truly hope that the
renewed commitment will bring tangible results and
that the conditions will now be created for UNMIN to
complete its work within the envisaged timeframe.

UNMIN has remained continuously engaged with
the major political actors to contribute to confidence in
the peace process and to fulfil our specific monitoring
tasks. The present efforts towards pursuing a peaceful
and constructive way forward should be maintained
and the principal political actors encouraged to
continue the unity, leadership and focus of recent
weeks.

On behalf of UNMIN, I would like to convey a
warm welcome to Ambassador Gyan Chandra Acharya,
who in his previous role as Nepal's Foreign Secretary
worked closely with my predecessor, Ian Martin, and
with me. Along with my colleagues in the Department
of Political Affairs, I look forward to continuing the
warm relationship and good communication that we
have enjoyed.

