Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): I, in my
turn, would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this morning's meeting, which is devoted to
consideration of the outcome of the elections of 30
August 2001 for the first Constituent Assembly in East
Timor - a decisive step on the road towards the
creation of an independent State. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno
for sharing with us the excellent news about the
arrangements for and outcome of that historic election,
organized by the United Nations. Of course, we would
also like to welcome the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, to this important meeting.

It is noteworthy that the first election in the
chaotic history of East Timor took place in a spirit of
calm and celebration on 30 August 2001, exactly two
years after the territory chose independence in a
referendum. There can be no doubt today that East
Timor has resolutely committed itself to the path of
democracy. Indeed, the election of 88 members of the
Constituent Assembly of East Timor, who will have
three months to draw up a constitution, is a decisive
step towards a hard-won freedom. The impressive
turnout of 91 per cent is a concrete manifestation of the
commitment, maturity and sense of political
responsibility of the people of East Timor and their
leaders.

The success of the elections that we are
celebrating today was due above all to the people of
East Timor and their leaders, who have demonstrated
an impressive degree of political maturity; to the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), which did everything possible to
ensure that the elections were free, transparent,
peaceful and honest; to the Government of Indonesia,
whose cooperation should be welcomed; and, of
course, to the entire international community, whose
political and financial support for East Timor has
remained steadfast since 1999.

My delegation would like to pay a warm tribute
to the people of East Timor for its huge turnout in the
election on 30 August and to the leaders of the political
parties who decided to respect the results of the
election and behaved in a peaceful and mutually
respectful manner during the course of the election.

We would also like to express our full satisfaction
with the enormously important role played by
UNTAET, which enabled the inclusive election in East
Timor to be organized and held in good order. We
would also like to reaffirm Mali's firm support for the
remarkable work done by UNTAET, under the effective
leadership of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, in helping to
achieve independence for East Timor, the Timorization
of the Administration and the foundation of an
independent Government in East Timor.

In conclusion, my delegation is looking forward
to the October report of the Secretary-General, in
which he will outline the new mission to succeed
UNTAET. There can be no doubt that East Timor will
still need the assistance of the international community
after it attains national sovereignty, and the
international community must shoulder its
responsibilities with regard to the emerging democracy
in East Timor.

