Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Jeremic' and
Acting Foreign Minister Citaku to the Council and
thank them for their comments. I would also like to
thank Special Representative Zannier for his
comprehensive briefing today.

Let me take this opportunity to congratulate the
people of Kosovo on the third anniversary of their
independence tomorrow, 17 February. In these three
years, Kosovo has demonstrated a commitment to
developing democratic institutions and to playing a
responsible role in the neighbourhood and in the wider
international community.

Let me also take a moment to congratulate the
people of Serbia on the celebration of their national
day on 15 February. Serbia too has demonstrated a
commitment to peace and stability in the Balkans.

The United States supports the aspirations of both
countries to achieve lasting peace and prosperity and to
complete their European integration. To this end, we
look forward to the European Union-facilitated
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo, aimed at
improving the quality of life for their citizens and
supporting both countries as they make progress on
their respective paths to membership in the European
Union.

I would like to make three additional points. First,
in its three years of independence, Kosovo has made
substantial progress in building its democracy. It
administered municipal elections in 2009 and snap
National Assembly elections at the end of last year.
The implementation of decentralization has moved
government closer to the people and Kosovo has
established new Serb-majority municipalities that have
fostered improved political engagement in minority
communities. We note, however, that serious
irregularities occurred in some areas during the
December parliamentary elections. That said, Kosovo's
electoral and judicial institutions responded
immediately and appropriately to hold orderly re-votes.
Kosovo Serbs south of the Ibar River turned out in
record numbers during the December elections. This is
a welcome sign of the benefits of decentralization and
of the improved security and political situation in
Kosovo. Still, significant work remains to strengthen
the electoral system, and we join international partners'
calls for further electoral reforms. These and other
pressing reforms await the new Assembly and
Government in the coming days.

The story is not as encouraging in northern
Kosovo. The ethnic-Serb community's engagement in
Kosovo politics and municipal administration is a
critical element for the development of a prosperous
multi-ethnic democracy. We are concerned that Serbs
in northern Kosovo who have engaged with Kosovo
Government institutions have faced organized
opposition from parallel institutions, which use
violence and intimidation to prevent the democracy
and development that has taken root in Serb
communities throughout the rest of Kosovo. It is also
alarming that, as cited in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/43), the targeting of international workers in
northern Kosovo has increased.

Secondly, the rule of law is paramount to stability
and progress in the Balkans. The United States takes
any allegations of criminal wrongdoing seriously,
especially with regard to war crimes. We therefore take
the allegations contained in the Council of Europe
report seriously - allegations that had previously been
investigated by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We fully
support the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) leading a comprehensive, thorough
and impartial follow-on investigation. EULEX has a
jurisdiction and mandate to deal with war crimes. It has
dealt with similar issues in the past and it will have the
full weight of the European Union and its partners to
support it. We welcome the declared support of the
Governments of Kosovo and Albania for such an
investigation. We do not believe that an ad hoc United
Nations mechanism is necessary or appropriate in the
light of the EULEX mandate.

l l-23 603
This brings me to my third point. The process of
reconciliation must continue in order to maintain peace
and stability in the Balkans. We were encouraged that
voluntary returns increased in 2010, with nearly twice
as many Kosovo Serbs returning as compared to 2009.
We would also note that NATO's Kosovo Force
continues to transfer protective responsibilities for
Serbian Orthodox properties to the Kosovo police
without incident. The protection, and support for, the
religious and cultural heritage of all of Kosovo's
communities is critical to reconciliation efforts. We
commend UNMIK's efforts to facilitate the work of the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission. We also
welcome the efforts of the European Union facilitator
for the protection of religious and cultural heritage and
call on other members to aid in these and similar
efforts. The United States recently allocated
$1.4 million for cultural preservation and restoration
projects throughout Kosovo.

Let me reiterate the commitment of the United
States to a stable, prosperous and democratic Kosovo
that enjoys genuine cooperation with Serbia and the
Balkan region.

