Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): My delegation
would like to join others in congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council the first month of 2004 and for your efforts to
sustain the momentum of the attempt to rid the world
of small arms and light weapons.

The title of the agenda item under consideration
by the Council is "Small arms". However the issue is,
of course, the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. As the Secretary-General states in his most
recent report, the General Assembly recently took an
important decision with a view to dealing with this
issue: the establishment of an open-ended working
group to negotiate an international instrument to enable
States to identify and trace, in a timely and reliable
manner, illicit small arms and light weapons.

We consider that to be one of the most far-
reaching decisions in current efforts to eradicate what
has become another scourge in the world today,
especially in Africa. For a country that has experienced
the agony and the devastating effects of this inhuman
trade, Sierra Leone wholeheartedly supports any action
that is directed at the source of the problem - the
manufacturing and supply channel. We do so not
because we underestimate the need to deal more
effectively with the so-called consumer side of the
equation but, on the contrary, because we strongly
believe that the firearms industry has not done enough,
as far as legally-binding measures are concerned, to
check the flow of these deadly weapons and to ensure
that they do not reach non-State actors.

The General Assembly's decision concerning an
international instrument on marking and tracing came
within four months of the First Biennial Meeting of
States to Consider the Implementation of the 2001
Programme of Action To Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects.

The General Assembly has already made an
invaluable contribution towards the eradication of the
problem. The Secretary-General's most recent report
(S/2003/l2l7) focuses on the Security Council's own
contribution. In the view of the Sierra Leone
delegation, the question is, "What should the Council
do, or what is it obligated to do?"

The fact is that Council should continue to
acknowledge that the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. Therefore, as the organ with
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it must assume its
responsibility in removing the threat. The Council must
go beyond its presidential statements - statements in
which it expresses support for such efforts as the
drafting of the proposed international instrument on
marking and tracing and the establishment of national
registers of arms brokers and end-user certificates.
These expressions of support for efforts undertaken by
Member States and regional organizations are always
welcome. They provide the political weight that is
often needed to strengthen the implementation of such
initiatives. However, in our view the Security Council
should, for instance, seek other means of enforcing its
arms embargoes.

In this connection, we note the Secretary-
General's observation in his most recent report, that
while arms embargoes continue to be the most frequent
sanctions measure imposed by the Council, they have
proved to be extremely difficult to enforce. The
Council should, as a matter of urgency, address the
problem of lack of compliance by Member States,
especially non-compliance that is attributable to
inadequate legislation, lack of enforcement or technical
capacity. We share the Secretary-General's suggestion
that the Council should consider steps that could assist
Member States in implementing the mandatory arms
embargoes.

Sierra Leone welcomes the decision of the
Council to maintain the arms embargo against Liberia.
While prospects for peace and stability in the Mano
River Union countries have improved considerably
with the expansion of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Liberia and the start of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme (DDR),
we cannot afford to be complacent. The arms embargo
must be scrupulously monitored.

We note with satisfaction the observation that the
Security Council has focused considerable attention on
DDR programmes in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. For example, reference is made in the report
to the Council's call on parties to conflict in West
Africa to recognize the importance of activities related
to DDR in post-conflict situations, and specific
measures for the collection and disposal of illicit
and/or surplus small arms.

We note in paragraph 5 under recommendation 2
of the Secretary-General's report, that the Security
Council, in welcoming the identification of arms
traffickers who have violated arms embargoes
established by the Council, has called on Member
States to impose appropriate penalties on such
violators.

Sierra Leone believes that the Council should
consider what action should be taken when States fail
to penalize arms traffickers who violate the Council's
arms embargoes.

Recognition of the importance of DDR and
related activities cannot be overemphasized. However,
the Security Council should find a more practical and
effective means of addressing the problem of shortfalls
in funding DDR programmes. Timely and adequate
funding is critical to the success of DDR programmes
and efforts to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. In the view of
the Sierra Leone delegation, actions taken by the
Council, as outlined in the latest report of the
Secretary-General on small arms, have not adequately
addressed the recommendation concerning the funding
of DDR programmes through the assessed budget for
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

We continue to support the recommendation that
the Council should consider strengthening the
financing of DDR programmes through the expansion
of measures covered under the budget for peacekeeping
operations. We agree that this would ensure that DDR
activities are not entirely dependent on voluntary
contributions from Member States.

In this connection, we recall that last year, in
expressing concern about the continuing financial
shortfall in our Multi-Donor Trust Fund for DDR, the
Council merely urged the Government of Sierra Leone
to seek actively the urgently needed additional
resources for reintegration. We also recall that the DDR
programme initiated and launched by the Government
before the 1999 Lome Peace Agreement stalled
miserably because of funding problems.

While the Secretary-General is pleased to note
the significant and encouraging progress achieved in
the implementation of the various recommendations,
Sierra Leone attaches special importance to the issue of
secure funding for DDR from the assessed
peacekeeping budget - an issue that the Secretary-
General has underscored in the three concluding
paragraphs of his report.

We trust that the Council will give it the serious
attention it deserves in the context of the threat that the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons continues
to poses to international peace and security, and the
Council's primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

