Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his statement. I would also like to thank
Mr. Gambari, the Secretary-General's Special Adviser
on Myanmar, for his briefing and to congratulate him
on attaining the expected objectives through his visit to
Myanmar.

China is an immediate neighbour of Myanmar.
The two countries share a border of over 2,000
kilometres, and the two peoples have lived as
neighbours and have shared weal and woe since

ancient times. Therefore, we are no less concerned
about the situation in Myanmar than any other country.
We sincerely hope to see a Myanmar with political
stability, economic prosperity, social harmony and
democratic progress.

Since late September, the situation in Myanmar
has witnessed some disturbances which seriously
disrupted the normal life of the people of Myanmar.
The Chinese Government and leadership have followed
the situation very closely and, on many occasions,
called on all parties concerned to exercise restraint,
restore stability through peaceful means as soon as
possible, promote national reconciliation and achieve
democratic progress.

China has also called on the Government of
Myanmar to commit itself to improving the lives of its
people, maintaining ethnic harmony and properly
addressing related social issues. China encourages the
Government to implement the seven-step road map
promptly and to continue to make greater efforts on the
democratization process. We believe that Myanmar's
stability serves the fundamental and long-term interests
of its people as well as the common interest of the
Asia-Pacific region and the world at large. On this very
point, China shares the same position, perspective and
expectations espoused by the rest of the international
community.

China firmly supports the Secretary-General's
good offices and has always believed that the United
Nations could and should be able to play a constructive
role in helping Myanmar. During his visit to Myanmar,
Mr. Gambari had an in-depth exchange of views with
Myanmar with the leaders of Myanmar on the current
situation and also met people from various
communities and circles. That is one good step. We are
quite encouraged to see the results of this visit and
view positively the efforts by Mr. Gambari and the
Government of Myanmar.

Since the inception of the turbulence, China has
made its due efforts to promote stability in Myanmar
and has encouraged the Myanmar Government to
continue its engagement with the international
community. So far, Mr. Gambari's visit has achieved
some initial results. He has listened to the views of
different parties within the country and has also
conveyed the concerns of the outside world. It should
be noted that the purpose of the Secretary-General's
good offices cannot be served through only one or two
missions. This will be a gradual process with
incremental results. We encourage Mr. Gambari to
continue his engagements with all parties in Myanmar,
further build on mutual trust and facilitate candid
dialogue.

We have learned that Myanmar has invited
Mr. Gambari to visit the country again in mid-
November this year. We sincerely hope that the
Secretary-General's good offices will truly help
Myanmar to achieve internal stability and national
reconciliation and will provide constructive assistance
to the country in addressing economic, social,
humanitarian and human rights problems. Any actions
by the Security Council should facilitate the good offices
of the Secretary-General rather than interfering with them
or even undermining the mutual trust already established.

We have noted that the situation in Myanmar is
calming down thanks to the joint efforts of all parties
in Myanmar and the international community. China
hopes that the situation in Myanmar will continue to
move in a positive direction. The current situation does
not pose any threat to international or regional peace
and security. The future of Myanmar lies in the hands
of its people and its Government, and their problems
will be addressed properly through consultations.

In our view, it is quite understandable for the
outside world to express concern or expectations
regarding the situation on the ground. However,
pressure would not serve any purpose and would only
lead to confrontation or even the loss of dialogue and
cooperation between Myanmar and the international
community, including the United Nations. Therefore,
the Security Council should adopt a prudent and
responsible approach in handling the issue of
Myanmar. The international community can help the
country achieve national reconciliation and democratic
progress by offering constructive engagement and
mediation. The key is to take the right approach.

Yet, if the situation in Myanmar takes a turn for
the worse because of external intervention, it will be
the people of the country who bear the brunt. That is
the last thing that China, as well as other neighbours of
Myanmar and other regional countries, wish to see.

We look forward to continued constructive
engagement and cooperation between the international
community and the Myanmar Government, which, we
hope, will help the country move in a positive
direction. China supports the positive role of the

Association of Southeast Asian Nations on this
question and will continue to work with the
international community for a proper settlement of the
Myanmar issue.

