Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The increasing
victimization of civilians in armed conflict is a sad and
well-documented fact. While civilian populations have
always suffered disproportionately from the
consequences of armed conflict, modern warfare and
the changed nature of armed conflicts have exacerbated
their situation.

The Security Council's decisions and actions
have a strong and immediate impact on the situation of
civilians in armed conflicts. That special responsibility
should be expressed through a more consistent and
more permanent engagement. We therefore support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to establish
an expert-level working group among Council
members.

We have witnessed an erosion in respect for
international law relevant to the protection of civilians.
The law of armed conflict, or international
humanitarian law, is one of the core achievements in
the history of international law, and the Council has a
particular responsibility to promote its observance.

A central element in this respect is a clear
commitment to fight impunity. The establishment of a
number of ad hoc and hybrid tribunals was an
expression of such a commitment. The key role in the
fight against impunity, however, falls on the

08-3528]

International Criminal Court. While the Court is seized
with a number of specific cases, including situations on
the Council's agenda, its activities and mere existence
also have a preventive effect in conflict situations
beyond those under investigation.

The Rome Statute attributes certain functions to
the Security Council, including the possibility of
referring situations to the Court. In March 2005 the
Council exercised this function in connection with the
situation in Darfur. More than two years later, the
Council must follow up with action to ensure
cooperation in the arrest of the persons indicted by the
Court. The Council's upcoming visit to Africa offers a
unique opportunity for doing so.

Beyond the execution of arrest warrants, full
cooperation is needed in other areas as well. In the
interest of effective protection of civilians, all organs
of the United Nations as well as individual States
should extend such cooperation - not just States
parties to the Rome Statute, even though of course only
States parties have a legal obligation to cooperate. The
jurisdiction of the Court extends to a number of crimes
that are still being perpetrated on a large scale and
sometimes systematically and as part of a policy of
intimidating civilian populations. Sexual and gender-
based violence and the recruitment of children as
soldiers or for other purposes in connection with armed
conflicts play a sadly prominent role in this respect.

Access to civilians in armed conflicts and in other
emergency situations is vital for effective humanitarian
assistance. Too often access is unsafe, provided too late
or is far from unhindered. In Somalia and Darfur, for
instance, access to the populations affected is severely
limited, and significant numbers of people cannot be
assisted by humanitarian agencies. In other situations,
access is used as a tool in political bargaining, at the
expense of the civilian population.

It is worth recalling that facilitating rapid and
unimpeded passage to relief activities for civilians is
an obligation under international humanitarian law.
Both the Council and the General Assembly must
therefore give more attention to the question of access,
including in specific situations. We thus welcome the
efforts of the Emergency Relief Coordinator to set up a
mechanism for reporting on and analysis of access
constraints in conflict settings. We look forward to
receiving that analysis as part of the next report of the
Secretary-General.
The protection of civilians is particularly fragile
when those who should provide it are themselves at
risk. Today more than ever, the safety and security of
United Nations and associated personnel continue to be
jeopardized. Humanitarian personnel in particular often
face life-threatening risks when carrying out their
duties. Against that background, the number of States
parties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
remains very low and must increase.

The safety and security of humanitarian personnel
has long been a priority for us, and we are currently
one of only two countries financing the Saving Lives
Together initiative, which aims to provide better
security for the United Nations, international
organizations and non-governmental organizations in
the field. We will continue our financial support for
that initiative this year and hope that other donors will
join us.

The consensus decision at the 2005 World
Summit to accept the concept of the responsibility to
32

protect was of historic magnitude, but it has not yet led
to a paradigm shift in the protection of civilians. We
believe that it is time to operationalize this concept and
that the relevant discussions must be carried out with
the necessary conceptual clarity. The responsibility to
protect, as defined in the Summit Outcome Document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), is not as such
linked to armed conflicts, but to the crimes listed in the
Outcome Document: genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. Some of those
crimes do not necessarily occur in situations of armed
conflict and therefore do not require a connection to
armed conflict. The responsibility to protect concept is
thus highly relevant to the discussion we are having
today, but protection-relevant situations also occur
outside of armed conflicts.

