We thank Director-General Arias and High Representative Nakamitsu for their briefings, which were professional as always. We welcome the opportunity for the Security Council to hear directly from Director-General Arias and to engage in a transparent and open discussion about the Syrian regime's abhorrent use of chemical weapons against its own people, its refusal to fully declare and destroy its chemical weapons programme and its continued flouting of its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention. Given the comments of our Russian colleague, I should begin by saying that the United States strongly supports the leadership and the impartial and independent work of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). We applaud the OPCW Technical Secretariat. We believe that it conducts its work in a professional manner and carries out its mission in accordance with the international standards that the international community expects. The coronavirus disease pandemic has raised additional hurdles for the OPCW, yet it has found ways to continue its important work, investigate when incidents of the use of chemical weapons take place and assist States parties when asked to do so. The Al-Assad regime's violations of the Chemical Weapons Convention go far beyond its undeclared chemical-weapon stockpile; they also include the barbaric use of those weapons against the Syrian people, including women and children, throughout the protracted civil war. We must not allow those types of attacks to be normalized, nor should we become numb to the depravity of the Al-Assad regime. The United States condemns in the strongest terms the use of chemical weapons by the Al-Assad regime. Al-Assad's chemical-weapon attacks are, tragically, just one example of the atrocities he has committed and continues to inflict on the Syrian people. The OPCW Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) has, in our view, diligently and professionally carried out the work of its mandate, and in April the IIT's first report concluded that the Syrian Arab Air Force was responsible for three chemical weapons attacks in Ltamenah, Syria, in March 2017, including two sarin attacks and one chlorine attack, affecting more than 100 Syrian people. The victims of sarin exposure can experience horrific symptoms, from blurred vision and breathing difficulties to convulsions and respiratory failure, and it can eventually lead to death. Unfortunately, the IIT's findings were not surprising, given the Al-Assad regime's repeated and well-documented history of the use of chemical weapons. In response to the IIT's findings, the OPCW Executive Council took action and adopted a decision in July requesting that Syria take measures to redress the situation. That decision received support from more than two thirds of the Executive Council, including members from across all regional groups. On 14 October, Director- General Arias shared a report with the Security Council stating that Syria had failed, unsurprisingly, to complete any of the measures set forth in July's Executive Council decision. The United States strongly supports providing the highly professional and hard-working staff of the OPCW's investigative and attribution mechanisms, such as the IIT, with the means and the resources they need to be able to fulfil the mission entrusted to them. We congratulate the Director-General on the overwhelming adoption of the budget at the recent Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention so that the Organization can continue its important work on upholding the norm against the use of chemical weapons. Chemical weapons pose a security threat to all States, and when they are used, the members of the Security Council must never remain silent about such inhumane and reprehensible acts or treat them with impunity. The Council has a solemn responsibility to ensure that there are serious consequences for the perpetrators of such heinous attacks. Unfortunately, Russia and other members of the Security Council would prefer to support their friend Bashar Al-Assad and block all action rather than fulfil the Council's central responsibility to promote international peace and security. It is incumbent upon the Security Council to take steps to hold Syria accountable for its use of chemical weapons and hold Syria to its obligations under resolution 2118 (2013). Syria must also uphold its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention, and we call on the Conference of the States Parties to take appropriate action, when its session reconvenes in the spring, in order to send a strong message to the Al-Assad regime that its actions have consequences. To that end, the United States, along with 45 other sponsors with broad geographic representation, has submitted a draft decision to the Conference of the States Parties in response to Syria's brazen violation of its obligations under the Convention and its failure to fulfil the measures set forth in July's Executive Council decision. We call on all countries to support that draft decision, aimed at holding Syria accountable for its actions. We urge the Al-Assad regime's enablers, particularly Russia, to encourage Syria to come clean about its use of chemical weapons and its current chemical-weapon stockpiles. We continue to support all efforts aimed at ensuring accountability, not only to provide justice to the victims and the families who have suffered as a result of those heinous chemical-weapon attacks, but to support the broader political process, as called for in resolution 2254 (2015), so as to bring peace and stability to Syria and the Syrian people. In conclusion, we continue to support the work of the OPCW as well as its leadership and experts as they work to rid the world of the risk and scourge of chemical weapons. We applaud the OPCW's professionalism and integrity in undertaking that important and solemn task.
