Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
Allow me first to express our sincere gratitude to Sir John
Weston and his entire team for his presidency during the
month of January. To you, Madam President, the French
delegation extends its compliments and assurances of
support during your presidency this month.

Angola has been experiencing, as we near the end of
the century, one of the most bloody conflicts on the planet.
We recall the Secretary-General telling us two years ago,
when the press was focusing its attention on other
continents, that nearly a thousand persons a day, including
women and children, were dying in Angola. This was
taking place in a country which, moreover, had the
reputation of being the most heavily mined in the world.

The peace Agreement signed in Lusaka on 15
November 1994 put an end to the war. The two parties
committed themselves to the implementation of a complex
process aimed at restoring peace and democracy and
allowing Angola to resume its path towards development
and progress.

The international community, and in particular the
Security Council, have given continual attention to the
situation in Angola. We have committed ourselves to fully
supporting the peace process agreed upon by President dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi, sending what has become the
biggest peace-keeping operation in Africa - nearly 7,000
men, to whose work we pay tribute, with a comprehensive
mandate. For their part, the donors have committed
themselves to providing significant assistance to the
Angolans.

Angola therefore has everything needed to succeed
today. The French Government hopes - here I note that it
wishes to associate itself fully with the views expressed
here by the Presidency of the European Union - that the
will to do so will not be lacking. There is good reason for
concern over the lack of progress in implementing the
peace process described by the Secretary-General in the
report before us today, although it is natural in our View
that after 20 years of war a certain distrust between the
belligerents continues.
The French Government was concerned by events at
the end of last year which led to an increase in tension
between the Government of Angola and UNITA. We take
note of the new commitments undertaken by the two parties
and expect them to be scrupulously respected. The French
Government has also noted that the authorities in Luanda
have since tried to demonstrate good will by implementing
certain fundamental points of the peace Agreement: the
withdrawal of troops from offensive positions near
UNITA quartering areas, the release of prisoners, the
beginning of quartering of the rapid reaction police, the
cessation of hostile propaganda and the cancellation of
contracts of expatriate personnel.

As to UNITA, we take note of the encouraging
progress made in the past 24 hours on the quartering of
its troops. Efforts remain to be made, however, by all
sides in this field. UNIT A in particular must no longer
hinder the quartering process and must continue the
operation to its end, as rapidly as possible. France
believes that it is not acceptable for UNITA to refuse to
cooperate with UNAVEM. III in concluding the task of
quartering, which we feel to be absolutely essential.

Moreover, there are reasons to welcome the signing
of an agreement defining the level of UNITA's
participation in the new Angolan Armed Forces. But such
an agreement will have no effect if the troops of Mr.
Savimbi do not first allow themselves to be disarmed and
quartered and if, on the other hand, the government forces
do not withdraw far enough from the assembly zones and
if they seek to take advantage of UNITA's disarmament.
It should also be noted that security will not be fully
restored in Angola until the programme for disarming the
civil population has been concluded in accordance with
the peace agreements. To date, this programme has not
even begun to be implemented.

The United Nations led an operation in Mozambique
which was crowned with success. In Somalia, it
experienced failure in conditions of which we are all
aware. In both cases, success or failure depended on the
implementation of measures to disarm the parties. The
same will be true in Angola. The disarmament of the
civilian population and the combatants, their assembly in
specific zones, their reintegration into civilian life and,
finally, the establishment of a new national army are all,
along with the gradual establishment of a political system
based on national reconciliation, at the heart of the
process and the guarantees of its success.

The parties here must therefore do what is required
to restore mutual confidence. They must demonstrate
maturity and responsibility in order to build their future
on stable foundations in accordance with democratic
principles. If those conditions are met the international
community will be able to lend its full support to the
country's recovery and Angola will resume its proper
place on the African continent.

 

For all these reasons, France believes that the
international community must remain vigilant. We feel that
extending UNAVEM. III's mandate for six months might
not send a sufficiently clear signal from the Council. We
would therefore prefer that the mandate of the United
Nations operation be renewed for three months, thus
allowing the Security Council to re-examine the situation by
8 May, particularly regarding progress made in the
disarmament and quartering of troops.

