Ms. Salamanca (spoke in Spanish): My name
is Rosa Emilia Salamanca. I am the co-Director of
the Corporacion de Investigacien y Accion Social
y Economica. I have been working for years in
peacebuilding and in defending human rights.
I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, the Permanent Representative of Colombia
to the United Nations and the other members of the
Colombian Government.

For us this forum is of great importance in our
dialogue with the international community and with the
Colombian Government in addressing the challenge of
peacebuilding in my country. We, together with many
civil society organizations and very diverse women's
organizations, continue to help transform Colombia
with resilience and determination. In addition to
being a time for us to speak of hope and faith in the
future, this is also a challenging time when it comes
to implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, as
I will explain later, and we are being asked to remain
unwavering in our focus on and support to a process
that will continue to be an example of innovation and
contributions to the entire world.

Let me recall that the agreement is designed based
on a comprehensive approach and its greatest asset
lies in its interconnected approach to peace and the
way it places Victims at its centre. Its transformational
potential is to be maintained and is an opportunity for
change in order to put an end to the cycles of violence,
conflict and pain we have experienced. I would
therefore like to underscore some issues that, although
they are not the only issues, we believe are important
when it comes to implementing the agreement in the
current environment.

With regard to the reintegration of former
combatants, as expressions of civil society, we
recognize that, if we invest in people who are in the
process of reintegrating, that is a security issue and
is a way of preventing new conflicts and moving
forward in the reconciliation process. We speak of
issues that will benefit society as a whole and foster
effective and sustainable peace. For that reason, we
must accelerate the decision and routing of territorial
areas and reduce uncertainty about their stabilization
and future. We must accelerate the implementation of a
gender perspective towards reintegration with financial
and technical resources, with the understanding that
projects that involve women ex-combatants guarantee
that they and their families can live free from violence.
At the same time, we must also count on measures
to address the barriers to political participation that
have been noted inside and outside the party formed
following the peace agreement.

As civil society, we want to see women reintegrated
as full citizens and with recognized leadership.
We must reduce the uncertainty surrounding the
physical and legal guarantees for male and female
ex-combatants by accelerating the disbursements for
productive projects that should be operational. We
must operationalize and accelerate the implementation
of the national strategy through the national policy
for the social and economic reincorporation of former
members of the Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo, document 3931, and
allocate sufficient resources for that phase through
the national development plan and departmental and
municipal plans. We must stress the psychological
and psychosocial components, which are critical to
the transition of men and women who lay down their
arms in order to stabilize the deep cultural, social and
political changes that this entails. We must disseminate
the value of community reintegration experiences as
good practices and share their examples and lessons
learned as a basis forjoint reconciliation processes.

With regard to the comprehensive system of truth,
justice, reparation and non-repetition, which was
highlighted at the global level for the balance it struck
between peace and justice, there must be support for
democratic institutions and respect for the division of
powers, which, in spite of the historic difficulties in
Colombia, has been a treasure that we cannot afford
to lose. We must ensure that there is not a feeling
of loss of constitutionally defined rights, whether
because of objections or other setbacks. It is crucial
to ensure sustainable peace and genuine confidence
in the strength of the institutions - and they must be
respected to reduce the lack of trust and fear throughout
the country.

With regard to sexual violence, that must not
be used to jeopardize the agreements that have been
reached. It has been committed by all actors involved
in the internal conflict in the country. Therefore,
the guarantee of truth and justice, and above all the
non-repetition in those cases, must give the victims the
security that they can bring action against everyone
involved, and that will enable the system and the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the Commission on
Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition to exist and be
effective. We must provide certainty for those who seek
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and want to tell the
truth, because that is fundamental to reducing doubts
and disincentives to come forward.

The international community and the Colombian
Government must understand that the recent lawsuit
brought before the Commission of Accusations of the
House of Representatives against the President of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace reinforces the fiction
of a prosecution of that court and does not contribute
to dialogue among and with civil society, but rather
to polarization.

With regard to leadership, the defence of human
rights and peacebuilding in the country, in Colombia
there are deep-rooted inequalities and discrimination,
and the defence of human rights seeks to promote more
rule of law. However, it is a high-risk activity that
sometimes costs lives. In that environment, women
human rights defenders, leaders and peacebuilders
face risks when it comes to their participation, as they
encounter a culture that attacks bodies, goods and
dignity. We must therefore ensure that whoever defends
human rights defends everyone's human rights without
distinction, as stated in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. As such, that endeavour deserves our
highest respect.

We must implement the comprehensive guarantee
programme for women leaders and human rights
defenders, thereby activating the respective Permanent
Intersectoral Commission for the Coordination and
Follow-up of the National Policy on Human Rights
and International Humanitarian Law to ensure
its development. The reactivation of the national
guarantee process is crucial, and even more so with
its long history of local and national participation.
The National Commission on Security Guarantees and
Non-repetition should be highlighted and supported.
The diversity of institutions and organizations, along
with the experience and expertise gathered, offer an
opportunity for the Government to make progress in
designing policies to dismantle the so-called successor
structures of paramilitarism, which is a risk factor
for social leadership and could have other serious
consequences on the country's security. Social protest
is a legitimate mechanism in all democracies. And,
therefore, within the social collective thinking, that
message, as opposed to its stigmatization, must be clear.

Increasing the presence and response capacity
of the State at the local level is a challenge that
cannot be resolved with military presence. It implies
redistribution, the guarantee of rights, social
reconstruction, the reduction of fear and trauma, the
provision of services and the prevention of dangerous
situations so as to allow for prosperity.

The focus on gender is an aspect that is implemented
more slowly. However, actions included in the gender
approach have the potential to accelerate the benefits
of peace, not only for women in their diversity but for
society as a whole. Investing in women generates peace
dividends, as has been demonstrated through many
examples around the world.

Let us not forget that when we speak of peace in
everyday life, for women and for men, it means accepting
diversity and differences, meeting in the town square,
being treated well by the police, employment, health,
a cow grazing without being tethered, women walking
alone free from danger of being raped, participating
in the country's decision-making without feeling
threatened on account of their beliefs or thoughts,
and children and young people playing and studying
without fear of being recruited, without fear of losing
a loved one and having an active role in building their
future. That would entail a future that does not cost
people their lives.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia for its
work. Its role has been key in helping ensure the
implementation of the agreement.

