Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti: I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this briefing and for inviting me to
brief the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).

I should like to welcome the Permanent
Representative ofMozambique, in his capacity as Chair
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP); the Permanent Representative of Cote d'Ivoire,
in his capacity as Chair of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS); and the Permanent
Representative of Guinea-Bissau, Ambassador Joao
Soares Da Gama.
I also thank Assistant Secretary-General Taye-
Brook Zerihoun for his briefing today. I take this
opportunity to convey, through him, our appreciation for
the excellent work carried out by the outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Guinea-
Bissau, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba. I wish also to express our
satisfaction at the nomination of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau. His wisdom, experience and political
stature are invaluable assets for the work of the United
Nations on the ground at this critical juncture. We look
forward to close cooperation with Mr. Jose' Ramos-
Horta.

Almost 10 months on from the coup d'e'tat ofl2 April,
Guinea-Bissau continues to face significant challenges,
which need to be addressed in 2013. Although it is the
primary responsibility of Guinea-Bissau's political
leaders and people to demonstrate the will to overcome
the current situation and to move towards a rapid and
sustainable return to constitutional order, the country
will continue to need the assistance of the United
Nations, including the Peacebuilding Commission, in
close coordination with Guinea-Bissau's international
partners, to further those goals. Holding free, fair and
transparent presidential and legislative elections in a
timely manner and promoting the necessary reforms to
sustain stability and spur development are urgent tasks
that will require international support.

National ownership and mutual accountability
are key principles for any country's engagement with
the Peacebuilding Commission. Unfortunately, the
12 April coup d'etat in Bissau has affected the work that
the PBC was carrying out. The progress that had been
made on several fronts was interrupted. The absence
of consensual national counterparts with whom the
configuration could interact on a regular basis has
limited the Commission's work.

Those difficulties notwithstanding, the Guinea-
Bissau configuration continues to follow closely the
situation in the country. I have striven to facilitate
dialogue among the main international partners, in
particular ECOWAS and the CPLP, to enable concerted
action in addressing the challenges in Guinea-Bissau.
At the request of the Permanent Mission of Guinea-
Bissau, a meeting of the configuration took place on
the margins of the General Assembly on 27 September
2012, during which Interim President Raimundo Pereira
and Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Junior briefed the
configuration on developments in Guinea-Bissau.

A further meeting of the configuration is being
planned for the second half of February in order
to receive briefings on the African Union-CPLP-
ECOWAS-European Union-United Nations joint
assessment mission to Bissau in December 2012.

The continued lack of civilian control over
the military, drug trafficking, impunity, economic
deterioration and human rights violations are daunting
challenges that Guinea-Bissau currently faces. In the
past few weeks, steps have been taken by the political
parties to revise the political transition pact and the
political agreement signed last May, and draft a new
transitional regime pact that would serve as the new
framework for the return to constitutional order. Those
are developments that may signal movement in a
positive direction.

The African Union-CPLP-ECOWAS-European
Union-United Nations joint assessment mission to
Bissau last December was a welcome initiative. Those
five partners also met on 26 January in Addis Ababa
on the margins of the African Union Summit to discuss
the situation in Guinea-Bissau and the way forward. We
hope that such meetings will enable Guinea-Bissau's
main international partners to get together on a common
platform in order to help Guinea-Bissau move swiftly
towards the restoration of constitutional order.

We sincerely hope that the recent dialogue among
national stakeholders will lead to a more inclusive
transitional arrangement. As it has been said before,
that arrangement should be inclusive and acceptable to
all parties concerned in order to lead the country back
to constitutional order, thus enabling the re-engagement
of international partners with Guinea-Bissau.

Finally, the appointment oer. Jose' Ramos-Horta as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General augurs
well and brings new impetus to our common efforts to

help Guinea-Bissau overcome the current crisis. I had
the chance to exchange views with Mr. Ramos-Horta
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau a few weeks ago. The
configuration looks forward to productive cooperation
and close interaction with him in the weeks and months
to come.

Finding a path out of the crisis in Guinea-Bissau
requires that all national stakeholders solve their
disputes through dialogue. National reconciliation has
to take root domestically. Only then can the international
community fully and effectively re-engage, confident
that it is supporting a nationally owned and inclusive
process. The United Nations, the PBC and the wider
international community can only play a supporting
role. The lead must come from legitimate authorities
that represent the people of Guinea-Bissau as a whole.
But even then, huge challenges will remain and
the road to sustainable peace and development will be
arduous. The Guinea-Bissau configuration remains
committed to help the country on that path, with a view
to achieving political stability, consolidating peace and
furthering its social and economic development.

