Mr. Muburi-Muita: It is a great pleasure for me
to appear before the Security Council today to make
my maiden presentation on the work of the newly
established United Nations Office to the African Union
(UNOAU). While I have spent several years working
with the United Nations as a Permanent
Representative, this is my first briefing to the Council
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General, a
role I assumed some nine months ago.

As the Council is well aware, the establishment
of the Office is part of our collective efforts, over a
number of years, to, inter alia, enhance the United
Nations-African Union strategic partnership on peace
and security issues, provide coordinated and coherent
United Nations support to the African Union (AU) on
both short-term operational and planning matters and
long-term capacity-building, and make the United
Nations representation to the African Union on these
matters more coherent, cost-effective and efficient. I
am pleased to report today that I think we are making
progress on all three fronts.

Let me begin by briefly updating the Council on
our activities designed to operationalize the Office and
streamline the United Nations presence. I am very
happy to say that, with the active engagement of the
Department of Field Support, we are nearing
completion of our transition from three former separate
offices - the United Nations Liaison Office to the
African Union, the African Union Peace Support Team
and the United Nations planning team for Somalia -
2

and the administrative function of the Joint Support
and Coordination Mechanism of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) - reporting separately to three different
departments at Headquarters and supported remotely
by UNAMID in Darfur - to a new lean, self-sufficient
operation based in Addis Ababa. Also, by 31 July, we
will have recruited 61 staff members out of a total of
63 positions.

In support areas where we could see efficiency
gains, and to fill gaps in our own support structure, we
have signed an memorandum of understanding with the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa
(ECA) in Addis Ababa, allowing us to tap into their
existing common services and provide UNOAU with
adequate office space in the new premises being
constructed at the ECA compound. We expect to be
collocated there in the first quarter of 2013. As with
any new office, we have been busy with these
administrative issues - logistic, personnel and
support - while at the same time undertaking action to
deliver on the main mandate of UNOAU.

The consolidation of the Office and the elevation
of the Head of Office to a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General at the level of Assistant Secretary-
General have certainly raised the United Nations
profile at the AU. To help inform United Nations
decision-making, we are producing real-time reporting
and political analysis on peace and security issues
based on daily consultations with senior AU officials
on political developments in Africa.

Upon my arrival, our Office immediately
organized a substantive retreat with our African Union
Commission counterparts, which resulted in a fruitful
exchange of views on how best to work together,
especially on the implementation of the UNOAU
mandate. We have intensified consultations with the
AU at the strategic level to respond to common
challenges on long-standing peace efforts in Africa -
for example, on Cote d'Ivoire, the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia - and
on recent developments in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya.

At the strategic level, we are focused on
enhancing coordination, strengthening common
understanding and maximizing comparative advantages
on United Nations-African Union joint peace efforts in
Africa. Our experience with the cooperation between
the two organizations shows that we do better in
11-38140
addressing crises in the continent when we stand
together and speak in one voice.

Nobody knows better than the Security Council
that the mediation of conflicts is a challenging
business, particularly when we are faced with a
multiplicity of actors, initiatives and organizations all
playing varying roles. That is why one of UNOAU's
roles is to strengthen our coordination with AU
institutions and enhance their capacity to deliver peace
in Africa. My regular participation at meetings of the
African Union Peace and Security Council on country
specific situations, such as Cote d'Ivoire, Somalia and
the Sudan, and on the most recent developments in
North Africa, has proved to be instrumental in
coordinating action. In addition, building upon the
gains from two United Nations-Africa Union
workshops on collective peace efforts in Somalia,
Guinea-Bissau and Kenya, the United Nations
Secretariat and the Africa Union Commission have
agreed on United Nations-Africa Union mediation
partnership guidelines. The guidelines will be endorsed
and launched by the third meeting of the United
Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security, to be held in New York in September on the
margins of the sixty-sixth session of the General
Assembly.

To help address these and other challenges, we
have also embarked on revitalizing the peace and
security cluster as part of the regional coordination
mechanism framework. We are also working to
improve the activities of its three sub-clusters, namely,
on the Peace and Security Architecture of the African
Union; post-conflict reconstruction and development;
and human rights, justice and reconciliation. As Chair
of the cluster, I have launched a committee to work
with the secretariat of the Regional Coordination
Mechanism on an overall strategic plan into which our
cluster activities will be integrated as part of efforts to
implement the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme
for the African Union.

As we recruit more staff for UNOAU, we are
enhancing the effectiveness of our capacity-building
support to the African Union, helping it to design and
implement new strategies to develop its institutional
capacity for peacekeeping management, especially the
African Union Peace Support Operations Division's
structural needs, in the context of an ongoing and long-
term overall restructuring of the AU.
11-38140

At the working level, while there are many
imperatives for short-term support, which must be
responded to cooperatively, we have made it a priority
that all UNOAU planners make tangible achievements
in helping the AU to assess its capacity needs in their
areas of expertise; in designing appropriate strategies
aligned with AU priorities and adapted to a realistic
assessment of absorptive capacity to fill those needs;
and in implementing those strategies.

Far too often, capacity-building efforts get
bogged down in helping counterparts meet urgent day-
to-day needs, and achieve little in terms of
strengthened capacity. We want to avoid such a pattern
so that we can achieve our common goal of helping the
African Union Commission to be fully capable of
planning and executing its own peace support missions.
Realistically, however, we must accept that
institutional capacity-development is a long-term goal.

As members of the Security Council know,
UNOAU is not alone in supporting the AU's
institutional development. That is why coordination is
an important part of our mandate. The Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme brings together the
entire United Nations family to support that objective.
In February, the Secretary-General submitted a report
to the Council and to the General Assembly that
recommended, among other things, more clearly
defined work programmes for the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme and its clusters, aligned with the
programming and planning cycles of the AU
Commission. We are working with the Commission
and partners to that effect.

Coordination with partners outside the United
Nations is also essential. In addition to the established
African Union Partners' Group, which meets regularly
at different levels, we have agreed to establish
coordination among experts of the Group supporting
the African Union in their respective areas of specialty.
In most cases, UNOAU will play a leading role in such
multi-partner coordination. We are also engaging
organizations that can bring other resources to the
table. For example, the World Bank has expressed keen
interest in partnering with us on support to the AU in
the area of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

We have also made gains in our support and
advisory roles with regard to AU planning; let me
mention a few. As part of the African Peace and
3
Security Architecture, an AU continental-level peace
support operation exercise code named AMANI
AFRICA was conducted with UNOAU support, in
close coordination with the European Union and
NATO, to assess the operational readiness of the
African Standby Force (ASF). This brought to a close
the ASF Road Map II. UNOAU is currently assisting
with the development of the African Standby Force
Road Map 111, which should culminate in the
operationalization of the Force by 2015.

As part of its ongoing support to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), UNOAU
assisted the African Union Commission in generating
the troops for AMISOM. to meet its original mandated
strength of 8,100 and in conducting a number of
predeployment visits to ensure the smooth insertion of
the troops. We are now assisting the AU in achieving
the newly approved strength of 12,000 troops. UNOAU
also helped to review, update and develop most of the
strategic and operational documents for AMISOM, in
keeping with United Nations standards. The Office has
also assisted in recruiting AMISOM. civilian staff. We
have been helping to strengthen the AU Peace Support
Operations Division. AMISOM. public information
offices have helped to update the AMISOM
communications strategy and its strategy on the
protection of civilians. It has also translated and
published the AMISOM. rules of engagement and code
of conduct in a pocket-sized format.

We have facilitated more than a dozen training
activities and workshops for AU regional economic
communities on peacekeeping, planning, logistics and
other operational and administrative issues, helping to
ensure that they are in line with AU Commission
training policy guidelines, which themselves, under our
guidance, are largely based upon United Nations
standards.

Just this past weekend, another in a regular series
of desk-to-desk consultations was held between staff of
the Secretariat, the AU Commission, UNOAU, the
African regional economic communities and members
of peace and security cluster. Some 40 participants held
a thorough discussion and exchanged analysis on
current issues such as Somalia, the Sudan and Cote
d'Ivoire. We also maintain constant contact with the
AU Commission on cross-cutting issues such as
elections, conflict prevention and mediation.
In developing these joint efforts and
consultations, I hold regular meetings with the African
Union Commission Chairman, Mr. Jean Ping, and the
various commissioners, particularly the Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra. In that
context, I have been frequently invited to attend
meetings of the AU's Peace and Security Council on
pressing issues facing the African continent, including
efforts to resolve the crises I have just mentioned. I
have also represented the Secretary-General at high-
level meetings in Africa.

In conclusion, let me say a few words about the
overall strategic relationship, the improvement of
which, as I said earlier, is one of the priorities of my
Office's mandate.

As members saw for themselves during the
Council's visit to Addis Ababa last month, we have
achieved a lot in our partnership with the AU. But the
full potential of the cooperation between the two
organizations is still to be achieved in a number of
areas. Helping the AU to strengthen its capacities so
that it can play an ever more effective role in
addressing peace and security issues in Africa is an
objective that we all share, and it is the basic reason
UNOAU was created. I firmly believe that the various
activities of my Office will greatly strengthen the
foundation for this relationship by helping the
Secretariat to improve its effectiveness so that better
strategic planning, better analysis and better
coordination with other partners can inform political
decision-making and pave the way for more effective
political coordination between the two organizations.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Council
for its support in the establishment of UNOAU, and to
assure it of my utmost commitment to achieving its
objectives.

