Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish to begin by congratulating the non-permanent
members of the Security Council and wishing them
every success in their deliberations.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Austria as Chair of the Human
Security Network.

We also welcome the briefings given this morning
by Her Excellency Michelle Bachelet, President of the
Republic of Chile; the Secretary-General; the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission; and Nobel Laureate
Ms. Leymah Gbowee, all of whom have been inspiring
today's debate on this important issue on the agenda of
the Security Council.

As a consequence of the interdependence of
today's world, we are continually affected by global
threats that know no political borders. Conflicts of
ethnic and religious origin, international terrorism,
extremism, environmental problems, resource scarcity
and competition for such resources, organized crime,
mafias, pandemics and global militarization pose a
challenge to human security, which is a necessary
precondition for the social, political and economic
development of countries.

Through the Human Development Reports, we have
learned that people require economic, food, health,
environmental, personal, community and political
security if they are to achieve their potential, exercise
their freedoms, take advantage of opportunities and thus
contribute to the development of their communities.

Exclusion in all its forms, be it social, religious,
ethnic or territorial, is by definition a violation of
human rights and therefore lies at the root of conflicts
throughout the world. The problem is not conflict
per se; the problem is that when it becomes violent,
it results in the loss of human lives and in insecurity.
Peace and security are fundamental to dignity and
human development; however, insecurity and conflict
always pose a threat to the sustainable development of
peoples and cultures. Therefore inclusive development
is a key factor in preventing violence and in the process
of building and consolidating peace.

Today we are seeing the start of the intergovernmental
process on the post-2015 development agenda. We
cannot speak of inclusive development - our main
challenge in this new phase - without the assistance of
agents of chance: persons and all citizens.

As the Secretary-General rightly stated in paragraph
28 of his report contained in document S/2014/694,

"Where peacebuilding efforts are rooted
in inclusive societal consultation and efforts to
minimize exclusionary practices, they generate
trust and legitimacy in the State and its institutions."

In the world we live in, which is subject to constant
threats, we deem vital States' way of addressing and
promoting the prevention of such threats through
inclusion, social cohesion and dialogue, as we seek
to build resilient societies, one of the pillars of
responsibility to protect. A cohesive and integrated
society is better equipped to prevent conflicts and
violence.
In this context, we believe that in this year that is is
so critical in terms of the development agenda, we must
have exactly this kind of inter-organ debate at the United
Nations, without, of course, creating a precedent that
could undermine the mandate of any organ, but, rather,
laying the groundwork for a free-flowing exchange of
ideas and best practices, so that each body can enhance
its mandate. It is important to realize that not only
are these issues interrelated, but also that in the past
some may have eclipsed others. For example, how do
we explain to our children that today we are spending
more on weapons than on development and that we are
investing more in wars than in social inclusion projects?

We are challenged as Member States by the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations to think
outside the box and to think creatively, so as to devise
innovative ways of addressing this issue. In that
connection, as we are also celebrating the twentieth
anniversary of the World Conference on Women, we
invite the Security Council to ensure greater leadership
and participation by women and gender-related training
in peacekeeping missions.

Panama will soon host a historic Summit of the
Americas entitled "Prosperity with equity," where one
of the main issues will be that of security. We hope
to contribute through a transformative push towards
regional commitment, with a view to achieving a more
inclusive development in this region of peace.

Finally, the Republic of Panama welcomes the
adoption of the presidential statement submitted by
Chile (S/PRST/2015/3), which focuses on the existing
interlinkage between inclusive development and the
maintenance of international peace and security, which
are fundamental pillars of this Organization.

