Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking all those who briefed the Security Council
today for their words of insight and their efforts towards
bringing peace and stability to the Central African
Republic. Let me also welcome to the Council Her
Excellency Ms. Sylvie Valerie Baipo-Temon, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic.

I would like to join others in extending particular
thanks to Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). His
frankness, integrity and outstanding leadership over
the past three and a half years have seen MINUSCA
perform effectively and efficiently through the most
challenging of times. On behalf of the United Kingdom,
I would like to extend the most sincere commendations
and warmest thanks to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga and wish
him the very best for the future.

The United Kingdom has consistently backed the
African Union-led African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic as the
only - I repeat, the only - viable peace initiative. We
are encouraged to see that it has yielded the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation, which is
based on sustainable foundations of communication
and compromise between the authorities of the Central
African Republic and all 14 major armed groups. We
are hopeful for the future, and we commend Mr. Smai'l
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, and the African Union itself, as well as the
Governments of the Central African Republic and the
Sudan and regional partners in particular, for their
efforts in bringing about the agreement.

The comprehensive briefing provided by His
Excellency Mr. Omar Hilale, Permanent Representative
of Morocco to the United Nations, in his capacity as the
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as his
recommendations for the implementation of the
agreement, captured many themes that the United
Kingdom can support - ownership of the agreement
by the people of the Central African Republic; the
inclusivity of the Agreement for women, youth and
civil society; the need to combat impunity for the most
serious crimes; the importance of communication by
the Government of the Central African Republic to
instil trust in the population; and the importance of
sustained support by regional partners.

The United Kingdom also recognizes the need to
set a pace that keeps up the momentum ofthe agreement
and delivers the dividends of peace to the people.
But the requirement for rapid implementation should
not come at the cost of trust in the overall process.
The excellent work of the European Union Military
Training Mission has helped to build trust between the
population and its armed forces and police. Members of
armed groups will understandably have to work harder
than most to gain that trust. Therefore, it is vital that
demobilized members of armed groups are subjected to
the same rigorous standards of vetting and training in
human rights as regular members of the armed forces in
the Central African Republic before they are integrated
into those armed forces.

In that context, the recent allegations of torture
and illegal detention by Central African troops and
Russian trainers in Bambari are a matter of deep
concern. The United Kingdom welcomes the United
Nations investigation into those allegations, which
should be rigorous and independent. If the allegations
are found to be true, the United Kingdom calls on the
authorities of the Central African Republic to hold those
responsible to account. As my United States colleague
said, international support for the Government of the
Central African Republic should be transparent, well
coordinated and consistent with the highest standards
of military conduct and law and with the obligations of
Member States under the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013),
concerning the Central African Republic.

My Russian colleague mentioned Ukraine, which
is indeed a dangerous precedent - there we saw a
classic Russian playbook on disinformation and media
manipulation, sponsorship of military groups and
the provision of arms, direct military intervention by
Russian forces and the illegal annexation of Crimea
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international treaties.

The sanctions regime, comprising the arms
embargo, travel ban and assets freeze, is designed to
hold to account those who would threaten the peace and
security of the Central African Republic and prevent
the proliferation of weapons in the wrong hands. The
United Kingdom welcomes the efforts of the authorities
of the Central African Republic in security sector
reform and arms and weapons management, and urges
the authorities to continue those efforts to allow the
sanctions Committee to conduct a meaningful review
of the arms embargo in September. The sanctions
regime will continue to be an important tool in holding
to account would-be spoilers of the agreement. In
that regard, the effective implementation of sanctions
measures by the authorities and regional partners will
continue to be critical.

The United Kingdom has committed hundreds of
millions of dollars to the Central African Republic since
2013 - to MINUSCA, to life-saving humanitarian
assistance, to helping displaced people and refugees
rebuild their lives, to capacity-building, particularly
in the security and judicial sectors, and to United
Nations efforts in support of the long-term peace and
stability of the Central African Republic. The United
Kingdom remains committed to supporting the people
of the Central African Republic as they work towards
building a peaceful and prosperous future.

