Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We wish at the
outset to express our appreciation to the Congolese
presidency for organizing this important meeting. We
also wish to welcome the Secretary-General and to
thank him for his unwavering support for Africa. We
believe that his trip to the Sudan comes at just the right
time, when we need a push to make sure that the
people of Darfur are not forgotten. In addition, we
welcome Ambassador Merores, representing the Office
of the President of the General Assembly, and
Ambassador Christian in his other incarnation,
representing the Peacebuilding Commission.

This debate comes after the recent visit by the
United Nations Security Council to Addis Ababa to
consult with the African Union on common strategies
to address ongoing conflicts in Africa. During the
historic working session between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
concrete suggestions were made about developing
synergies in the area of conflict prevention and
peacekeeping at the institutional and operational levels.
Our deliberations today can only further strengthen the
response of the international community to making
peace sustainable in Africa and, indeed, elsewhere in
the world.

Conflict prevention cannot be addressed in
isolation. Matters of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacekeeping are linked inextricably to
peace and stability, good governance and the deepening
of democracy, and all can contribute to concrete efforts
towards achieving sustainable social and economic
development.

Conflicts in one country have the potential to
destabilize neighbouring countries, with devastating
consequences. It is therefore critical to build on
national processes and to implement regional strategies
to combat such challenges as transnational crime, drug
and human trafficking and the proliferation of small
arms. South Africa has always welcomed efforts by
national Governments, the African Union and the
United Nations to address challenges of conflict
prevention in a meaningful manner. It is important that
strategies dealing with conflict prevention continue to
be further developed and harnessed in order to produce
tangible and visible results. In other words, there can
be no peace without sustainable development,
democracy and the protection of fundamental human
rights.

Nearly a decade ago, former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan published a comprehensive report on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa. The report
stressed, among other reasons, the following factors
contributing to instability in the African continent:

historical legacies - that is, colonial frontiers,
political legacies and commercial relations established
under colonial rule; support for authoritarian regimes
during the Cold War era; internal factors such as the
nature of power-sharing and the politicization of
ethnicity; and external factors - that is, economic
interest, competition for resources, the destabilization
of neighbouring States and the effects of war
economies. The former Secretary-General called on the
United Nations to adopt a prevention strategy rather
than rely on the usual reactive response to conflict. He
argued that such a strategy called for a more holistic
and developmental focus in addressing the root causes
of conflict, including addressing socio-economic,
cultural, environmental, institutional and other
structural causes of conflict, rather than treating only
its symptoms.

Two further reports on the prevention of armed
conflict, in 2001, and a progress report on the
prevention of armed conflict, in 2006, were published.
They contained numerous recommendations on how
the United Nations could collectively mobilize greater
coherence and focus for conflict prevention.

Yet Africa remains confronted by conflicts driven
by underdevelopment, poverty and hunger, lack of
democracy, injustice, religious extremism and plain
ignorance. It would therefore seem obvious that a
reassessment of how the United Nations contributes to
conflict prevention must be undertaken, taking into
account the practical experience gained over many
years of resolving conflict in Africa. The active role
that the African Union has played and continues to play
in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa is a huge
asset in complementing the efforts of the United
Nations.

The establishment of the Peace and Security
Council; the African standby force; the Early Warning
System; the Pan-African Parliament; the Economic,
Social and Cultural Council; the New Partnership for
Africa's Development; and the African Peer Review
Mechanism have gone a long way in improving
security as well as creating sustaining conditions of
political stability, good governance and economic
development.
It is now up to the United Nations to use its
convening power to link all global efforts to create a
better and safer world for all the world's citizens. We
all share the responsibility to ensure that the United
Nations lives up to expectations in strengthening
regional and continental structures to complement
global initiatives in conflict prevention. In organizing
this open debate on conflict prevention and resolution,
the Congolese delegation has given us the opportunity
to discuss ways to improve the manner in which the
United Nations can address the issue of conflict
prevention in a coherent and coordinated fashion. We
believe that the draft presidential statement before us
lays a good foundation for that effort, and we support
1t.

