Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for the detailed and extensive report in
document S/1998/486. I would be remiss not to express our
thanks to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, to the
United Nations staff in Sierra Leone and to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) for their commendable efforts to restore
peace and stability to Sierra Leone.

The report refers to many positive steps undertaken by
the Government of Sierra Leone following the reinstatement
of the elected President, Mr. Kabbah. However, there have
been many repercussions, and many problems must be dealt
with, such as fostering peace and stability in the country
and disarming the former supporters of the junta, who are
still attacking innocent, defenceless civilians - displacing
them, endangering their lives, violating their rights and
committing atrocities against them. My delegation
condemns these atrocities, which jeopardize the peace and
stability of the country and impede the achievement of
national reconciliation.

Given the current security and social situation in Sierra
Leone, my delegation hopes that the establishment of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) will contribute to peace and security in the
country in particular and in the region in general. The task
of the Mission will complement that of ECOMOG. That is
why my delegation underlines the importance of close
coordination between the two missions. We also call upon
all the parties concerned to guarantee the safety and
security of the members of the Mission and to protect its
property so that it will be able to achieve the desired
objectives.

We also welcome the decision of the Secretary-
General to convene a high-level special political conference
to mobilize resources for peacekeeping activities,
emergency humanitarian assistance, reconstruction and
rehabilitation in Sierra Leone.

In light of all this, my delegation will join the
consensus on the draft resolution before us.

