Ms. Imam: I would like to begin by thanking the
Ethiopian Ambassador, and President of the Security
Council for this month, for inviting me to provide
a civil society perspective as part of the Council's
deliberations on the Lake Chad basin region.

I am Fatima Shehu Imam, the current Chairperson
of the International Federation of Women Lawyers in
Borno state. Today I also represent the Network of Civil
Society Organizations in Borno state.

The Network is a coalition of more than 100 civil
society, community and faith-based organizations
engaged in a wide range of activities geared towards
providing humanitarian aid and assistance to Victims of
the over four-year-long insurgency. In Borno state, where
I live and work, families, livelihoods and communities
have been repeatedly torn apart by insurgent activities
of the Jama'atu Ahlus-Sunna Lidda'Awati Wal Jihad,
otherwise known as Boko Haram. Borno state remains
the epicentre of the Boko Haram insurgency.

In March this year, Council members met with me
and other women-led civil society organizations during
the Security Council mission to Maiduguri. Sadly,
there has been no significant improvement in providing
for protection needs or humanitarian assistance to the
growing number of Victims of the insurgency who have
been displaced.

Thenon-participationofwomenindecision-making,
peacebuilding processes, and in aid and relief delivery
in camps remains a serious concern. Borno state
currently hosts the highest number of internally
displaced persons (IDP), who remain in need of urgent
humanitarian protection and assistance owing to the
level of insecurity in the State. The dire humanitarian
conditions in north-east Nigeria are arguably brought
on by the security challenges and the almost near-
total collapse of societal and institutional apparatus
of the Government, which has been unable to keep
up with the increasing numbers of internationally
displaced persons.

I wish to highlight the following key concerns we
have identified in the context of the work we do as
humanitarians, enumerate the main areas for urgent
intervention and touch on the challenges we face as
a coalition. I will then conclude with an appeal to the
conscience of the Security Council.

On security, the general situation in and around
Maiduguri remains tense and fragile. While there have
been several reports forecasting improvements and
gains by the Nigerian armed forces in the region, that
progress has been grossly overestimated. That has left
room for a false sense of security, which has also led
to a resurgence of armed attacks on civilians and other
soft targets in and around the state. People still live in
fear in their communities, and many who have been
displaced as a result of the insurgency are reluctant
to return. That has resulted in poverty, a lack of food,
malnutrition and a total collapse of economic activities
within the region and the threat of famine.

Threats to the life and property of marginalized
populations, especially women and girls, seem to
be on the increase in the light of the resurgence of
violent attacks. Local civil society organizations
working on the ground, such as mine, are largely
incapacitated in reaching out to large sections of those
communities, including to women and girls who are in
urgent need of humanitarian aid. Unlike international
non-governmental organizations and United Nations
agencies, which are accompanied by security details
during field operations, local groups are continuing
to carry out their work unaccompanied by any form
of security apparatus, thereby making access a major
challenge and compromising the lives of individuals
who engage in such operations.

There is continuing and clear abuse of the rights
of individuals living in the camps in Maiduguri and
surrounding areas. As have been detailed in numerous
reports to the Council, there are severe shortages of
food and other supplies. That has led to a situation
where ther is a trade in sexual favours for food. From
the various Visits I have personally made to the IDP
camps as part of my mandate to improve and promote
the welfare and rights of women and children, it is
pertinent to note that most of the women and girls in the
IDP camps are ignorant oftheir basic human rights and,
as such, do not even know when their rights are being
violated. That is partly a result of culturally induced
factors where women do not have a voice and, in a few
cases, do not know where to go when violated. The
insurgency has taken its toll on those women who are
now heads of households and are compelled to give their
bodies for food - which ultimately results in unwanted
pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases - in
the name of survival sex just to be able to provide for
their family.

With regard to the women and girls who have been
abducted by Boko Haram, women and girls have been
used as targets in the recent trend of violent attacks
perpetrated by insurgents in utilizing them as suicide
bombers. The issue of stigmatization faced by those
women and girls cannot be overemphasized. A case at
hand is that of a married woman who was abducted by
Boko Haram and returned after a few years with another
child. Her husband is forcing her to choose between
him and the child. The psychological trauma faced by
that woman, and the many others who have lost their
self-esteem as a result of stigmatization, needs to be
urgently addressed. A sharper focus must be placed on
women's reintegration, while tackling stigmatization
and ensuring that they are part of the strategies aimed
at addressing Boko Haram.

In terms of the threat to farming, the fragile state
of security in the region has led to a situation where the
normal lifestyles and customs of the population have
been truncated. Due to inherent security challenges,
members of some communities are afraid to go to
their farms because it is risky to travel beyond a
three-kilometre radius from their communities. About
a week ago, 12 people were abducted from their farms
and are yet to be found. Reports of such abductions
are numerous, which is of course of great concern to
my Network.

The Network faces myriad challenges, as do many
civil society groups, that affect our ability to deliver
the lifesaving work we are trying to carry out. Those
challenges cover, but are not limited to, operations, such
as funding, institutions, policy and law and security.

There currently appears to be more rigidity than
flexibility in the level of donor funding available for
humanitarian assistance, thereby creating a situation
whereby highly professional and experienced
institutions, such as United Nations agencies and
international NGOs, are expected to access funding
based on the same evaluation criteria. Those quite clear
and noticeable differences in terms of institutional
capacity undoubtedly impedes the availability of
funding opportunities available to smaller local groups
in the field that carry out lifesaving interventions.

There is an urgent need to ensure that local civil
society organizations and affected populations are
critical components in the design and implementation
of interventions. The fragile and tense situation still
makes it extremely challenging and risky for local
groups to engage in operations in the field. As a
result, those groups lack the accompanying security
apparatus available to United Nations agencies and
NGO colleagues.

Despite the extreme humanitarian situation in
the country and the apparent global focus on Nigeria
arising from the insurgency and the increasing number
of people who have been displaced and are in need of
protection and assistance, it might interest the Council
to note that the country still lacks any comprehensive
legislation and/or policy that holistically targets
humanitarian responses. The result is that most of work
currently being carried out is non-transparent and ad
hoc, with no accountability mechanism.

In conclusion, while I am immensely grateful
for the apportunity afforded to me to address the
Security Council, I must reiterate the important role
that perception plays in the context of humanitarian
intervention and bringing hope. The perception on the
ground today reflects the diminishing hope of the huge
population affected by the conflict, as they believe
responses to be insufficient, despite the huge funding
allocation reported by the Government and development
partners. I urge the Council to see this as an urgent
and dire call - given the highlighted challenges and
analysis of the situation, it should galvanize a strategic
and adequate response mechanism to bring assistance
and aid to the millions of people in need of protection
and humanitarian assistance.

