Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation is pleased to participate in this
debate on the situation in Angola. The armed conflict that
has afflicted the people of Angola for almost four decades
has been a cause of great and ongoing concern to the
international community. Finally, thanks to the
collaboration and participation of all parties, a solution is
emerging in the context of the Lusaka Protocol.
Unfortunately, in recent months, the peace process has
been jeopardized by a certain reticence on the part of one
party to comply with agreements made. That is why my
delegation warmly welcomes the outcome of the meeting
of the Joint Commission and, in particular, the adoption
of the timetable for completing the tasks of the Lusaka
Protocol, which will reactivate the peace process in what
we hope will be a definitive fashion.

Compliance with the main phases agreed on in the
timetable - the demilitarization of UNITA forces, the
normalization of State administration throughout Angolan
national territory, and the transformation of Radio Vorgan
into an impartial and non-partisan broadcasting facility -
is essential and fundamental to the consolidation of peace
in Angola. In this context, Costa Rica attaches the
greatest importance to the forthcoming meeting between
President Dos Santos and the UNITA leader, Mr.
Savimbi, even if it should take place outside the agreed
timetable. We feel that the convening of this meeting in

 

the near future, hopefully within the timetable, is
indispensable to the success of the peace plan.

The recent report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
contains certain points on which Costa Rica believes it
necessary to comment. First of all, my delegation cannot
conceal its concern at the continuation of armed clashes
between local governmental authorities and UNITA
militants, and at the regrouping of military elements of
UNITA, particularly in the regions of Andulo and Bailundo.
Secondly, my country is particularly concerned at the
increase in the number of reports of human rights
Violations. In that connection, we are concerned at the lack
of resources and personnel for the protection and promotion
of such rights. We note that, unfortunately, United Nations
human rights observers are currently present in only 7 of
Angola's 18 provinces. We hope that this situation will be
resolved in the manner proposed by the Secretary-General.

For all these reasons, my delegation believes it
necessary to extend MONUA's mandate, including its
military task force so as to respond to security needs, as
well as the provisions contained in the Secretary-General's
report, until 30 April.

We look forward to the report to be submitted by the
Secretary-General to the Security Council in March so as
to be able to consider the role that MONUA would be able
to play in the future, in keeping with advances made in
compliance with the established timetable.

Lastly, Costa Rica would appeal to the parties to
continue to observe fully the agreements of the Lusaka
Protocol, and in particular we would appeal to UNITA to
begin its move to Luanda so as to transform itself into a
political party.

