The President: I request members of the Council to
stand and observe a minute of silence in honour of the
memory of the victims of Pan Am Flight 103 and of UTA
Flight 772.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Colombia, Cuba, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, Egypt, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the United Arab
Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen and
Zimbabwe, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome the
Secretary of the General People's Committee for Foreign
Liaison and International Co-operation of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and invite him to take a seat at the Council
table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Muntasser
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) took a seat at the Council
table; Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr. Forero (Colombia),
Mr. Rodriguez Parilla (Cuba), Mr. Li (Democratic People's Republic of Korea), Mr. Abdel Aziz
(Egypt), Mr. Wilmot (Ghana), Mr. Da Gama
(Guinea-Bissau), Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Wibisono
(Indonesia), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq), Mr. Abu-Nimah
(Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Ouane (Mali), Mr. Saliba (Malta),
Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania), Mr. Snoussi
(Morocco), Mr. Andjaba (Namibia), Mr. Gambari
(Nigeria), Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan), Mr. Al-Khalifa (Qatar), Mr. Erwa
(Sudan), Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Hachani (Tunisia), Mr. Samhan Al-Nuaimi
(United Arab Emirates), Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Kalaz (Yemen) and
Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 13 March 1998 from
the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Mahamadou
Abou, Deputy Permanent Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the United
Nations, during the Council's discussion of the item
entitled, 'Letters dated 20 and 23 December 1991,
from France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America (S/23306, S/23307, 8/23308, S/23309 and S/23317', to be held on 20 March 1998." 
That letter has been published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1998/251.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Abou.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 16 March 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Bahrain to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

 

"I have the honour to request the Security Council to
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, to His Excellency
Ambassador Hussein Hassouna, Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States to the United Nations,
during the Security Council's formal open debate on
Libya, which will take place on Friday, 20 March
1998."

That letter has been has been published as a document
of the Security Council under the symbol S/1998/252. If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Hassouna.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 18 March 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Gabon to the United Nations, which reads
as follows:

"I have the honour to request that during the meeting
of the Security Council devoted to the consideration of
the question of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America, the Council extend
an invitation, under rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, to His Excellency
Mr. Amadou Kebe, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of African Unity to the United Nations."

That letter has been has been published as a document
of the Security Council under the symbol S/ 1998/253.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kebe.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting
in accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations, having before it the letter dated 2 March
1998 from the Permanent Representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council, document S/1998/179;
the letter dated 4 March 1998 from the representatives of
Algeria, Egypt, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania,
Morocco, the Syrian Arab Republic and Tunisia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, document S/1998/195; and the letter dated 4
March 1998 from the Permanent Representative of Mali
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, document S/ 1998/ 199.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/1998/190, S/1998/191, S/1998/192 and S/1998/242,
letters dated 2, 2, 4 and 17 March 1998, respectively,
from the Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council; S/ 1998/ 196, letter dated
4 March 1998 from the Permanent Representative of
Zimbabwe to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a letter of the same date
from the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1998/198,
letter dated 5 March 1998 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/1998/200, letter dated 5 March 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/1998/201, letter dated 15 January 1998 from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting the report submitted to him
by the fact-finding mission to the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya; S/1998/202, letter dated 5 March 1998 from
the Permanent Representative of Zimbabwe to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting a letter of the same date from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe and Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Committee
on the Dispute between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and
the United Kingdom and the United States addressed to
the President of the Security Council; and S/1998/239,
letter dated 16 March 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the Acting Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
distinguished Secretary of the General People's
Committee for Foreign Liaison and International
Cooperation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, His
Excellency Mr. Omar Mustafa Muntasser, to whom I give
the floor.

 

Mr. Muntasser (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
(interpretation from Arabic): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on the assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. As an African
brother, I am very pleased to see you guiding our debate.

I wish also to express to you, Mr. President, and to the
members of the Security Council our gratitude for your
agreeing to convene this formal meeting. Undoubtedly, it is
a step that we fully appreciate. We believe it is appreciated
by the entire international community as represented by
Member States of the United Nations, as it constitutes a
signal of a commitment to compliance with the provisions
of the United Nations Charter. This meeting is being held
in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter, in
response to our formal requests contained in documents
S/1998/179 and S/1997/857.

I would also like to express our solidarity and
sympathy with the families of the Lockerbie victims and
our sadness at their suffering. We hope that a quick
agreement will be reached on a resolution of the dispute
over a venue for the trial of the two suspects in order to
end their suffering and the suffering of millions of Libyan
families.

Today's Security Council agenda item goes back seven
years - "Letters dated 20 and 23 December 1991,
S/23306, S/23307, 5/23308, S/23309 and S/23317". Some
of these letters contained demands from the United States
and the United Kingdom upon Libya. Those two countries
chose to announce those demands first in a press
conference, and not through accepted legal channels and
judicial procedures.

Those demands were, first, the extradition of two
Libyan citizens suspected of being involved in the incident
of the destruction of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie,
Scotland, in 1988. This demand runs counter to Libyan
national law and most laws in the world relating to
jurisdiction and non-extradition of citizens. It runs counter
to international customary law. It also runs counter to the
1971 Montreal Convention and even to the judgements of
the United States Supreme Court barring extradition in the
absence of an extradition treaty. This is precisely the case
between Libya and the United States and the United
Kingdom.

The second demand was the payment of compensation,
which is indeed an outrage for any legal conscience because
it contravenes the law and encroaches upon the defendant's
right to being considered innocent until proven guilty.
Moreover, such a demand deviates from the right course
of the law as regards civil liability, particularly the
liability of the State, which attaches to a criminal act.

The third and strangest demand was that Libya
should provide the evidence proving the guilt of the two
suspects. It is a well-known fact that Libya neither
accused nor suspected the two Libyan citizens; it was the
United States and the United Kingdom who accused the
two Libyan citizens, and they, not Libya, therefore bear
the burden of providing evidence.

Strange as they are, all these demands are related to
legal procedures and any dispute over them is a legal one.
This is exactly what Libya has repeatedly emphasized,
and it has thus dealt with these demands on that basis.
Allow me at this juncture briefly to go over the
developments of this dispute as is required by such an
important situation for my country, which, having done
no wrong and in the absence of a court judgement, has
been suffering, together with its people, from collective
sanctions for the last six years. All of this suffering, of
severe material and moral magnitude, is without a legal
basis. Add to this the suffering of the families of the
victims of this tragic accident, who are, like us, anxious
to have the two suspects brought to trial in a just and fair
court, to uncover the truth and to put an end to their
suffering and that of our people.

Allow me to describe the evolution and background
of the dispute, which I shall summarize with the
following points.

First, the suspicion of the involvement of two Libyan
citizens in the Lockerbie incident was based on the
allegation that they placed an unaccompanied suitcase
containing a time-bomb on an Air Malta flight that took
off from Malta.

Second, the Government of Malta investigated the
matter and concluded that there were no unaccompanied
bags on that flight. Further, the competent authorities in
Germany also investigated the matter and found nothing
to corroborate the story of the bag.

Third, right from the start, Libya dealt with the
suspicion of its two citizens, within the framework of the
1971 Montreal Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, of
which article 7 accords Libya judicial competence for
trying the two suspects. Legal procedures provided for in

 

article 6 of the same Convention were put into effect. On
the basis of these procedures, the two suspects were
apprehended and two judges were entrusted with
investigating the case which they started.

Fourth, in a letter sent to the Secretary of State of the
United States and the Foreign Minister of the United
Kingdom, the Secretary of the General People's Committee
for Foreign Liaison and International Cooperation of Libya
called for the implementation of article 14 of the 1971
Montreal Convention, which states that

"Any dispute between two or more Contracting
States which cannot be settled through negotiations,
shall, at the request of one of them, be submitted to
arbitration. If within six months from the date of the
request for arbitration the Parties are unable to agree
on the organization of the arbitration, any one of those
Parties may refer the dispute to the International Court
of Justice by request in conformity with the Statute of
the Court."

Fifth, the issue was brought before the Libyan
legislative authorities - the General People's Congress -
during its 1992 session, and it did not object to the
investigation and the trial of the two suspects being taken
up by the Committee of Seven established by the Arab
League to deal with the dispute or by the United Nations
before a just and fair court to be agreed upon.

Sixth, Libya proposed that the Secretary-General
should establish a legal committee composed of neutral and
impartial judges to ascertain the facts.

Seventh, Libya declared its readiness to enter into
negotiations with the States concerned, under the auspices
of the United Nations Secretary-General, for the purpose of
conducting a trial in a neutral country.

Eighth, the countries concerned immediately
transformed the question from a legal to a political one by
submitting it to the Security Council. Within one month, the
Council adopted resolution 731 (1992) on 21 January 1992
under the threat of military aggression being launched
against Libya. This forced the Security Council to adopt the
resolution in order to save Libya from a greater danger
which was looming. The United States of America, let us
not forget, attacked Libya in 1986.

Ninth, resolution 731 (1992) did not address the
Libyan Government except to urge the Libyan Government
to provide a full and effective response to these demands in
order to contribute to the suppression of international
terrorism. That resolution was adopted in clear violation
of the provisions and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations whose Article 27, paragraph 3, states,

"Decisions of the Security Council on all other
matters shall be made by an affirmative vote of nine
members including the concurring votes of the
permanent members; provided that, in decisions
under Chapter VI, and under paragraph 3 of Article
52, a party to a dispute shall abstain from voting."

The parties to the dispute did take part in the voting and
did not abstain, as is provided by Article 27.

Resolution 731 (1992) was also adopted in a clear
violation of Article 33, paragraph 1, of the Charter, which

states,

"The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security, shall, first of all,
seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to
regional agencies or arrangements or other peaceful
means of their own choice."

Paragraph 2 of the same Article states,

"The Security Council shall call upon the
parties to settle their dispute by such means."

Resolution 731 (1992) was also adopted in a clear
violation of Article 36, paragraph 3, of the Charter which
states,

"In making recommendations under this Article
the Security Council should also take into
consideration that legal disputes should as a general
rule be referred by the parties to the International
Court of Justice."

In view of this dangerous development which
politicized a legal question and of the refusal of the other
two parties to establish judicial cooperation, Libya
unilaterally resorted to the International Court of Justice
on 3 March 1992. In so doing, Libya has met all its
commitments made obligatory under applicable
international law.

In a belated attempt to pre-empt the Court's decision,
and after Libya's submission of its claim to the

 

International Court of Justice, the two countries concerned
quickly resorted to the Security Council, pushing it into
adopting resolution 748 (1992) on 31 March 1992 and
Security Council resolution 883 (1993) on 11 November
1993, imposing sanctions on my country and expanding the
sanctions. Those resolutions were based on Security
Council resolution 731 (1992), which was adopted in clear
violation of Articles 27, 33, and 36 of the Charter. Legal
rules stipulate that that which is illegally based is likewise
illegal. Furthermore, those resolutions were adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter, which deals with "threats to the
peace, breaches of the peace, and acts of aggression".

Everybody knows that the tragic Lockerbie incident
took place in 1988, four years prior to the adoption of those
Security Council resolutions, and that the suspicion
involved two individuals, who could not constitute a threat
to the peace, breach the peace or commit acts of
aggression. How can two individuals threaten or destabilize
the peace or commit an act of aggression?
The two countries concerned challenged the
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in handling
this case, asserting that the Montreal Convention was not
applicable. Accordingly, the Court was obliged to review
this aspect of the case and to postpone reviewing the
original case, thus leading to a further delay in dealing with
the dispute.

In the light of all this, Libya applied the provisions of
Article 33 of the Charter, resorting to regional and
international organizations to seek a solution by negotiation,
inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration or judicial
settlement. Libya submitted the issue to the League of Arab
States, the Organization of African Unity, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement.
These organizations established committees which contacted
the parties concerned in search of a solution that would
satisfy all parties. However, their noble endeavours were
aborted through rejection, disregard and worse. Those
organizations, once their noble efforts of mediation or
conciliation had failed, submitted proposals aimed at the
judicial settlement of the question through one of three
options.

The two countries rejected all the offers and proposals
put forward by those regional and international
organizations, which together with some other countries that
are not members of those organizations, constitute the
international community. The position of the United States
and the United Kingdom, by virtue of their permanent
membership in the Security Council, where they enjoy veto
power, prevented a response to these proposals in spite of
their repeated submission.

This situation continued despite all the appeals
repeatedly adopted by those organizations, which were
regularly presented to the Security Council and to the
United Nations Secretariat in writing, and in person, by
the Secretaries-General of those organizations, who came
specifically for this purpose to United Nations
Headquarters and the Security Council. Those decisions
were adopted at the summit conferences of those
organizations, represented by the Kings, Presidents,
Emirs, and Heads of Government of the States members
of those organizations. The statement of President Robert
Mugabe, Chairman of the Organization of African Unity,
before the Security Council on 25 September 1997 was
but a reaffirmation of positions of the African Summit
and the summits of all those organizations.

Also rejected by the United States and the United
Kingdom were the demands and appeals of most of the
families of the victims, who called for trying the two
suspects in a neutral country. Libya alone observed the
Charter of the United Nations, international conventions
and covenants. Please do not forget that my country was
born of this Organization, as Libya's independence was
declared as a result of a United Nations resolution. Libya
has accepted the proposals submitted by regional and
international organizations, out of its limitless respect for
those organizations, their leaders, their Governments and
their peoples. On this occasion, we would like to renew
our continued adherence to our commitments and our
respect for all the offers we have previously agreed to.
My country has fully responded to all relevant resolutions.

First, regarding so-called terrorism, if the file on
terrorism is to be opened, we reserve the right to
announce what is irrefutable. In this respect, the substance
of our statements would cover all time, all human history
and the breadth of the entire globe. We shall demonstrate
how most peoples of the world, including the Libyan
people, have been victims of terrorism. Some of these
people, including Libyans, are still victims of terrorism.
We can prove this irrefutably. We can even prove that the
contemporary political problems of various countries and
regions have been the creation, the product and the
responsibility of those who now accuse us of terrorism.

Needless to say, the struggle for liberation against
occupiers and colonialists is not terrorism. Liberation
movements are not terrorist movements. Suffice it to say
that those who accuse us of terrorism used to label those

 

struggling for freedom terrorists, or guerrillas. Now, having
liberated their countries, securing victories which are a
source of happiness for us, they are recognized and
welcomed, and red carpets are spread out for them. They
are addressed by the titles they deserve, such as "Your
Excellency" and "Your Highness". Political relations are
established with them and ambassadors exchanged. Several
ambassadors and delegates in this Organization were among
those who struggled for liberty.

Libya has supported such people and stood by them,
in the belief that this is its duty to them, and to the cause
of freedom, as they fought against those who occupied and
colonized their countries. They did not fight outside their
countries. We also did that because they stood by our side
and helped us when our country was colonized, and
because they fought the hated racial discrimination
exercised by the occupiers hailing from overseas. Now the
whole world stands against racism, and we thank God very
much for that. Thus, Libya has never supported terrorism
but has assisted in the liberation struggle - and there is a
big difference between the two.

In full response to Security Council resolutions, and
out of respect for the Council, Libya has undertaken the
following:

First, Libya declared its condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations in several letters to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the President
of the Security Council, such as those contained in
documents S/23396, S/24209, S/24961 and S/1994/900.
Libya repeated this declaration at various levels of
responsibility.

Secondly, Libya called for the convening of a special
session of the General Assembly to consider the question of
terrorism (A/46/840). Thirdly, Libya announced its
readiness to formulate an agreement, or bilateral or
multilateral agreements, which would define the methods
required to eradicate international terrorism; it expressed its
readiness to enter into bilateral or multilateral talks to
achieve this end (S/23672).

Fourthly, Libya announced that it would never allow
its territory, citizens, or institutions to be used in any form
to commit terrorist acts, directly or indirectly, and
expressed its readiness to punish severely those proved to
be involved in such acts (S/23417).

Fifthly, Libya further declared that it had no objection
to inquiries inside the Jamahiriya by the Secretary-General
or one of his representatives in order to refute or confirm
these claims, and committed itself to providing all
facilities and information which the Secretary-General or
his representative deemed necessary to uncover the truth
(S/23672 and S/23417).

Sixthly, throughout the last six years my country has
called on the Security Council and the Secretariat to send
a committee, an envoy or envoys to ascertain the fact that
my country had nothing to do with terrorism (S/26500, S/26760, S/ 1996/73, S/1996/609, S/1997/378, S/1997/503, S/1997/518, S/1997/549, S/1997/875, S/1997/880). Once
more, it reiterates those calls.

Libya has categorically denied any link to the tragic
Lockerbie incident and any knowledge by Libyan
authorities of the culprits. Libya has affirmed its
condemnation of international terrorism in all its forms
and expressed the sympathy and solidarity of the Libyan
people with the families of the victims of the incident
(document S/23226). Libya has immediately and
effectively responded to the requests of the British
Government relating to the Irish Republican Army. The
British Foreign Ministry notified the Security Council that
Libya's replies to its queries regarding the Irish
Republican Army were satisfactory and conformed to its
expectations (document S/1995/973). Of course, we all
know that the Irish Republican Army is present at 10
Downing Street and at Pennsylvania Avenue.

In addition to all that was stated with regard to the
claims, offers, proposals and initiatives which were made,
submitted or accepted by us, my country, out of its
respect for this Council and in response to its resolutions,
did the following:

First, it declared that, as a State, it had no objection
to the two suspects' presenting themselves before a just
and fair court, in a neutral country, and even urged the
two suspects to do so (documents S/24961, S/26313 and S/26523).

Secondly, it urged the two suspects to agree to
appear before a Scottish court in Scotland (documents S/26629 and S/26523). However, the two suspects
categorically refused to do so because their defence
lawyers advised them not to agree to a trial in the United
Kingdom or the United States, since they had already
been pre-condemned in those countries by the intensive
and concentrated media coverage of the issue and
statements made against them by officials of the two
countries. Such a situation does not provide an

 

environment suitable for a fair and just trial in accordance
with human rights. The lawyers for the two suspects
threatened to sue the Libyan State under local and
international laws if it surrendered the two suspects against
their will to either of the two States (document S/26629).
It is noteworthy that the team of lawyers defending the two
suspects includes two British subjects, one of whom is
Scottish, and two American citizens.

Thirdly, my country has asked that the two suspects be
accorded the same treatment accorded to American citizen
Timothy McVeigh, the accused in the Oklahoma City
bombing. Mr. McVeigh's trial venue was transferred from
the state where the crime was committed to another -
Colorado - because the environment of prior
condemnation by public opinion in the place where the
bombing occurred did not accord him his human right to a
fair trial. Libya recalls that human rights have no
nationality (S/1997/518).

What we have stated demonstrates that the sanctions
the Security Council adopted in accordance with its
resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993) constitute collective
punishment against the entire Libyan people as a result of
nothing more than a mere suspicion against two of its
citizens. As such, they represent a blatant violation of all
international human rights instruments, which stipulate that
punishment can be imposed only when an unlawful act has
been perpetrated, when it has been proved by a fully
independent and impartial investigation to have been
committed and when the perpetrators have been tried and
duly convicted by a fair and impartial court that considered
the case in a fair and just manner.

The two Libyan citizens are mere suspects who have
not been accused, interrogated, brought to trial or convicted
by a court of law. Therefore, the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council clearly violate article 10 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and article 14 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which
stipulates that an accused person is presumed innocent until
proven guilty, to say nothing of the present case, which is
based on no more than mere suspicion.

This is collective punishment against the entire Libyan
people in a blatant violation of paragraph 2 of article 1 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
which stipulates that

"In no case may a people be deprived of its own

means of subsistence." [General Assembly resolution

2200 (XXI), annex]
Thus, these sanctions violate the human rights of each
and every individual Libyan, which have been guaranteed
by the International Bill of Human Rights: the right of
every person to an adequate standard of living for himself
and his family; the right to be free from hunger; the right
of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health; the right to
education; the right to freedom of movement; and the
right to work.

As a result of my country's strength of argument,
sound reasoning, realism and flexibility in dealing with
this issue, and its adherence from the start to the United
Nations Charter, international conventions, agreements
and law, it has received strong and firm support from the
international community.

What is now left for the other party to say and what
is its reasoning?

The other party says the following: that Libya knows
what it has to do; that, so long as there are Security
Council resolutions, Libya must implement them; that the
problem is between Libya and the Security Council, and
not between Libya and the United States and the United
Kingdom; and that the two suspects would receive a just
trial in Scotland and observers could be invited to attend
the trial.

Allow me briefly to address these points. First,
Libya has done everything that it knows should be done.
As I mentioned earlier, Libya has responded to all
demands addressed to it and has endeavoured in every
way possible to find a solution to the dispute, despite the
fact that it has always been sure of the innocence of its
two citizens.

Secondly, as regards the implementation of the
resolutions that have already been adopted, and despite
our reservations about the manner in which they were
adopted - under the threat of armed military aggression;
despite the fact that they were adopted as an alternative
to such aggression in order to spare my country an evil
greater than the worst resolutions, which entail damages
less than those of a military aggression; and despite the
fact that they were adopted in violation of the Charter, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has responded in full to what
was asked of it in accordance with these resolutions, as I
have explained. Furthermore, all Security Council
resolutions which were implemented, were carried out
through negotiation and dialogue.

 

Thirdly, my country has affirmed, as confirmed by
reality, by the two Judgments of the International Court of
Justice, and as attested to by most members of the Council
and the United Nations at large, that the problem is
between my country and the United Kingdom and the
United States, and not between my country and the Security
Council. If their claims are true, why do they not leave the
matter to us, the Libyans, and to the Council to try to find
a solution to the question? And why do they continually
hinder the work of the Council whenever it tries to consider
it and find a solution? Why do they not observe the
provisions of the Charter and abstain in the voting, since
they are parties to the dispute? It is no justice at all that a
party to the dispute be adversary, judge and jury at the
same time through its membership in the Security Council
and its well-known privileges in that Council, where the
parties to the dispute act in violation and contradiction of
Articles 27, 33 and 36 of the United Nations Charter.

Libya's observance of the Charter in all phases of this
question confirms the extent of its dedication to and respect
for the United Nations and all its organs, including the
Security Council, and for international law. It also shows
who does not respect the United Nations or its Security
Council, Charter and covenants, and works by every means
to manipulate them as tools in the service of their foreign
policy, at the expense of the interests of the international
community, and in violation of international law.

Fourthly, Libya has never cast doubt on the Scottish
judiciary or Scottish law. It even sent an official letter to
the Security Council in July 1997 confirming its
appreciation of the deep-rooted history of Scottish law and
judiciary (document S/1997/518). Moreover, Libya has
urged the two Libyan suspects to appear before that
judiciary. It has even accepted a trial for the two at the
International Court of Justice in The Hague by Scottish
judges, under Scottish law (document S/26523).

What was said about Scotland in the letters sent to the
Security Council by the attorneys for the two suspects
relates to the venue and has nothing to do with the judges
or the law: Scotland offers a climate which would not be
conducive to a just and fair trial in view of the media
campaign and the statements of government officials
(S/26629).

In this respect, we would recall that the trial of
Timothy McVeigh was transferred from Oklahoma City to
Denver, Colorado, not because of any challenge to the
fairness of the judiciary or to the law in Oklahoma but
because the place in which the crime was committed no
longer provided the conditions needed for due process and
a fair trial for the accused. Also, we should not forget that
the case of the two Libyans is one of suspicion only. As
for the observers, they would be mere spectators, like
other spectators who watch a play or a movie, in that they
cannot interfere in or influence its events or scenes. Even
if such spectators have views, their views would only be
like those of a play or movie critic.

After a long wait, the International Court of Justice,
to which we resorted on 3 March 1992, rendered its
Judgments against the other parties, which had challenged
its jurisdiction. The two Judgments of the Court, which
were rendered on Friday, 27 February 1998, contain
principles relating to basic questions which can be
summarized as follows: that there is a dispute between the
parties in this case on the interpretation and application of
the Montreal Convention of 23 September 1971; that the
Court has jurisdiction, on the basis of article 14,
paragraph 1, of the Convention; and that the requests of
the Jamahiriya are admissible notwithstanding Security
Council resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993). On that
basis, the Court rejected the objections to inadmissibility
submitted by the United Kingdom and the United States
of America. The Court also rejected the objection that the
Libyan requests should be considered invalid and
irrelevant following the adoption of the above-mentioned
Security Council resolutions: the objection was immaterial
in the circumstances of the case.

There is no denying that a new situation has arisen
since the issuance of these two Judgments by the Court,
which should be binding for all United Nations organs
and their members given that, under Article 92 of the
Charter, the Court is the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations.
First, each Member of the United Nations should
comply with the judgments of the Court in any case to
which it is a party, pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article 94
of the Charter. Thus, the United Kingdom and the United
States should be bound by the Court's decisions regarding
their dispute with Libya over the interpretation and
application of the 1971 Montreal Convention Libya; that
the Court has jurisdiction in considering that dispute; and
that the Security Council resolutions in question have no
effect on the Libyan demands.

Secondly, on the other hand, a decision of the Court
is binding on the parties in respect of the particular case
on which the decision made, in accordance with Article

 

59 of the Statute of the Court. Under Article 60 of the
Statute, a judgment is final and without appeal.

Thirdly, the Security Council may, if it deems
necessary, make recommendations or decide upon measures
to be taken to give effect to a judgment, in accordance with
Article 94, paragraph 2, of the Charter. This means that
even though both the Charter and the Statute confirm that
each party to a dispute must comply with the decision of
the Court, the Charter also gives the Security Council the
power to adopt a resolution containing such measures as it
deems necessary to give effect to a judgment, that is, to
ensure that a judgment is binding on all Members of the
United Nations in respect of the dispute on which the
judgment was rendered.

In the light of these considerations, and in application
of the legal norms to which I have referred, the following
conclusions can be drawn.

First, the Lockerbie matter is a legal dispute between
Libya, on the one hand, and the United States and the
United Kingdom, on the other. The Court has jurisdiction
over that dispute in accordance with the Charter and the
Statute of the Court. This being the case, the parties to the
dispute must comply with the two Judgments rendered by
the Court in that respect. None of them may take unilateral
or multilateral measures except through the Court. Since
they are parties to the dispute, they must abstain in the
voting on any decision or recommendation relating to it, in
accordance with Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter.

Secondly, Members of the United Nations, parties to
the Statute of the International Court of Justice, are bound
by the provisions of the Charter relating to the Court and
by the provisions of the Statute of that Court, especially
with regard to the finality of the Court's judgments and
their binding character on all parties to a dispute.
Thirdly, the Security Council must, by virtue of the
provisions of the Charter, make the recommendations and
take the measures needed to give effect to a judgment,
whether or not it is requested to do so.

Fourthly, Libya, as a party to the dispute, has from the
beginning taken all the steps needed to resolve it peacefully
and has implemented all requests by international
organizations, including the Security Council, in relation to
it, except for those relating to the interpretation and
application of the 1971 Montreal Convention, on which it
resorted to the Court, as provided in Article 33 of the
Charter and article 14, paragraph 1, of the Convention,
and was vindicated by the Court.

Fifthly, the sanctions provided for in Security
Council resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993) have
become irrelevant and moot since the Court has accepted
jurisdiction in the matter on which the resolutions were
based.

It is an established fact that Libya was the first to
resort to the Court. The last two decades have witnessed
several occasions on which Libya resorted to the Court in
observance of the norms of international law and the
Charter, in connection with the settlement of disputes by
peaceful means and in accordance with the Statute of the
Court and its rules of procedure. The judgments rendered
by the Court never faced any difficulty or obstacles in
their implementation. This behaviour has resulted in the
stability of Libya's international relations, especially with
neighbouring countries. When Libya resorted to the Court
in the Lockerbie matter, it did so in implementation of a
policy based on respect for the norms of international
law, the Charter and the Statute of the Court, in spite of
the injustice which was inflicted upon it and its
neighbours by the unjust Security Council resolutions.

In the light of the above considerations relating to
the background of the dispute, the Judgments of the Court
open up prospects for achieving the basic purposes of the
United Nations in respect of acting in accordance with the
principles of law, justice and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. These are the objectives which led, more than
50 years ago, to the inclusion in the Charter of the
provisions relating to the establishment of the Court.

The Judgments of the Court enhance the initiatives
of all the regional organizations concerned to achieve a
just solution to a dispute whose legal character is very
clear, in respect of which there is an international
Convention, applicable to all parties to the dispute without
exception, which provides the right framework for the
settlement of the dispute.

Implementation of the Judgments of the Court,
which are final and binding, as supported by the
provisions of the Charter and the resolutions of the
regional organizations concerned, makes it incumbent on
the parties to the dispute and on members of the Security
Council - which must act in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations and the
provisions of the Charter in order for the Council's
decisions to be acceptable and binding - to deal with the

 

question on the basis of a new vision for handling the
dispute and its economic and humanitarian consequences,
according to which, especially, the resolutions of the
Security Council with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security are of a temporary and not
an indefinite nature.

Sanctions have been imposed on Libya since 1992
within a framework and in accordance with a description of
the dispute that were found by the principal judicial arm of
the United Nations to be invalid. Since 1992 Libya's point
of view has been that the disputes between it and the
United States and the United Kingdom are legal disputes,
and that application of the provisions of Article 36,
paragraph 3, of the Charter make it incumbent on the
Security Council in making its recommendations, as in
resolution 731 (1992), to take into consideration the fact
that legal disputes should be referred by the parties to the
International Court of Justice. The Court has rendered its
decision to this effect, that the Court has jurisdiction in that
dispute and that Libya's application in this respect is
acceptable to the Court.

For the sake of fruitful cooperation between the Court
and the Security Council, the Council must take the
necessary measures to give effect to the two Judgments
rendered by the Court on 27 February 1998.

First, the Council should promptly and urgently refrain
from renewing the sanctions imposed on the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya pursuant to resolutions 748 (1992) and 883
(1993).

Secondly, those two resolutions should be rescinded
insofar as they relate to the imposition of sanctions on the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

Thirdly, the two cases before the International Court
of Justice should be considered the only peaceful means for
settling the dispute between the parties, and the Council
should call on them not to take any unilateral or multilateral
measures until the Court renders its final judgment.
Fourthly, as an interim measure, the Council should
suspend implementation of the two resolutions insofar as
they relate to the sanctions imposed against the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.

The continued failure to suspend sanctions imposed on
a whole people, indeed on the peoples of the entire region,
for six years on the basis of a resolution which the Court
has viewed as non-binding in respect of legal disputes -
in which the Council is not competent - and on the basis
of an erroneous procedure comes close to violating the
1948 genocide treaty. We are confident that everybody
will abstain from participating in this violation of the law
in this decade of respecting the law in relations between
peoples.

Libya believes that these two Judgments by the
International Court of Justice pave the way for a
definitive settlement of the Lockerbie dispute and hereby
declares once more its continued acceptance of the
initiatives of international forums, including the League
of Arab States, the Organization of African Unity, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, addressed to the
Security Council with regard to settling the dispute and
about which the Council was periodically informed, with
a view to ensuring the effective implementation of
international and national law. Libya most emphatically
reasserts before the Security Council and the entire world
that it was not responsible for the tragic destruction of
Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie and the horrendous
loss of human life that resulted.

It is noteworthy that since the occurrence of the
tragic event over Lockerbie, many books, articles and
investigative reports have been issued, and many audio-
visual recordings presented whose sources are both
American and British which absolved Libya from
responsibility for that event. The majority of those who
prepared and published this material were from the United
States and Britain. If the United States and the United
Kingdom really believe in good faith that they actually
possess circumstantial evidence of Libya's link to the
incident, then those two States are obligated to bring their
so-called evidence to the International Court of Justice, in
accordance with the binding rules of international law and
the normal practice for resolving serious legal disputes
between sovereign and civilized States.

I should like to state publicly before the Council that
my country was the first to come to the Security Council,
upon the announcement of the indictment against its
citizens on 16 November 1991 - more than a month
before the other parties contacted the Council, on 20
December 1991. Today, my country comes to the Council
once again to ask for the implementation of the judgment
of the Court. We do that out of respect for the Council
and our keenness to preserve its credibility. We are
hopeful that right will be established, the law upheld and
the causes of the bitter suffering of our people eliminated,
making it possible to get closer to a day when the

 

suffering of the families of the victims of the tragic incident
would end, too.

Before all present, my country would like to confirm
that it still upholds the principles and consistent position it
declared upon the evacuation of the military forces of both
the United States of America and the United Kingdom from
its territory in 1970, when we considered that a new page
had been opened in our relations with both countries, and
that we no longer had any problems with either of them. At
that time, we called upon them to enter with us into an
equal relationship based on mutual respect, non-interference
in internal affairs and cooperation on an equal footing. We
have not severed our relations with them. They did that
unilaterally for no genuine reason. We have not interrupted
our cooperation with them. They did so unilaterally without
any real reason.

Today we renew our call to them to turn over a page
that is no longer of any benefit to either of us, and open a
new page in which we would exchange benefits, not
accusations, within the framework of normal political and
economic relations characterized by dialogue, not discord,
and cooperation, not boycott.

We urge the Security Council to embark on a drastic
review of the decisions it took in very critical
circumstances against my country, taking into consideration
what I have said in this statement and what the international
community has incessantly called for - the suspension of
the resolutions referred to.

We pray to God to help us all in obeying what he said
in the Holy Koran:

"We made you into nations and tribes, that ye may
know each other The most honoured of you in the
sight of Allah is (he who is) the most righteous of
you." [The Holy Koran, IL:13]

May the peace and blessings of God be upon you.

The President: I thank the Secretary of the General

People's Committee for Foreign Liaison and International
Cooperation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for the kind
words he addressed to me.


