Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate.
Allow me to focus on three aspects of the report
(S/2009/304) that we are discussing today.

First, we welcome the exemplary consultation
process for this report. That way of proceeding well
illustrates the potential role of the Peacebuilding
Support Office as a catalyst. To be effective, the Office
should play that role in conjunction with strong
leadership of the Secretary-General. The Security
Council has an important role to play in supporting that
combination by recognizing the functions of the two
actors and by supporting them. In mission management
in particular, we invite the Council to increase its
consultation of the Peacebuilding Commission, whose
potential asset is its ability to mobilize the skills of a
wide range of actors.

We support the proposal that the Chairs of the
country-specific meetings of the Peacebuilding
Commission be invited to participate in the work of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council concerning
the countries in question. Before us, we have specific
examples of the challenges of coherence, in the reports
on mediation and on peacebuilding and in the New
Horizon non-paper on peacekeeping. To head up those
efforts concerning the crucial and complementary
aspects of the United Nations system, we would like to
see a note by the Secretary-General that highlights
their complementarity and gives us an overview of the
various available financial instruments. Only if the
complementarity of instruments and the transparency
of financial flows are considerably improved will there
be more effective, flexible and predictable funding for
peacebuilding.
Secondly, the report stresses the need to develop
national and regional capacities and the skills of the
senior managers and of the teams deployed on the
ground. We welcome those recommendations, and my
country is willing to share the experience acquired
through our own pools of national experts.

The credibility and the effectiveness of the
United Nations depend above all on the skills of its
permanent staff and on a cross-cutting awareness of
conflict issues within the various institutions of the
United Nations system. Peacebuilding is not the
exclusive preserve of any one body, but is the
responsibility of all actors under the active leadership
of the Secretary-General.

Thirdly, the United Nations and the World Bank,
as well as our capitals, must provide the personnel in
the field with the best possible support by establishing
a more effective, coherent and coordinated support
system. The report shows us that there are already a
number of instruments that favour a joint approach,
such as, for example, the Post-Conflict Needs
Assessment or integrated task forces. We must ensure
the effective use of those instruments and not multiply
the reporting and the number of planning and
monitoring instruments. That effort must be made
jointly with the development banks, regional
organizations and the donor community.

We are convinced of the importance of qualified
leadership in the countries concerned, supported by an
able team. In that regard, we would like the funds,
programmes and specialized agencies to recognize
strengthened authority of the Resident Coordinator vis-
a-vis the United Nations country team, particularly
when the Coordinator holds the post of Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We propose
that the Chief Executives Board make a decision in that
regard.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing the
importance of measuring all improvements in
processes and institutions by their positive impact in
the field.

