Mr. Gama (Portugal) (spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): Africa has been a major
presence on the agenda of the Security Council. The
reasons for the attention given by this body to African
affairs are well known. Portugal, as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, has sought to contribute
to a constructive and productive debate on African
problems. In this context, we are always ready to support
initiatives that might, in an innovative manner, frame the
work of the Council in this area.

We believe that a fresh start is essential in the way
the international community deals with issues concerning
the African continent. Exceptional circumstances, such as
those that today prevail in various African countries,
require imaginative and effective answers from all of us.

We have therefore supported since the beginning the
excellent initiative of the United States to promote a
debate in this format and with this objective in mind. It
is a timely debate, and it constitutes a clear sign of the
interest of the United Nations in contributing decisively
to the maintenance of peace and security in Africa. The
welcome presence among us of the Chairman and the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) is a clear indication of the importance of this
initiative. I also salute the United Nations Secretary-
General, whose marked concern for Africa has been
demonstrated in a number of concrete cases.

The Portuguese Government welcomes this meeting
of the Security Council on the understanding that it is not
an end in itself. Many words have been spoken about the
big challenges that are faced by the African continent, but
these have not always been translated into practical
action. The report and the recommendations that are today
being requested from the United Nations Secretary-
General will certainly be a step in the right direction.

Strengthening the ties that bind Portugal and Africa
is one of the priorities of Portuguese foreign policy. I
would like to recall some of the initiatives that reflect this
commitment. In the first place, Portugal submitted to its
partners in the European Union a proposal for the holding
of a Euro-African summit, aimed at establishing, for the
first time, a political dialogue at the very highest level

 

between the two continents. The main goal is to place
Africa at the top of the international agenda, as a continent
whose dimensions and economic potential deserve a new
model of relations. At the European Council meeting in
Amsterdam, which took place last June, it was agreed that
the summit should take place by the year 2000, and talks
are starting with our African partners on that subject.

Portugal has been participating in several United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa through an active
presence with the United Nations Operation in Mozambique
(ONUMOZ), the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM), the United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola (MONUA) and the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO).

We have also been allocating considerable resources
to aid development in various African countries, and we
have argued in international forums that funds should be
provided commensurate with the demands of the current
economic situation in Africa.

Portugal jointly founded the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries with Angola, Cape Verde,
Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe and,
across the Atlantic, Brazil. This Community of 200 million
people will increase our cooperation and will establish
mechanisms of coordination and diplomatic consultation in
areas of common interest, which include, naturally and
prominently, those relating to Africa. In this context, the
seven countries are currently exploring ways to build on
their own experiences so as to enable them to contribute to
peace actions in Africa.

We know that the difficulties with which various
African countries are grappling can ultimately be overcome,
carefully and realistically. In Africa, as elsewhere,
persistence pays. We sincerely believe that Africans will
find the path to political stability and social and economic
development, by way of democracy, the rule of law and the
respect for human rights.

We also believe that one of the main priorities of the
international community should be to support initiatives
aimed at preventing emerging conflicts in Africa, as well as
the creation of mechanisms that, would establish the
conditions necessary for their peaceful and negotiated
resolution at a more advanced stage. The main elements
that should orient our action in this area are clear.

First, Portugal believes that it is indispensable to have
the active association of African countries - and their
representative organizations, above all the OAU - in the
development of doctrine and concepts on which those
initiatives are based and in the implementation of those
mechanisms. In this context, we consider that the concept
of "African ownership" is particularly suitable; however,
it should be made clear that this concept cannot be seen
as a pretext for disengagement from Africa on the part of
the international community. On the contrary, the aim is
to help African countries acquire the capacities to play a
more effective role in the resolution of their own
problems, avoiding the recourse to external solutions,
which have often brought to bear negative effects.

Secondly, we advocate that the Security Council
continue to exercise fully its responsibilities under the
United Nations Charter, with regard to peacekeeping and
other operations, and in cooperation with other United
Nations organs and agencies.

Thirdly, we would like to widen this debate on
African security, which has centred excessively on
technical and operational aspects, to include questions
related to peace-building.

Indeed, a formal peace, guaranteed by military
forces, should be complemented by conditions aimed at
sustaining a material peace, freely accepted by the
interested parties. As the Secretary-General pointed out in
his opening statement to the fifty-second General
Assembly:

"We aspire to a United Nations that can act with
greater unity of purpose, coherence of efforts and
responsiveness in pursuit of peace and progress".
(See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 5th meeting.)

A final word to express the sincere hope of the
Portuguese Government that the serious conflicts and
disputes which still divide African countries will shortly
be resolved, through dialogue and development. In this
way, an end may be brought to the serious humanitarian
crises that plague some parts of the continent. As a
member of the Security Council, and as a country which
has in Africa hundreds of thousands of its countrymen,
Portugal will not fail to help Africa and Africans reach
that objective.

