Mr. Powles (New Zealand): May I begin, Sir, by
congratulating you on your decision to hold this open
debate on a subject which remains one of most important
facing Member States. Let me say also that it is a particular
pleasure to appear under your presidency, given the close
collaboration, going back many years, between our two
delegations on Security-Council-related matters.
Like others, we welcomed very much the thoughtful
contributions of the Deputy Secretary-General and of Ms.
Bertini at the outset of the debate this morning.

Three weeks ago in this Chamber many of us
watched with astonishment videotaped testimony from a
former UNITA guerrilla to the effect that the shooting
down of two United Nations aircraft in Angola in
December 1998 and in January 1999 had been deliberately
ordered. That video recording was, of course, part of the
report made by Ambassador Fowler to the Council on his
visit to Angola in his capacity as Chairman of the
Committee established under Security Council resolution
864 (1993).

The two C-l30 aircraft were carrying a total of 23
staff of the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola.
The premeditated destruction of those aircraft would be one
of the most flagrant crimes against this Organization and its
personnel ever recorded. According to the evidence
presented on the videotape, the soldier who fired the missile
on each occasion was promoted as a result. We hope that
the evidence brought back by Ambassador Fowler is
thoroughly studied. It is essential that the perpetrators be
brought to justice, however long it takes. There can be no
impunity for crimes of such a nature.

In recent months Member States have also endured
the murders of staff members of the United Nations
Children's Fund and the World Food Programme in
Burundi and the savage death of a United Nations official
in a public place in Pristina, Kosovo.

The Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel, which my own country and
Ukraine had a lead role in developing in 1994 and which,
of course, New Zealand ratified some time ago, offers a
framework for dealing with some of these crimes. But the
protections offered by that instrument will remain
fragmented in their application until many more States
have become party to it. Furthermore, perhaps its scope
does not go far enough. The categories of United Nations
operation that the Convention covers are somewhat
narrow. Recent examples of brutal violence in East Timor
against personnel of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor illustrate the scope for possible broadening of the
United Nations operations covered. Additionally, the
Convention, crucially important as it is, does not
accommodate humanitarian workers not specifically tied
into a United Nations operation. This currently poorly
protected group is in need of strengthened protection
under international law. We are sympathetic to the
elaboration of a protocol to extend the range of protection
afforded by the Convention.
In this context, the inclusion of deliberate attacks
on personnel involved in a humanitarian situation or
peacekeeping mission in the Rome Statute as a war crime
over which the International Criminal Court will have
jurisdiction is a welcome step forward and an
acknowledgement of the seriousness of the plight faced
by personnel in these situations. We hope that the Court
will provide an effective forum for enforcing those
protections which currently exist under international
humanitarian law, and that it will contribute towards
ending the impunity enjoyed by perpetrators of such
attacks in the past.

There is a particular category of United Nations
staff to whose needs I wish to draw attention today. They
are those staff who are often locally recruited for a United
Nations mission in a wide range of disciplines, depending
on the needs of the particular mission, and include
interpreters, drivers, clerks, cleaners and others. Recent
experience in East Timor, in particular, showed that such

 

people can become principal targets for violence because of
their association with the United Nations. We believe that
more must be done to ensure their protection, including
their better integration into security planning for missions.

In conclusion, we are glad the Council is seized once
again of this important issue, and we look forward to solid
outcomes from this debate.

