Mr. Ulibarri (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica
attaches great importance to this debate. We thank the
United States for convening it, and Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson and the four invited journalists
for their presentations. The Security Council can derive
great benefit from the knowledge and experience of
professionals like them and other members of civil
society. We urge the Council to strengthen this kind of
interaction.

When journalists and other media professionals
work in situations of conflict, they not only face the
collateral risks arising therefrom, but are increasingly
subject to deliberate aggression by the warring parties,
be they despotic regimes, sectarian groups, terrorists
or the perpetrators of organized crime. Such aggression
frequently extends to their information sources and to
the integrity and privacy of their communications.

Violence against journalists does not aim solely
at impeding their individual ability to exercise the
right to freedom of expression that they share with
all citizens. The abuse, kidnapping, torture or murder
of journalists seeks above all to hinder society from
accessing independent information about conflicts
or other realities that some may wish to keep hidden.
Journalists are also often targeted in a form of revenge
designed to make an example of them in order to instil
fear in other journalists and in the civilian population
as a whole - a perverse method of represson that is
both reactive and pre-emptive.

The greater and more complex are the conflicts,
the greater is the need for external voices capable of
providing serious, rigorous information, led by strong
ethical and quality standards. This is the vital social
task of professional journalists and media, particularly
in situations that, by their very nature, threaten
international peace and security. The international
community therefore has the responsibility to protect
journalists and hold their aggressors accountable.
That is why the Security Council should pursue its
involvement in this issue. The responsibility also
extends to the entire United Nations system and, in
particular, to its Member States.

In undertaking this task, we already rely on
important support tools. One of the most important
such tools is the promotion of respect and achievement
of international humanitarian law regarding the
protection of civilians in international armed conflicts
or internal conflicts. That includes the specific norm
of Additional Protocol I of the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 regarding methods of protecting journalists.
The Security Council's resolutions on the protection
of civilians - particularly resolution 1738 (2006)
regarding the protection of j ournalists - and paragraph
16 of the presidential statement contained in document
S/PRST/2013/2, add important guidelines. Additionally,
the parameters found in regulations and resolutions
relative to the protection of humanitarian assistance
personnel should be extended to journalists.

From a more operational perspective, the
implementation strategy and national application of
the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity is of particular
importance. We highlight the role of UNESCO in
designing and implementing these initiatives.

Furthermore, the international community must
strive even harder to develop national capacities to
guarantee accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights. It must endeavour
to improve security andjustice, and to consistently recur
to international justice when necessary. In addition, a
permanent incentive should exist to support the efforts
of professional organizations and other civil society
entities that promote the protection of journalists, their
sources and communications.
Costa Rica is committed to that cause. In line
with this commitment, from 2 to 4 May our country
hosted UNESCO's celebration of World Press Freedom
Day, which included the international conference
"Speak without Risk: For the safe exercise of freedom
of expression in all media". Today's debate is along
the same lines, but there is much more to do, and we
should maintain our efforts in order to continue moving
forward.

