Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
Allow me also to endorse the words you addressed to
the President for the month of May, Ambassador Wang
Yingfan.

We thank Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte for the
briefing she has just given us, which demonstrates
again the scope of the challenges and demands facing
her Office. I wish to express my country's support for
her exemplary work.

This is the second opportunity the Council has
had to hear a report from Ms. Del Ponte, a little more
than six months following the previous report. We
believe that the regular receipt of reports is a useful
resource for examining the position of the Council
regarding the jurisdictional bodies that it has
established. This approach must be pursued so that we
can continue to benefit regularly from the experiences
shared and the recommendations for finding solutions
to the problems raised.

Argentina welcomed the establishment of the two
tribunals. Despite the initial scepticism of some, today
both institutions are operational and are showing that
they can play an important role in our efforts to combat
violence and impunity and in consolidating
international peace and security. These institutions
have proved to be an innovative tool for the
international community, contributing to great
advances in international law. It is obvious that the
work of both Tribunals has great importance for the
future work of the International Criminal Court. Each
problem that the Tribunals face and each step forward
or backward, undoubtedly will also be a valuable
precedent for the Court. Their rules of procedure and
evidence, for example, have been useful in preparing
the rules of the Criminal Court, which are soon to be
defined.

The Rwanda and Yugoslavia Tribunals and the
Office of the Prosecutor have grown and matured and
have further consolidated. They nevertheless continue
to face a variety of problems that have been considered
thoroughly and well in the complete report provided by
the Expert Group assessing the functioning of both
Tribunals, submitted last November to the General
Assembly in document A/54/634. This is not the forum
or the occasion to consider in detail those
recommendations, but we cannot fail to note that the
comments and suggestions clearly describe the various
problems being faced.

Today, in the Security Council, we nonetheless
must note with growing alarm that our main concern
continues to be ensuring full cooperation from the
Member States of the United Nations so that the
decisions of these two Tribunals can be implemented.
The reticence of Governments to provide support to the
Tribunal is a negative signal that could undermine the
efforts of the international community. This negative
stance is not new, and many of the statements heard in
previous debates in the Council have sounded the
alarm. Although some progress has been made since
then, resistance and lack of cooperation are ongoing,
and this is a matter of concern to us.

My delegation regrets that once again we have to
appeal to States to cooperate with the Rwanda and
Yugoslavia Tribunals. We particularly regret the
attitude of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. On the
other hand, we welcome the comments made by Ms.
Del Ponte regarding the positive attitude of the new
Government of Croatia and the cooperative attitude of
the Government of Rwanda. This cooperation is not
optional, to be carried out or not at one's own
discretion. It is a legal obligation, imposed by the
Security Council, and the very possibility of
administering justice depends on it, since the Tribunals
do not have their own coercive mechanism to enable
them to make their decisions effective. Non-
compliance with the obligation to cooperate is a
violation of their statutes and undermines the objective
for which the Tribunals were established. The Security
Council must not remain silent in the face of this
situation and it may well need to take decisions.

The Security Council must help the Tribunals and
the Prosecutor to carry out their duties, as the main
problems that they are facing continue to involve
factors over which those bodies have little or no
control. That is the responsibility of the Council, in
particular on this occasion.

The consolidation phase is behind us. It is clear
now that, before planning the creation of new tools or
furthering institutional reform, we need to provide the
means for them to carry out their tasks.

We are aware that the Tribunals need sufficient
and appropriate human and material resources to carry
out their work effectively at all stages. In this
connection, we would like to ask what progress has
been made regarding the vacancy rate in the Office of
Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for Rwanda as
compared to last year. What are the future perspectives
and what are the results of the training programmes for
new staff? We would also like to ask Ms. Del Ponte for
a few additional comments on the effectiveness of the
administrative support system, in particular as regards
the Tribunal for Rwanda's coordination with the
defence and the prosecution, on delays due to
translation problems, on availability of chambers and
on the abundance of pre-trial judicial questions.

