Mr. Rinkevics (Latvia): First of all, I warmly
congratulate Poland for presiding over the Security
Council this month and for organizing this open debate
on a very important topic.
My remarks will focus on three areas: first,
the crucial importance of international law in the
maintenance of peace and security; secondly, the
responsibility of the Security Council in that regard;
and, thirdly, upholding accountability for breaches of
international law.

Latvia has always been a staunch supporter of
international law and a promoter of the principles
of democracy, human rights and the rule of law.
Those principles are fundamental to maintaining an
international order based on the predictability, stability
and security of States. By promoting international law,
Latvia promotes our foreign policy values and interests,
as well as sustainable security. We are convinced that
the relations between States must be based on law,
not force.

The Security Council, as the main guarantor of
international peace and security, has a particular
responsibility, as its actions have implications with
respect to international law. The Council has a special
role in preventing conflicts, acts of aggression and
mass atrocities. The Council has a special role in
seeking solutions to ongoing crises and conflicts. It has
not always lived up to its responsibility. The special
privilege of veto power of the permanent members of
the Council is also a responsibility - it must be used
in the interests of common peace and security, and not
when mass atrocity crimes are committed. A failure
to implement its own resolutions is also an issue that
needs more attention.

In the case of Syria, the failure of the Council to
prevent or stop the conflict and end impunity for the
mass atrocities that have taken place has resulted in an
enormous human cost. The polarization of the Council,
including the use of the veto to block any meaningful
action, has delayed the chances for reaching a viable
political solution in Syria. Latvia strongly condemns the
use of chemical weapons, which is a flagrant violation
of international law and Security Council resolutions.
Such violations must be thoroughly investigated, and
the approach to them must be proactive.

The principle of territorial integrity is a key
element of the international legal order, enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. Russia's annexation
of Ukrainian Crimea and its covert and overt actions in
eastern Ukraine violate that fundamental principle. We
have witnessed similar acts by Russia in Georgia. We
need a rules-based system so that powerful countries do
not annex parts of other countries, or whole countries,
on false pretexts. We must return to the rules-based
security order. A peaceful resolution of the conflict
in Ukraine that respects Ukraine's independence and
territorial integrity must be a priority. The international
community must continue to seek solutions to the
protracted conflicts in Europe.

Accountability for grave violations of international
law is necessary for the credibility of the whole
international system. Latvia has ratified the Kampala
Amendments to the Rome Statute on the crime of
aggression and is committed to further supporting
the work of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Referrals by the Security Council to the ICC are
necessary when there is evidence that atrocity crimes
are being committed with impunity. International law
will prevail only if it is rigorously implemented by the
international community, and we all should all strive
to do that.

