Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to extend my congratulations to
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
wish you every success in your endeavour. I would also
like to express our thanks to the delegation of Syria for
its effective and able presidency of the Council last
month. I also take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador Fayssal Mekdad on his appointment as
Permanent Representative of Syria to the United
Nations.

The crux of the Arab-Israeli conflict is Israel's
continued occupation of Arab territories and its
blocking of all efforts to achieve a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. Israel continues to pursue
that policy despite the calls of the international
community, the resolutions of the Security Council and
the Arab peace initiative adopted at the 2002 Beirut
Summit, which was unanimously welcomed by the
Security Council but rejected by Israel.

After 50 years of war and violence, when will the
Government of Israel be persuaded that a policy of war,
violence and force will not solve the question of the
Middle East? When will it be persuaded that peace
negotiations and the implementation of the resolutions
of international legality are the only way for Israel, the
State of Palestine and all other States of the region to
live in peace, security and stability? Israel's attempt to
recast the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in the optic of the
war against terrorism is a failed and ridiculous effort
deceiving no one. The Palestinian people are the
victims of Israel's arbitrary practices. The crux of the
conflict is Israel's continued occupation of the
Palestinian territories.

Mr. Roed-Larsen has painted a bleak picture of
the situation of the Palestinian people as a result of the
occupation and the practices of the Israeli forces. He
once again portrayed the bleak future of the prospects
of peace in the region, owing to Israeli intransigence.
Israel has put up all kinds of obstacles to the
implementation of the road map. Now it continues to
establish settlements and construct an expansionist
wall, which will not provide security for the Israelis.
Rather, it puts the Palestinian people in an enormous
jail.

Ending the Israeli occupation and establishing a
just peace is the only way to provide security for the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples alike. Israel's violation
of international humanitarian law and of the Geneva
Conventions has become routine, as if it were of no
concern to anyone in the international community.
Israel has even gone so far as to adopt an official
decision in principle to expel President Arafat, the
elected President of the Palestinian people, to threaten
his safety and his life. That is an illegal and immoral
decision, and any attack on the Palestinian President is
an attack on the Palestinian people as a whole. Israel
knows that attacking him will not lead to peace or
security, but rather will fan the flames of violence and
will increase the wrath of the Palestinian people.

How can the Security Council stand idly by, in
full view of Israel's flagrant defiance of the
international community? We call upon the Council to
take a clear stand that will put an end to Israel's
flouting of moral values and of international laws and
that will compel it to return to the path of peace by
implementing the road map and withdrawing from all
occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan
and the Sheba'a Farms in Lebanon, according to the
Arab peace initiative and in order to achieve a just and
lasting solution in the region.

