Mr. Ihsanoglu: It gives me great pleasure to
address this unique and much-needed meeting on
behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
which encompasses 57 countries.

We are grateful to the Foreign Minister of Greece
for having taken the initiative of bringing us together
to exchange views on the very important subject of
international peace and security.

I should like also to highlight the importance of
the ideas contained in the letter dated 6 September
prepared by the Permanent Representative of Greece,
and I would like to highlight the paragraph concerning
the importance of revising the use of the terminology
concerning regional and subregional organizations.

I would like also to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General for the excellent report before us.

Today, as we try from an analytical perspective to
understand the problems of the world, of which quite a
number involve the Muslim world, we see that those
problems continue to worsen and that the scope of the
crises is widening. It seems that the monodimensional
approach to tackling crises is leading to further

complexities. When problems are approached solely
from the angle of security and solutions are sought
only through military means, those problems cannot be
solved in a lasting and comprehensive manner. On the
contrary, they become harder to solve. Short cuts and
short-term solutions further complicate the problems
and increase their vehemence.

Therefore, if we support the effective, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful settlement of crises, the
need arises for a paradigm shift in our approaches.
That requires us to understand that political grievances,
backwardness, the underdeveloped situation of
societies and their need for good governance are the
underlying reasons for the problems we are trying to
solve.

When we are resolved to act to settle disputes and
conflicts; when sound measures are taken by the
international community by upholding respect for
international legitimacy; and when we focus on long-
term prospects with patience and wisdom instead of
resorting to the logic of intervention, we will move
towards a more stable, secure and developed world
where cooperation and dialogue win out over
unilateralism and division.

For its part, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC), in cooperation with the
international community, is promoting moderation,
modernization and development within the Islamic
world. Also, with a new emphasis on development
issues, it is aligning its 10-year programme of action,
which was adopted at the last OIC extraordinary
summit in Mecca in December 2005, with the
Millennium Development Goals of the United Nations.
The programme of action includes the OIC's proactive
involvement in all stages of conflict management, as
well as combating international terrorism. I am pleased
to inform the Council that the OIC has taken several
initiatives related to various conflict situations,
including in Iraq, Somalia, the Sudan, Palestine,
Lebanon and elsewhere.

In the field of development and peacebuilding,
the OIC and its specialized organ, the Islamic
Development Bank (IDB), are playing an active and
constructive role in various places. The OIC and IDB
can closely coordinate with the recently established
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission in
achieving common objectives, starting particularly
in Sierra Leone, where the OIC Trust Fund for
Reconstruction, Rehabilitation and Humanitarian
Assistance, as well as the IDB, are actively
undertaking numerous projects. The OIC stands ready
to further cooperate with the United Nations and all
other international, intergovernmental, regional and
transnational organizations with a View to making the
maximum possible contribution to world peace and
security.

I should like to emphasize here the importance of
the political engagement in and support of the world's
leaders for dialogue, mutual recognition, respect and
cooperation among the representatives of cultures,
civilizations and religions, as that issue has gained in
importance recently due to its implications for and
repercussions on international peace and security.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the need to
reinvigorate the time-tested doctrine of multilateralism
to promote international peace and security. It is only
through cooperation on an equal, equitable and just
basis that the objectives of international peace and
security, as well as of social and economic
development, can be achieved.

