Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

The Council has clearly defined that sustaining
peace involves all stages of the conflict cycle and should
flow through all three pillars of the United Nations
engagement. Today, we are faced with a rising number
of violent conflicts around the world. Crisis situations
tend to last longer, are driving human insecurity
on a vast scale, have become increasingly complex
and volatile, and most of them take place in contexts
that have experienced conflict before. The failure to
sustain peace is at the heart of the question calling for
unprecedented international cooperation and action.

Tackling rising global insecurity is a pressing
imperative. How do we craft a more coherent and more
effective response across the conflict continuum? How
do we mainstream sustaining peace across the United
Nations action, including its peacekeeping operations?

First, our priority should be to pursue political
solutions. The peace and security reviews of 2015 have
underlined that conflict prevention and resolution is
an inherently political and comprehensive process in
which preventive foreign policy plays a pivotal role.
Peace can be sustained only through locally owned
comprehensive agreements rooted in broad, deep and
durable regional and international partnerships.

The EU reiterates the need to invest in upstream
conflict prevention while also planning for sustaining
peace beyond peacekeeping engagement, recognizing
that peacekeeping and special political missions
remain at the core of the United Nations mandate. The
right policy mix of conflict prevention, mediation,
building and strengthening resilience, peacekeeping,
stabilization, peacebuilding and humanitarian
assistance must serve the objective of sustaining peace.
Peacekeeping operations must be and must be seen as a
key ingredient of the policy mix available to the United
Nations.

Peacekeeping is a unique and invaluable feature
of the United Nations. Peacekeeping mandates must
evolve consistently in line with the context and changing
needs on the ground. Operations and special political
missions must remain flexible and open to adaptation
throughout their life cycle to best deliver stabilization
and peacebuilding.

Secondly, the Council's ambition for sustaining
peace and the Secretary-General's broad vision on
conflict prevention fully resonate with the European
approach to security, and in particular with the
Global Strategy for the European Union's Foreign and
Security Policy. Our Global Strategy emphasizes the
importance of acting promptly on prevention, while
also responding responsibly and decisively to crises,
investing in the resilience of States and societies, and
avoiding premature disengagement when a new crisis
erupts.
The Global Strategy also promises that the EU will
engage in a practical and principled way in sustaining
peace, taking an integrated approach to conflict and
crises. As conflicts have multiple dimensions - from
security to gender, from governance to the economy - it
remains essential, both for the European Union and the
United Nations, to take a multidimensional approach
to their prevention or resolution through the use of all
available policies and instruments.

The Council and the General Assembly have both
agreed that sustaining peace is thejoint responsibility of
Governments and societies and should be supported by
the international community. With the EU's integrated
approach and resilience policy, we will become a
more effective actor in our own right and partner
in international action, including with the United
Nations and its peacekeeping operations. Peacekeeping
operations must form an organic part of a coherent and
integrated United Nations response. In this context, the
Council should ensure that longer-term peacebuilding
is included in mission mandates, along with reflections
on how to design transitions and strengthen the
advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission. Better
integration and collaboration between peace operations,
sustainable development policies and United Nations
country teams is also an absolute priority.

Thirdly, the EU reconfirms its support to the
Secretary-General's ambition to create a well-
coordinated institutional structure to provide a holistic
United Nations Headquarters approach to crisis
management and sustaining peace. The Secretariat
must act as one, building upon the lessons of the past
years and past reforms, while taking into account
the specificities of all the facets of its work on the
ground. We also advocate that field deployments and
decision-making on the ground should correspond to
operational objectives.

Lastly, let me address today's topic from the
perspective of the ever closer partnership between
the EU and the United Nations in crisis management.
This partnership is highlighted explicitly in our Global
Strategy. The EU has been very active in the field of
peace and security, and it has been engaged in an ever

deepening collaboration between our two organizations
to continue to ensure an efficient strategic cooperation
and coherent action on the ground, and also to ensure
that scarce resources are used in the most effective
way. Our joint EU-United Nations conflict prevention
dialogue is helping strengthen our joint approach, and
the EU continues to be a major supporter of United
Nations mediation capacities.

Operational cooperation between the United
Nations and the EU is reaching new heights in Mali,
in the Central African Republic and in other situations.
Whenever the EU and the UnitedNations are both present
on the ground, cooperation between our respective
missions is established from the outset. In addition to
joint analysis and information-sharing between our two
organizations, we increasingly associate each other to
the strategic reviews of our respective missions and
operations to ensure that we work coherently.

The imperative of sustaining peace runs across
the complete cycle of our engagement. Peacekeeping
represents a crucial lynchpin. What we need most is
to translate this recognition into action. For its part,
the EU will continue to strive towards a strong and
continuously evolving partnership with the United
Nations in promoting peacekeeping in the overall
context of sustaining peace.

