Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we would like thank the
briefers for their briefings today.

We express our most sincere condolences following
the death of Major General Francis Vib Sanziri.

There is no denying the important role played by
peacekeeping operations, which are a vital tool for
achieving international peace and security, as set out
in the Charter of the United Nations. Peace operations
are conducted in the context of daily life and therefore
involve several disciplines. We must stress that it is
important for missions to strictly adhere to the basic
pillars of peacekeeping: consent of the parties to the
conflict, impartiality and the non-use of force, except
in cases of legitimate self-defence and in defence of
mandates. The consent ofthe host country is key for the
effective discharge of mission mandates. At times, we
have seen the use of tactics that obstruct and affect the
performance of mandate activities or delay the political
process that the missions must support.

We thank Lieutenant General Ngondi for his
briefing and note with concern the impact recent
political developments in the Sudan could have on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). Such developments are marked by
the lack of cooperation between the Sudanese State and
the mission. A successful exit requires close cooperation
between the host country and peace missions and
allows for the effective transfer of responsibilities from
the mission to the State. In the Sudan there is a need for
an inclusive and transparent political process, led by
civilians, that allows for the restoration of democratic
order and good governance. That would ensure that
the State is committed to cooperating closely with
UNAMID and implementing the proposed exit strategy.
Such cooperation would make it possible for both the
mission and the State to have the tools needed for the
transfer of responsibilities.

Our delegation would like to take this opportunity
to express the following concerns.

The first pertains to the work with communities
in countries affected by conflict. How do they think
we could strengthen the mandates of peacekeeping
operations to ensure closer collaboration with
communities and, specifically, with young people and
women? Secondly, we acknowledge the crucial role
played by peacekeepers deployed in highly dangerous
missions. That sacrifice requires that the necessary
measures be taken in order to equip personnel with the
skills that would enable them to develop and thereby
ensure efficient and effective performance on the
ground. In that regard, what additional measures or
programmes are being considered to strengthen the
training of peacekeepers prior to deployment in order
to ensure optimum performance as they carry out their
functions and the effective fulfilment of mandates?

It is important that peacekeepers be trained on
gender issues, which requires the deployment of gender
advisers and women's protection advisers and the
strengthening of zero-tolerance policies for sexual and
gender-based violence committed by peacekeepers.

With regard to the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus, we note that incursions into the
buffer zone continue, in violation of resolution
2453 (2019). What other preventive measures do the
Force Commanders think could be taken to reduce
such violations?

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
peace missions are a vital tool in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping and that only with will and joint efforts
will we succeed in achieving lasting peace.

