The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for
his briefing today. The remarks in Mr. Lowcock's
statements are in line with the Secretary-General's
remarks yesterday morning (see S/PV.8185) - that
eastern Ghouta can wait no longer. There is tremendous
suffering there, with 400,000 people who are living hell
on Earth.

We support all what the Permanent Representative
of Sweden, Mr. Skoog, said in his statement on
behalf of Kuwait and Sweden as co-penholders of the
humanitarian dossier in Syria. It is unfortunate that
the number of people killed since the beginning of this
month in eastern Ghouta has reached 1,200 civilians.
The international community is silent; it stands still.
The question here is: How long we are going to remain
silent? How many more civilians, women, children and
elderly must die or be displaced until the international
community starts taking action and speaking in one
voice and saying enough - enough carnage and
grave violations of human rights law and international
human law? In that regard, I would like to make the
following points.
First, Kuwait and Sweden, in response to the clear-
cut demands of the United Nations on the humanitarian
situation in Syria, have jointly submitted a simple
and clear draft resolution that demands a cessation of
hostilities across Syria for a 30-day period in order
for the United Nations and its partners to be able to
deliver humanitarian aid and services and provide
critical medical evacuation to the sick and wounded,
in accordance with the provisions of international law,
and end the blockade on residential areas.

Secondly, action on the part of the the State of
Kuwait is based on our religious and national duty
to our brothers in Syria. We have a legal, human and
ethical responsibility to end their suffering. In that
connection, we call on all Member States to support the
draft resolution and vote in its favour. We should rise
above our political differences to protect civilians.

Thirdly, a failure to ende the systematic and
horrendous carnage and bloodshed that has continued
for seven years with various weapons would only serve
to encourage the perpetuation of such crimes without
accountability, as those who commit them are heartened
by impunity.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

