Mr. Sumaida'ie (Iraq): I thank you, Sir, for
allowing Iraq to participate in this meeting. I did not
realize until I arrived here that I had the right to speak,
so, I did not prepare a statement, but if you allow me, I
will make some brief remarks based on what I have
heard.

First, I would like to express my appreciation to
Mr. Volcker and his team for the very thorough and
extensive inquiry that they have conducted. I would
also like to express my thanks to the Secretary-General
for his remarks and say that it is very much to his
credit that he commissioned the inquiry in the first
place.

In taking control of oil revenues in Iraq to run the
oil-for-food programme, the Security Council in effect
appointed itself the guardian of the Iraqis' wealth.
Therefore, it had a responsibility to discharge that
function, together with the Secretariat. From all the
conclusions that have been reached by the Volcker
Committee, it is very clear that the Iraqi people have
not received full value for their money. For various
reasons, they were robbed of a great deal of what was
theirs by right. The lessons will continue to be studied
and various actions will be taken, but that loss is
permanent. Thus, at the end of the day, the Iraqis paid
the price for whatever failings and shortcomings arose.

It is also clear that the main beneficiary of the
recommendations of the Volcker Committee is, in fact,
the United Nations, because the report has pointed to
systemic shortcomings and problems that had to, and
have to, be put right. All the speeches that we have
heard today echo that conclusion. Indeed, the
Secretary-General has clearly stated that that is now
one of his central objectives.

For some reason, however, Iraq had to pay the
bill for arriving at this point. We were the people who
paid for the Volcker Committee; we protested. I must
say that, regrettably, that was decided with the tacit
consent of the Security Council and implemented by
the Secretary-General.

Now we have to think of the future. We will go
forward and, hopefully, turn the conclusions of the
Volcker Committee into action that will rebuild the
credibility of the United Nations, which we all need.
Iraq is a proud founding Member of the United Nations
and dearly wants the United Nations to continue to
play its great role in the world and in Iraq itself.

Therefore, thinking forward, I would call upon
the Council to consider the formation of a nucleus or
group - perhaps a small part of the Volcker team
itself- this time funded by the United Nations, to
help Iraq pursue assets belonging to it that have been
dispersed, let us say, through the oil-for-food
programme. The Volcker Committee has, I believe,
identified many, many ways in which assets have been
taken away from Iraq. Some of those assets could be
retrieved if we all cooperate in a systematic way. I
hope that that will be taken up by the Council. We
remain ready to work with any member of the Security
Council to make that happen. That would, at least to
some extent, recompense Iraq for some of its losses.

I would like to thank you, Sir, for having given
me the opportunity to speak, and I hope my remarks
lead to some concrete actions.

