Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate you, Sir,
and your country, the United Kingdom, upon your
assumption of the Security Council presidency. We are
confident in your ability to wisely guide the Council's
work. I also reiterate our thanks to South Africa for its
very able leadership of the Council in April.

Protecting civilians in armed conflict, including
situations of foreign occupation, must be a priority
mission of the United Nations, and the Security
Council has clear responsibilities in this regard. Of
course, the protection of civilians is an important
component of the work of United Nations bodies,
including the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Human Rights
Council, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, as well as of the work of many international
humanitarian organizations.

The basis and guiding principles for such efforts
are the rules of international law, particularly
humanitarian law and human rights law. The need to
protect civilians, promote their welfare and safeguard
their human dignity is at the core of the spirit and the
purpose of those laws. Protection provisions can be
found in many instruments of law, including the
Geneva Conventions, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which comprises provisions explicitly
aimed at ensuring the safety of civilians in armed
conflict, including specific provisions for civilians
under foreign occupation; the Additional Protocols to
those Conventions; the human rights covenants; the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court; and
United Nations resolutions. Additionally, in 2005, in
the World Summit Outcome Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1), world leaders affirmed the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
08-35364
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity.

Yet, despite such legal safeguards, armed
conflicts continue to claim the lives of innocent
civilians, who continue to be the victims of appalling
human rights violations and crimes, suffering physical
and psychological harm, displacement, imprisonment,
torture, exploitation, hunger, poverty, disease and the
destruction of their communities.

We must ask ourselves, then, why civilians are
still so vulnerable and why such violations against
civilians are permitted to continue with impunity. The
answer lies primarily in the lack of respect for
international law and the international community's
failure, in many circumstances, to ensure respect for
the law and hold violators accountable for their crimes,
with a view to ending those crimes and ensuring the
protection of civilians and the promotion of their
human rights.

Regrettably, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
the Palestinian people have been denied the protection
to which they are entitled as a civilian population
under occupation. There, civilians remain highly
vulnerable and exposed to the occupying Power's
lethal military force and massive, systematic and grave
human rights violations. Palestinian civilians,
including children, continue to be killed, wounded and
maimed in Israeli military assaults, which are
indiscriminately launched in civilian areas, particularly
in the Gaza Strip, and which, in addition to the
widespread casualties and destruction they cause, have
terrorized and traumatized the population.

At the same time, the civilian population suffers
from the unlawful collective punishment measures
being imposed by the occupying Power. The situation
in Gaza is most dire, due to Israel's ongoing inhumane
siege, by which it is deliberately obstructing
humanitarian access, the movement of persons,
including sick persons needing treatment unavailable
in Gaza, and the movement of goods, including food,
medical and fuel supplies. There has been a severe
impact on all aspects of life, with poverty, hunger,
disease and instability rising, particularly among the
refugee population and especially among children, and
the humanitarian crisis deepening.

International law clearly forbids such brutality.
Humanitarian and human rights law prohibit, inter alia,
the killing and bodily injury of civilians, reprisals
3
against civilians and civilian objects, the wanton
destruction of homes and other civilian property and
the collective punishment of civilians. Such actions,
wilfully perpetrated, constitute war crimes.

The international community's failure to hold
Israel accountable for its Violations and crimes has
regrettably reinforced Israel's lawlessness, permitting
it to continue using military force and collective
punishment against the defenceless Palestinian people
under its occupation and, in essence, absolving it from
its legal obligations as an occupying Power. Here, there
is a clear role that must be played by the Security
Council. As Israel continues to breach its legal
obligations towards the Palestinian civilian population,
the Security Council, if it cannot compel Israel to abide
by the law, has a duty to determine and undertake
appropriate measures to protect the civilian population.
To continue doing nothing in the face of such crimes is
unacceptable and, as we have witnessed over the years,
the consequences are more than tragic.

The international community, including the
Security Council, must uphold the responsibility and
declared commitment to protect civilians in armed
conflict. Respect must be demanded for the instruments
of international law that are supposed to provide
innocent civilians with protection from human rights
violations and crimes in all situations of armed
conflict, including foreign occupation.

Armed conflicts are disastrous, but they are not
natural disasters; they are man-made. The rule of law
must therefore be central to the debate on protecting
civilians, for respect of international law is the key to
the prevention of conflicts, the protection of civilians
where conflicts arise and, ultimately, the peaceful
settlement of conflicts and the promotion of human
rights, human security and human dignity.

