Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): I wish first of all, Sir, to say how pleased and
honoured we are to begin our deliberations this month
under the guidance of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Gambia. I also wish to convey sincere congratulations
to your predecessor, our friend the Permanent
Representative of Gabon, and to his entire delegation.

France will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before the Security Council, whose central purpose is to
endorse the Memorandum of Understanding signed on 23
February by the Secretary-General, for the United
Nations, and by the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq, for
Iraq. This draft resolution is not necessary either legally
or politically to give effect to the Memorandum of
Understanding, which gained the assent of the Council on
24 February.

Nevertheless, in order to dispel any hint of
interpretations of or reservations about the content of the
23 February Memorandum of Understanding, it was a
good idea for the Council - on the initiative of the
United Kingdom and Japan - to seek to confirm the
authority of the Memorandum through a particularly
forceful decision taken under Chapter VII of the Charter.
The draft resolution upon which we shall be taking action
is thus welcome and worthwhile.

 

The draft resolution before us meets what we view as
the indispensable criteria: it is brief and it cleaves to the
text of the Memorandum of Understanding, which it
ratifies. It does not seek to rewrite it or to modify its scope.
While affirming its determination to ensure immediate
and comprehensive respect for obligations under resolution
687 (1991), the Council reaffirms in the preambular part the
commitment of all Member States to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of Iraq,
Kuwait and the neighbouring States. There is a point to
reaffirming that commitment at this time.

In the operative part, the Security Council quite rightly
commends the initiative by the Secretary-General and
endorses the Memorandum of Understanding. The Council
places on record Iraq's commitment to accord immediate,
unconditional and unrestricted access to the Special
Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
But the Council also backs UNSCOM's commitment to
respect the legitimate concerns of Iraq regarding national
security, sovereignty and dignity.

The draft resolution requests the Secretary-General to
report to the Security Council as soon as possible with
regard to the procedures for presidential sites. This too is
important, because the recent crisis concerned access to the
presidential sites. Here the Council acknowledges the
overriding competence of the Secretary-General.

One reason for this draft resolution - apart from its
indispensable tribute to the Secretary-General - is to
address a serious warning to Iraq about complying with its
obligations, as well as to dispel any ambiguity about the
duration of the sanctions. This dual objective is achieved in
paragraphs 3, 4 and 5. I shall not dwell on those
paragraphs; their meaning is clear to the reader. Our
objective is, of course, to ensure respect for Council
resolutions, including those relating to sanctions against
Iraq. But it is also to underscore the prerogatives of the
Security Council in a way that excludes any question of
automaticity. Most of the preceding speakers made
reference to this, and it was stressed quite firmly by the
representative of Japan on behalf of the sponsors of the
draft resolution; I thank him for that.

The Council is justified in debating certain measures
because of their gravity. It is the Security Council that must
evaluate the behaviour of a country, if necessary to
determine any possible violations, and to take the
appropriate decisions.

It is important that the Council should have met
today to decide, unanimously and solemnly, that it will
remain actively seized of the matter in conformity with its
responsibilities under the Charter.

Today's meeting is taking place in the presence of
the Secretary-General. We have passed through a time of
serious crisis which it has been possible to settle
peacefully. That peaceful outcome would have been
impossible without the courageous action of the
Secretary-General, without his determination, without his
negotiating talents, without his firmness. France was
happy to support him. But the best tribute we can pay
him is to see to it that his work endures.

Nothing will be possible without constant vigilance,
without strict respect by each and everyone for the
Memorandum of Understanding and without also giving
extensive and dispassionate thought to the lasting means
to bring back peace and stability to the Gulf region and
to the Middle East as a whole. For the neighbours of Iraq
must not live in insecurity. Kuwait must regain
confidence. The Middle East must regain peace with
justice.

Nothing will be possible without the constant
involvement of the Secretary-General in our work and in
our deliberations.

