Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank you, Madam
President, for having organized this meeting just a few
weeks before the referendum to be held in Southern
Sudan on 9 January 2011. We also thank President
Mkapa and Mr. Alain Le Roy for their briefings, which
usefully addressed the three main concerns relating to
the question of Southern Sudan: the referendum
process, the developments in the negotiations on post-
referendum arrangements, and the ongoing discussions
among the parties on the status of Abyei.

We welcome the presence of Minister Mutrif
Siddiq of the Sudan and of the Secretary-General of
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM),
Mr. Pagan Amum.

The voter registration process, which was carried

out in peaceful and harmonious conditions, was

completed on 8 December. That marked a decisive

turning point in the preparations for the 9 January 2011

referendum. It is also proof of the will of both parties

to pursue the implementation of the Comprehensive

Peace Agreement. Gabon welcomes those steps and

encourages the parties to continue working in that
direction.

That positive momentum, which has been
reinforced by the preparations, leads us to believe that
there will be a credible, transparent and free
referendum and that its results will be accepted by all.
We know that we will be able to count on the
leadership of President Mkapa, and we reiterate our
support for him.

However, we are concerned by the difficulties the
Referendum Commission is encountering in securing
its budget. My delegation urges the parties to fulfil
their financial obligations in that area, so as to enable
the Commission to fulfil its mission.

With regard to post-referendum arrangements,
the problem posed by the serious delays in the
negotiations - especially with regard to the complete
demarcation of the North-South border, the freedom of
movement of the population, and the issues of
citizenship and wealth-sharing - show the scale of the
task still ahead of us, if we want to achieve lasting
peace in the Sudan. Gabon is pleased to see that the
efforts of President Mbeki have led to the
establishment of a framework that can guide
discussions on those important issues.

However modest that progress may be, it should
be supported. In that context, we encourage the parties
to reach an agreement on those issues as soon as
possible in order to ensure continued cooperation
between the North and South, whatever the outcome of
the referendum.
The negotiations on the Abyei referendum are at a
standstill. There are too many areas of disagreement
and time is running out. Gabon still believes that those
talks must be intensified. The initiative of President
Mbeki to regularly bring together the leaders from
Khartoum and Juba to discuss the issues should be
welcomed. My delegation strongly supports that
strategy. We are convinced that a definitive agreement
on Abyei could serve as a catalyst for overcoming the
other lingering challenges. The Council must continue
encouraging the parties in their efforts aimed at
overcoming those challenges.

I could not conclude without praising the
important role played by the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) in the security, political and
humanitarian sectors. By ensuring the protection and
freedom of movement of populations, the Mission has
been able to create an environment favourable to the
peace process. We encourage the parties to cooperate
fully with UNMIS.

We cannot remain indifferent to the situation in
Darfur, where the peace process has been further
delayed and remains without results. Gabon supports
the joint efforts of the United Nations and African
Union to restore peace in the region. We welcome the
commitment of the Government of the Sudan to take an
active role in those efforts. We also encourage the rebel
movement to participate in the peace process.

