Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): It is a great pleasure for me to welcome the
Foreign Minister of the Republic of Mozambique, His
Excellency Mr. Leonardo Simao, and to thank him for his
important and interesting statement to the Security Council.

We sincerely congratulate the people and the leaders
of Mozambique on the successful holding of the first multi-
party elections in the history of that country and the
creation of a democratic coalition Government. This
important event is a worthy culmination of Mozambique's
progress along the difficult road to peace and consent and
has marked the end of a lengthy period of destructive
internecine conflict that brought untold suffering to the
people of that country. The Russian Federation actively
promoted the peace process in Mozambique and wishes the
people and the Government of that friendly country, to
which we are solidly linked by many years of fruitful
cooperation, further success in creating a stable, democratic
and flourishing State.

The successful implementation of the large-scale and
complex task of effecting a political settlement in
Mozambique was made possible by the consistent support
of the international community and the staunch resolve of
the Mozambicans themselves to break out of the vicious
circle of violence and confrontation. An important and
instructive role in this regard was played by President
Chissano and the leaders of the Mozambican political
parties, who, displaying a rare degree of political courage
and statesmanlike wisdom and restraint, were able, for the
sake of the higher interests of their country, to rise above
the differences that had separated them for years and
embark on the course of national reconciliation. We are
convinced that this approach is the most reliable guarantee
of success in carrying out the difficult tasks of the post-
conflict stage in Mozambique.

We would also like to express our gratitude to the
personnel of the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ONUMOZ) and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ajello, for their skilful and
determined efforts to bring the peace process in
Mozambique to success. This became an important
component in the consolidation of stability and security in
the southern African region as a whole. The success of
the complex and large-scale Operation in Mozambique is
one of the most impressive examples of the real capacities
of the United Nations in the field of peace-making.

During the three-year mandate of ONUMOZ, a great
deal of meaningful and useful experience has been
gained, which we believe deserves thorough study in
order to further enhance the effectiveness of United
Nations peace-keeping operations. In this connection, we
look forward to the presentation of the Secretary-
General's report containing an analysis of the lessons
learned from the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique. We are quite certain it will be an important
contribution to our future work.

