Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to join
others in thanking Mr. Nigel Fisher for his insightful
briefing. I congratulate him for the work he is doing as
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti.

Rwanda commends the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for the role it is playing
in assisting Haitians to rebuild their country. We renew
our support for its work in various areas, including the
maintenance of public order, the promotion of human
rights and the strengthening the rule of law.

We fully support the Haitian people on their road
to reconstruction, democracy and development. We
are convinced that Haitians can overcome the current
challenges through the solidarity and active support
of the international community. However, political
progress requires the Government and all political actors
in Haiti to come together and form a broader political
pact based on a common set of national priorities, in
accordance with the country's Constitution.

The success already achieved in rebuilding the
country runs the risk of being eroded by the lack of
progress in establishing key Government institutions,
especially the Electoral Council. Free, fair and credible
elections are paramount if a Government that can answer
to the many challenges being faced by Haitians is to be
established and if trust in Government institutions is
eventually to be restored. It is therefore imperative that
all stakeholders within the legislative and executive
branches ofGovernmentmakethenecessaryconcessions
to ensure that agreement is reached to establish the
Electoral Council, reinforce good governance and set
in motion the reforms needed to rebuild and consolidate
stability and encourage outside investment. In that
regard, support and assistance from the international
community, the United Nations and the international
financial institutions remain indispensable and critical
to enabling the country to meet the aspirations of its
people.

We note that the security situation remains
relatively stable and that the number of kidnappings
has decreased. However, we express concern over the
increase in the number of homicides and continued
civil unrest, particularly regular anti-Government
demonstrations. As one of the police-contributing
countries in MINUSTAH, with a formed police unit
of 160 police officers, we recognize the importance
of professionalizing the Haitian police force in order
to tackle those security challenges. We call upon the
international community to continue providing support
in that regard.

We emphasize that security must be accompanied by
socioeconomic development. Therefore, our collective
reflection on Haiti today should take into account the
interlinkages between security and development as key
components of sustainable peace. It is therefore essential
that efforts on the security front be accompanied by
even stronger support by the international community
to socioeconomic development and the strengthening of
institutional capabilities.

Concerning the humanitarian situation, we of
course remain concerned by the prevalence of cholera
and we commend the Government of Haiti for its
national eradication plan against the disease. We are
alarmed by the aftermath of the earthquake and the
deteriorating food security situation in the country,
which has been aggravated by drought, hurricane
Sandy and tropical storm Isaac. We take note of the
humanitarian action plan for 2013, which requires an
estimated $144 million. We call upon the international
community to continue to extend solidarity to the
Haitian people. Rwanda also expresses concern over
the human rights situation in Haiti, particularly with
regard to sexual and gender-based violence, and we
urge the Government to establish mechanisms that
protect women and children against such violence.

In conclusion, the recent report on the current
conditions on the ground reflects a country that has made
progress (S/2013/139). However, a strong commitment
by the Haitian Government and political forces, as
well as continued support from the international
community, is needed to accompany that progress
towards sustainable peace, stability and socioeconomic
development for Haiti.

