Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My country's delegation would like to pay
tribute to the good relations that exist between Syria,
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) and other peace operations. We would like to
reiterate the Government's commitment to supporting
the mission with all possible tools.

As everyone knows, peacekeeping operations in
any region should be for a brief transitional period.
However, and unfortunately, in the Middle East that
period is often measured in decades. That is because of
Israel's continued occupation ofArab territory, posing a
challenge to the resolutions of international legitimacy,
and its ongoing aggressive policies that threaten the
region's peace and security. In that regard, I recall that
the Israeli occupation of Arab territory is the reason for
United Nations peace operations missions in the region,
which is a burden on the United Nations budget and
human resources.

My delegation would like to express its deep concern
about the security threats and attacks on peacekeepers.
My delegation would like to stress that such attacks
are the major challenges posed to peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, I note the statement made
by the representative of Israel and wish to offer some
comments. He stated that troops kidnapped security
personnel in the Golan, which proves that Israel is
supporting terrorist groups. The terrorist group,
Al-Nusrah Front, kidnapped and expelled UNDOF
elements from the region. That terrorist organization,
which is on the international terrorist organizations list
and has paid visits to the Israeli Prime Minister and to
those in hospital, has received all forms of support from
Israel, within the framework of UNDOF. Israel allows
the tanks of the terrorist groups, including Al-Nusrah,
to target innocent people in Al-Qunaytirah, which is
very close to the border in Jaulan. I have with me a
photo of Mira Zidane, who was two-and-a-half years
old when she was killed by Al-Nusrah missiles close to
the border while she was at home.

Israeli support of the terrorist group Al-Nusrah
is very well known on that border region and
documented in UNDOF reports. According to the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from
21 May to 29 August,

"Further south, United Nations personnel at
observation post 54 on 1 and 29 June observed
Israel Defense Forces vehicles moving from the
Alpha side to the ceasefire line where Israel Defense
Forces personnel disembarked the vehicles and
unloaded items immediately east of the ceasefire
line and thereafter returning to the Alpha side.
Several individuals in trucks from the Bravo side
subsequently arrived at the location where the items
had been left and loaded the items on the trucks
and drove offin an easterly direction." (S/2016/803, para. 10)

There is a second reference to this in the report of
the Secretary-General on UNDOF for the period from
1 March to 20 May 2016:

"Crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians,
primarily shepherds, from the Bravo side to the
Alpha side was observed on an almost daily basis.
On a number ofoccasions on 9, 10 and 28 March and
11 April, United Nations personnel at observation
post 54 observed interaction at the Israeli technical
fence between the Israel Defense Forces personnel
and individuals from the Bravo side, some of whom
were armed." (S/2016/520, para. 5)

