Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
invitees for their briefings, and also I also thank Italy
for having organized this meeting.

Earlier this year, Iraqi soldiers discovered tunnels
dug below the remains of the tomb and osque of Jonah
in Mosul, which showed that militants of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) were excavating into
an ancient Assyrian palace that is at the same site. That
excavation took place, of course, after ISIS had already
destroyed the historic tomb and mosque above, in 2014.
What was the likely target of ISIS? Valuable antiquities
to loot and then traffic in global markets. I share this
story to illustrate that nefarious activity has become, in
effect, part of the business plan of ISIS.

Even after liberation from ISIS, cultural heritage
and antiquities remain under threat, as fleeing members
of ISIS will likely seek to sell artefacts that could
continue to provide a substantial revenue stream. The
ability to sell looted goods over the Internet has turned
a once cost-prohibitive market into one accessible by
anyone with a cell phone or Internet connection. The
United States has been unwavering in its commitment
to protecting and preserving cultural heritage. Our
policy is clear: the unlawful destruction of cultural
heritage and the trafficking of cultural property
are unacceptable.

We join the United Nations and Council members
in affirming that countries have a responsibility to
preserve and protect heritage of universal importance
and prevent its exploitation for terrorist purposes,
including illicit financial gain. The United States
continues robust implementation of its own domestic
tools for putting an end to the destruction of cultural
heritage and trafficking of cultural property. The
emergency import restrictions on Syrian and certain
Iraqi cultural property remain in place, and serve as a
strong disincentive to would-be traffickers.
The United States has also negotiated bilateral
agreements with 16 countries to block the illegal
importation of archaeological and ethnological material
into the United States. We urge States parties to the
UNESCO 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property whose heritage is in
jeopardy to request the same type of protection.

The cultural antiquities task force established by
the United States Department of State focuses on the
recovery and repatriation of looted cultural objects and
supports law enforcement agencies in such efforts. The
United States Federal Bureau of Investigation maintains
an national stolen art file - a computerized database
of stolen art and cultural property - and makes its
information available to law enforcement agencies
around the world.

For several years, the United States Government
has provided funding to the American Schools of
Oriental Research (ASOR) to continue its important
work in Syria and northern Iraq. This year we have
expanded ASOR's work to also include Libya. With
that funding, ASOR monitors cultural heritage sites in
those areas using satellite imagery, human intelligence
and public information in order to document evidence
of destruction and looting by ISIS and other actors.
United States funding has also enabled the Smithsonian
Institution to train Iraqi cultural heritage professionals
so that they can be prepared to implement needed
interventions when the security situation allows.

We remain fully committed to those efforts, and we
look forward to coordinating with the United Nations
and Member States and with the United Nations and
international entities, including the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh),
Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities over the coming year on the
full implementation of resolution 2347 (2017).

