The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of France.

I warmly welcome Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy of the European Union and Vice-President
of the European Commission. It is always a pleasure
to welcome to the Chamber a representative of that
major player in security and international stability, the
European Union. I welcome her presence here for the
first time, as mentioned, since her appointment.

The European Union is a key partner of the Security
Council in dealing with most of the crises it has before
it. Ms. Mogherini has gone into detail on that, and I will
not go over it again.

In our View, the European Union's work is
complementary to that of the Council. The European
Union has been able, to act decisively in recent years,
in particular in Africa. Last year in the Council, we
welcomed the European Union's work in training the
Malian security forces, which complemented the work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. We then entrusted the
Europeans to do the same in Central African Republic.
That was done through the deployment of the EU-led
force in the Central African Republic (EUFOR-RCA),
beginning on 1 April 2014, which has made significant
contributions to the efforts to provide security and
protection to civilians in Bangui, again in support of
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic, then the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic.

This week, as the EUFOR-RCA mission comes to
an end, I want to commend the work of the mission and
highlight the continued commitment of the European
Union to Central African Republic, since an assistance
mission to reform the Central African armed forces
will immediately take over. The work in the Central
African Republic shows that the European Union knows
how to engage effectively and quickly, and we thank
the European External Action Service for its work in
mobilizing European partners.

In addition to its deployment on the ground, the
European Union is also a valuable partner of the United
Nations in finding sustainable solutions to the major
crises that concern us. The fight against Boko Haram
will therefore be a priority in the coming months.

On the Iranian nuclear issue, we thank the High
Representative for her exemplary engagement with
the E3+3. The European Union plays a crucial role in
the talks with Iran aimed at reaching a comprehensive
settlement of the crisis. Much remains to be done, but
we are fully committed to reaching a solution.

That is now also the case with the crisis in Ukraine,
which has entered into a new phase with the signing,
on 12 February, of the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. Again, the
European Union is taking part in the efforts to find a
solution to that crisis, with support from the Council
through resolution 2202 (2015). Let us recall that the
European Union has resorted to sanctions, on that issue
as on many others, not to punish but to encourage the
stakeholders to engage in dialogue. The link between
sanctions and the implementation of the entire Minsk
package was recalled last week by European leaders.
The EU is indeed mustering its efforts at the diplomatic,
financial and humanitarian levels for a peaceful
settlement of the crisis in Ukraine.

In the Middle East, the EU will continue to play its
role within the framework of the Quartet and beyond,
as a major player seeking to preserve the two-State
solution in the face of ongoing colonization, and to
contribute to finally achieving a peace agreement. That
is also the case in Libya, which is the most serious crisis
in the region to the south of the EU. The European Union
actively supports the efforts of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bernardino Leon. I know
that Ms. Mogherini is personally involved in that. The
resumption of the Libyan political dialogue should help
achieve a comprehensive solution, and the European
Union should play a key role in supporting that process.

Finally, the European Union, which is a
undertaking without precedent, is working to promote
a new order in its immediate neighbourhood and
beyond by establishing the rule of law, democracy and
human rights as elements for peace and security. Built
on the ideal of bringing peoples together to transcend
nationalism, the European Union has created a unique
model that has significant appeal.

That model continues to work in support of peace
and security, particularly in the Balkans, which were
long battered by war after the dissolution of the former
Yugoslavia. Today more than ever, the European Union is
working for rapprochement between Serbia and Kosovo,
by promoting their bilateral dialogue and offering
them a fair place in a peaceful regional environment
that is focused on its collective development. After the
electoral pause in those countries, we look forward to
the resumption of their dialogue at the highest level on
9 February with the help of the High Representative.
We earnestly hope for the continuation of those efforts.

The process of normalization is also under way for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which the European Union
is supporting on its road to stabilization, in particular
through European Union Force Operation Althea.
Under the leadership of Ms. Mogherini, the European
rapprochement of Bosnia and Herzegovina has gained
new momentum. It is crucial that the country resume
its journey on the path of reform, with a view to also
joining the European Union at the appropriate time.

Wherever the European Union is working, it
contributes to the ideals of peace, freedom and human
progress that the United Nations embody. It is thus
an indispensable partner for the United Nations. That
special role was reflected four years ago in the adoption
of General Assembly resolution 65/276, through which
the Assembly recognizes the European Union's place as
a partner and friend of the United Nations.

I would also like to emphasize today, while
expressing my best wishes for success to Ms. Mogherini
in her work, that the European Union is more than
a regional organization. It is an integration project
without precedent in history and one of the pillars of a
coherent and effective international system.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Ms. Mogherini.

