Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I want to thank Special Representative Annadif for his briefing and for his work as Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I also commend the work of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union, which mobilized efforts from within hours of the onset of the political crisis in Mali. France welcomes the transition in Mali. The authorities in charge of the process have been appointed, and we wish them every success. A transition charter has been published. France welcomes the release of individuals detained since 18 August. And, lastly, we welcome the lifting of sanctions by ECOWAS and we would endorse its call for the dissolution of the Comite national pour le salut du peuple. This transition must lead to the holding of open, free and fair elections within the next 18 months and the re-establishment of constitutional order. France urges the new authorities to use this period to lay the groundwork for constitutional reforms to build a stronger and more legitimate democracy in accordance with the expectations expressed by the Malian people. It is crucial that the process include all of the stakeholders, including women and young people, in accordance with resolution 2531 (2020). I want to highlight three priorities for the months ahead. First, we must continue our fight against terrorism. The new momentum begun in January, following the Pau summit, our partners in the Sahel have made gains in a number of areas. Despite events in Bamako, the Malian army has stayed the course. The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel is ever-more self- sufficient and effective. It still needs support. Terrorist groups know how to adapt. Humanitarian assistance and development activities must support security achievements in the spirit of the integrated approach supported by the coalition for the Sahel. France welcomes the involvement of the European Union and its member States. Secondly, the implementation of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation In Mali must resume without further delay. Following progress early in the year,the process has been at a standstill since June. France would like to reiterate that there is no alternative to this Agreement for a long-term reconciliation among the Malian people. When renewing the MINUSMA mandate, the Security Council identified priority actions for the reintegration of former rebels into the national armed forces; institutional reform; the development of the northern regions; and the participation of women. This road map is clear, and the Malian people must seize the opportunity of having MINUSMA at the ready to help in these tasks. The participation of the signatory groups to the Agreement in the transitional Government is an encouraging sign in that regard. Finally, the third priority is stabilization in the centre of Mali. It is essential that international humanitarian law be respected by all concerned, and that the transitional authorities work to establish a framework for dialogue, reconciliation, the fight against impunity and respect for human rights. France notes the opening of an investigation into the violence of recent months and urges the authorities to complete it in an impartial and independent manner so as to bring those responsible to justice. In support of those efforts, MINUSMA continues its protection of civilian work. But to fully achieve those goals, MINUSMA's adaptation plan must be implemented, including through the provision further helicopters. I call on Members States to meet these urgent needs. In this decisive period, we must reaffirm our support for MINUSMA and for the priorities that we have entrusted to it. It is also important to explicitly encourage it to support the transition. At the end of this meeting, France will propose a draft presidential statement reflecting these points.
