Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, allow me to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on the exemplary manner in
which you have been steering the work of the Council
this month. I would also like to express my
appreciation to Ambassador Li Baodong, Permanent
Representative of China, for his efficient presidency of
the Council in March.

I would also like to express my appreciation to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for today's excellent briefing, in
which he vividly described the volatile situation on the
ground, particularly in the Gaza Strip, and called on the
international community to engage with the parties to
create conditions conducive to the resumption of the
peace process.

The recent upsurge in violence in the occupied
Palestinian territories, particularly the Gaza Strip, is a
cruel reminder of how tense and fragile the situation
remains. The rocket fire by Palestinian militants and
reprisals by Israeli forces have claimed numerous
victims, most of them Palestinian civilians. Our
Committee calls on the parties to refrain from all
provocation and to act responsibly, and unequivocally
condemns all attacks on civilians, who urgently require
protection.

We are hopeful that the Council will assume its
Charter responsibilities by acting as resolutely and
with the same vigour as it has in other ongoing conflict
situations. It must also redouble its efforts to ensure the
full implementation of its resolution 1860 (2009) in
order to end the Gaza blockade and restrictions on the
freedom of persons and goods, and to promote
inter-Palestinian reconciliation.

We look forward to the resumption of serious
direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians
on all permanent status issues before the September
target date set by the Quartet. In that respect, we call
on the Quartet to speedily endorse the recent initiative
of the United Kingdom, France and Germany to restart
negotiations leading to the signing of an agreement on
Jerusalem as the capital of two States, Israel and
Palestine, founded on the basis of the borders of June
1967; to the reaffirmation of the illegality of
settlements; to a just, consensual solution to the
refugee question; and to security arrangements ending
the Israeli occupation.

The negotiations will succeed only if the parties
implement in good faith their road map obligations, in
particular a complete freeze of all Israeli settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including so-called natural growth. I take this
opportunity to register our disappointment with the
Council's lack of leadership on this important issue,
and its unwillingness to reaffirm its previous positions
and to adopt the pertinent draft resolution, which
enjoyed vast support among Member States. Israel's
unfortunate recent approval of over 900 additional
housing units in Gilo in East Jerusalem illustrates the
fact that the issue is not going away. It is the Council's
Charter and moral obligation to intervene.

We are pleased to note the recognition of the
State of Palestine by numerous Member States. These
countries and many others are supporting the
Palestinian Authority's programme to build the State
by September. The United Nations, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund have confirmed that
the Palestinians now have the institutional structure
necessary to administer their own State.

Since the most recent open debate of the Council
under this agenda item (see S/PV.6484), our Committee
has held international meetings in Vienna and
Montevideo devoted to achieving Israeli-Palestinian
peace. We remain fully committed to and will continue
to promote the objective of a two-State solution, in
conformity with Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative,
whereby Israel and the State of Palestine will live side
by side in peace and security. The United Nations and
its Security Council have a very special responsibility
to ensure the realization of this vision. I assure the
Council of the Committee's cooperation and support in
the implementation of its own resolutions on the
Palestinian question.

