Mrs. Haley (United States of America): This
morning I spoke with President Trump and Secretary
Pompeo, and my statement reflects the concerns at the
highest level of the American Government.

For the past four years, the international community
has spoken with a strong, clear and largely united voice
denouncing Russia's aggression against Ukraine. The
United States, the European Union, its member States
and many other countries have imposed sanctions
against Russia for its unacceptable conduct in Crimea
and eastern Ukraine. Sunday's outrageous Violation
of sovereign Ukrainian territory is part of a pattern
of Russian behaviour that includes the purported
annexation of Crimea and abuses against countless
Ukrainians in Crimea, as well as stoking a conflict
that has taken the lives of more than 10,000 people in
eastern Ukraine and shows no sign of decreasing.

What we witnessed this past weekend is yet another
reckless Russian escalation. Let us be clear about what
is known. Ukrainian ships set sail from one Ukrainian
port to another Ukrainian port. They attempted to do
so by the only possible way to go - through the Kerch
Strait. Both Russia and Ukraine use the Strait routinely,
but this time Russia decided to prevent the passage ofthe
Ukrainian ships, rammed them and then opened fire on
them. That is no way for a law-abiding, civilized nation
to act. Impeding Ukraine's lawful transit through the
Kerch Strait is a violation under international law. It is
an arrogant act that the international community must
condemn and will never accept. In May, the United
States condemned Russia's construction and opening of
the Kerch Strait Bridge between Russia and occupied
Crimea. In August, the United States condemned
Russia's harassment of international shipping in the Sea
of Azov and the Kerch Strait.

The United States will continue to stand with the
people of Ukraine against the Russian aggression. It is
our expectation that our European partners will lead
that effort through the Normandy Four format, which
we support. We call on Russia to respect its international
obligations and not obstruct or harass Ukraine's transit
in the Kerch Strait and to de-escalate the tensions that
it has created. As President Trump has said many times,
the United States would welcome a normal relationship
with Russia, but outlaw actions like this one continue to
make that impossible. The United States will maintain
its Crimea-related sanctions against Russia. Further
Russian escalation of this kind will only make matters
worse. It will further undermine Russia's standing in
the world. It will further sour Russia's relations with
the United States and many other countries. It will
further increase tensions with Ukraine. In the name
of international peace and security, Russia must
immediately cease its unlawful conduct and respect the
navigational rights and freedoms of all States.

