Mr. Siddig (Sudan): Allow me to congratulate you, Madam President, on leading the deliberations of the Security Council this month. I wish also to congratulate the Niger for the exemplary role that it played in steering the work of the Council last month. I should also like to commend the Permanent Representative of the Niger for the excellent job he did last month and also to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. Lacroix, and the Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, for their briefings. I also thank the members of the Security Council for their statements regarding the situation in Abyei. Over the past month and since the formation of the Transitional Government in the Sudan, the bilateral relations between the Sudan and South Sudan have been improving steadily. Some features of that progress are reflected in the regular exchange of visits between the two countries at various levels, as well as by the cross- border movement of people, goods and services. In addition, South Sudan hosted the peace talks between the Government of the Sudan and the armed groups, which led eventually to the significant signing of the peace agreement earlier this month. The continued rapprochement between the two countries is something that reflects positively on the Abyei final-status negotiations. Just three weeks ago, a Sudanese delegation led and headed by the minister of East African Community Affairs visited Khartoum for talks on Abyei. In a statement issued after the meeting, the Deputy President of the Sudanese Sovereign Council pledged the readiness of the Government of the Sudan to resolve the Abyei issue in the same spirit in which the Juba negotiations were conducted among the Sudanese parties. The Government of the Sudan is committed to building on the new political dispensation in the bilateral relations between the two brotherly neighbours so as to promote communal peaceful coexistence in the area and expedite discussions to reach an understanding on the final status of Abyei. That being said, I would like to highlight the following points. First, the political and legal terms that govern the current and future agreements and arrangements in Abyei, including the existence of the Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), are based on the agreement on temporary arrangements for the administration and security of the Abyei Area reached on 20 June 2011. The terms of that agreement should be strictly respected and followed by the two countries as well as by regional and international partners. For its part, the Sudan reaffirms its commitment to the letter and the spirit of the agreement. Secondly, the agreement of 20 June 2011 provides for the temporary local mechanisms and institutions to administer the Area. That includes local executive and legislative bodies and a local joint police force. The Sudan has always been ready to adhere to the terms of the agreement. In that context, my Government appointed last month its representative in the Abyei joint oversight committee, a move widely welcomed by the local communities in the area, especially the community leaders of the Ngok Dinka. In addition, the Sudanese authorities are ready to take part in forming the local joint police force to combat criminality in and around Abyei. Thirdly, we commend UNISFA's personnel for their efforts to preserve peace and stability in Abyei and condemn any attacks against or directed at peacekeepers in Abyei. We call on the mission to further improve civilian protection, protect the Area from incursions by unauthorized armed elements, ensure security and stand at an equal distance from all communities in the area. Fourthly, I would like to bring to the attention of Council members that the issue related to the operationalization of the Athony airstrip was discussed at the most recent meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, which was held in Juba last February. It was agreed among the parties that this matter should be referred to the presidencies of the two countries to take a decision on it. It is to be noted that in order to improve UNISFA's logistical capacities, the Sudan agreed a couple of weeks ago to the transfer of two helicopters from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur to UNISFA, in Abyei. The secretariat was duly notified of that approval. To conclude, the Government of the Sudan reiterates its commitment to strengthening cooperation with the Government of South Sudan and UNISFA with a view to enhancing the work of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism and the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee as well as establishing the remaining joint mechanisms between the two countries based on the terms of the agreement signed by both sides on 20 June 2011. I wish to end by welcoming the extension of the mandate of UNISFA for six months, as proposed by the Secretary-General. The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.
