Mr. Zheglov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I am forced to take the floor in connection
with a number of statements made by the distinguished
representative of Georgia. I would like once again to
point out to the Council that it was in fact Georgia that
in August 2008 unleashed an attack against South
Ossetia, which resulted in a humanitarian catastrophe
for the entire people and mass human rights violations.
During the night of 8 August 2008, the Georgian army,
trained and well-armed from abroad, attacked the
sleeping city of Tskhinvali. In spite of agreements that
had been signed, the norms of international law and the
dictates of human morality, the armed forces of
Georgia struck at civilians and shot at peacekeepers.

Operation Clear Field, which had as its goal the
physical destruction and ousting of Ossetians from the
land of their ancestors, was a continuation of the policy
of Tbilisi towards the Ossetian people which began in
1991. In August 2008, the implementation of this
policy spilled over into ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.

The basic outcome of this adventure on the part
of Saakashvili is well known: hundreds of people were
killed and wounded, and tens of thousands became
refugees and internally displaced persons. There is
evidence of the fact that the Georgian military
deliberately targeted civilians on the streets of the city
and refugees on the road to Zarsk.

One of the harshest results of Georgian
aggression against South Ossetia was the mass exodus
of the inhabitants of the Republic. The Georgian people
themselves were victims of Saakashvili's policy.
Citizens of that country and non-citizens alike did not
wish to return to their homes, fearing persecution and
repression from the Georgian authorities and extremist
elements. As a result, approximately 2,000 inhabitants
of Georgia appealed to be officially recognized by the
Russian Federation as refugees.

It is absolutely false to assert that the Russian
Federation is occupying the territory of Georgia. The
legal basis for introducing Russian troops into the
territory of South Ossetia was Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter, on the right to self-defence, about
which, in accordance with the established procedure,
the Security Council was informed.
We cannot agree with allegations to the effect that
there are restrictions on humanitarian access to South
Ossetia. It has been demonstrated in practice that, for
those institutions that truly wish to help South Ossetia,
access is open. Against this background, we can see
that it is the Georgian leadership that is trying to hinder
international humanitarian assistance to South Ossetia
in carrying out recovery work. To that end, the
Georgian law on the so-called occupied territories,
which is referred to in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/277, annex, para. 12), is being

invoked.

The crimes of the Georgian army in South
Ossetia should be properly assessed, including from
the standpoint of international law. First and foremost,
there is the responsibility of the Georgian leadership,
which took military action against civilians in the
country and committed, over a period of almost two
decades, many acts that can be classified as
international crimes.

At the current time, the situation in the so-called
buffer zones is becoming more tense as a result of the
build-up there of Georgia's armed forces, something
that may lead to new hotbeds of tension on the borders
between South Ossetia and Abkhazia.

In conclusion, I would mention that the Russian
and Georgian peoples, historically, have always had
warm and fraternal relations, and we are certain that
this will continue in the future. The conflict unleashed
by Saakashvili is an example of civilians' interests
being held hostage by political adventures.

