Allow me to begin by welcoming our new colleague, the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, Ambassador Barbara Woodward. I will be reading out the joint statement of the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in the Security Council - Indonesia and Viet Nam. We would first like to thank the briefers for their comprehensive briefings. Our two delegations commend the commitment of the Government of the Sudan to implementing its national plan for the protection of civilians. We are confident that, following the historic peace agreement, advancement towards a peaceful and prosperous Sudan will take place with greater momentum. Against that background, we would like to highlight three important points. The first is continued cooperation with the region. As members of ASEAN, we firmly believe in the virtue of regional cooperation to support peacebuilding. We acknowledge the role of the Government of South Sudan, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African Union in the Sudan's transition and call for the continuation of such cooperation in the Sudan after the drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We emphasize that a smooth transition to the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) can be achieved only through close coordination among the United Nations, the Government of the Sudan, the African Union and IGAD in order to preserve the gains achieved for long-term peace and development in the Sudan. The second point entails improving the security and economic situation. We echo the Secretary-General's observation that peace in the Sudan will be complete only once all conflicts come to an end. We are concerned about the persistent intercommunal violence and civil unrest in numerous parts of the country, as well as the incident between protesters and UNAMID formed police units in El Fasher on 16 November. The peace agreement has to be felt by all Sudanese. For them to feel confident in the transition, they need to feel safe and all violence should end. In that regard, we welcome the cooperation between the Government and the Sudan with UNAMID, including through joint patrols by UNAMID and the Sudan Police Force. We look forward to the continuation of that exercise until the termination of UNAMID's mandate. It is important for that spirit of cooperation to continue with UNITAMS. At the same time, the international community should also strengthen its efforts to support economic development in the country, which is facing critical challenges due to the coronavirus disease pandemic, heavy flooding and other natural disasters. The Government has been facing a budget deficit of approximately $250 million per month. In that regard, the Sudan's access to international financial assistance, investment and debt relief should be further facilitated. The third point concerns ensuring full support to both UNITAMS and UNAMID. We welcome last October's Tripartite Coordination Mechanism meeting among the United Nations, the African Union and the Government of the Sudan. That is a testament to the commitment of the Government of the Sudan to ensuring a smooth drawdown of UNAMID and transition to UNITAMS. As troop- and police-contributing countries to UNAMID and other United Nations peacekeeping missions, Indonesia and Viet Nam emphasize the importance of ensuring the safety, security and well-being of all peacekeepers during the liquidation process. The same support should also be rendered to UNITAMS in ensuring the full implementation of its mandate. We would also like to emphasize the importance of the appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary- General for the Sudan in accordance with resolution 2524 (2020). To conclude, our two delegations once again emphasize our firm commitment in supporting the Sudan in its transition towards permanent peace, security and prosperity.
