Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): The United
Kingdom welcomes the strong signal that this
unanimous Security Council resolution sends to the
Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. The Security Council has acted decisively and
quickly under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations to the provocative and irresponsible acts of the
regime. This resolution underlines powerfully to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea the importance
of this issue and reiterates the international
community's condemnation of its actions.

The requirements of this resolution are clear. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and all States
concerned have a legal obligation to comply with its
provisions.

The United Kingdom has made clear its
condemnation of the nuclear test that took place on 9
October. That was an irresponsible act by the
Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea that raised tensions regionally and
internationally. The Democratic People's Republic
carried out the test despite the repeated urgings of its
neighbours and the wider international community. The
test contravened the commitments of the Democratic
People's Republic under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and ignored our
own Security Council resolution 1695 (2006).

Against this background, the test cannot be seen
as anything other than a direct provocation to the
international community. It is a threat to international
peace and security. The Council had a duty to condemn
this behaviour. It was important, therefore, that the
international community send a strong message to
Pyongyang. It has done so in robust terms.

But let me stress that the resolution is targeted at
stopping the weapons of mass destruction and missile
programmes and changing the behaviour of those in
authority in Pyongyang. It is not aimed at the people of
North Korea, who are already suffering greatly.

We now expect the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to comply with the resolution and return to
the six-party talks. If it does, and if it complies fully
with the resolution's provisions and if the talks resume
successfully, the United Kingdom would expect the
Security Council to lift the measures imposed today.

But the choice is for North Korea - to accept the
wishes of the international community, or to flout
international law and the obligations we are imposing
today.

