Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): My delegation is
grateful to Japan for having organized this important
debate under the presidency of Foreign Minister
Okada. We are also grateful for the presence and
statements of the Secretary-General, the Foreign
Ministers of Afghanistan and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Minister of Defence of Sierra Leone, the Minister
of Justice of Timor-Leste and the Managing Director of
the World Bank.

Austria associates itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representatives of the European Union
and the Human Security Network later in this meeting.

How to make the best possible use of the window
of opportunity in the immediate aftermath of conflict is
not only the critical challenge for countries emerging
from conflict, but also a critical challenge for the
international community at large. It is crucial to long-
term peace and stability and the realization of early
peace dividends. Decisive action aimed at achieving
durable peace and long-term sustainable development
must be undertaken from the earliest stages onwards
and go hand in hand with the possible deployment of
integrated peacekeeping missions.

In order for peacebuilding measures to prove
successful, generating national ownership must be at
the centre of all efforts. Peacebuilding activities should
therefore draw on existing national capacities while at
the same time assisting the development of effective
civilian capacities, including the identification of
opportunities and capacity-building for local private
sector engagement. A stronger involvement of the local
private sector should also be considered in the context
of procurement activities for peacekeeping operations.
This would support the provision of social stability
through economic opportunity, thus contributing to the
irreversibility of the peacebuilding process.

Key priorities in the immediate aftermath of
conflict include the protection of human rights, the re-
establishment of the rule of law, the inclusive
implementation of peace processes, the reintegration of
refugees and internally displaced persons, effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration -
including of children associated with armed groups -
as well as security sector reform. The establishment
and support of effective and independent justice and
reconciliation mechanisms is a precondition for
ensuring accountability for past abuses. They will
contribute to justice and long-term peace, as well as to
the reconciliation of war-torn societies, thereby
minimizing the risk of future outbreaks of violence.

We are convinced that peacebuilding can be
successful only if all sectors of society are included. In
accordance with Security Council resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008), all activities in the field of
peacebuilding must be mindful of the Vital role women
play in re-establishing post-conflict societies. In this
regard, I also fully support what was just said by my
Lebanese colleague. The specific needs of women must
be reflected in peace agreements and their involvement
in participation in the development and implementation
of post-conflict strategies assured. This should be
complemented by the allegation of gender-specific
funds.

Civil society should play a greater role in the
early stages of peacebuilding. We will focus on new
concepts of cooperation between military and civilian
actors at the forthcoming 3C Conference to be held in
Vienna on 5 and 6 May. Enhanced coordination at the
national, regional and international levels, as well as
ensuring mutual accountability, are prerequisites for
avoiding duplication and ensuring efficiency. To secure
the success of our engagement, we must coordinate
with all partners having a comparative advantage on
the ground. Cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the European Union and the
African Union, as well as with the international
financial institutions, must be intensified.

Austria acknowledges the crucial role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in addressing a country's
post-conflict needs. The experiences of countries on its
agenda underline the necessity of involving the
Commission from the outset. Peacekeeping and
peacebuilding must be considered in a coherent and
parallel manner rather than sequentially. In this
context, we welcome the fact, for instance, that the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste,
which is a peacekeeping operation, is already
integrating peacebuilding aspects into its work, thus
helping to bridge a potential gap between peacekeeping
and later peacebuilding efforts there.

We would welcome increased interaction between
the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, more particularly when the Council
works on mandates for United Nations missions. We
are confident that the ongoing review process will
strengthen this relationship and enable the Commission
to make full use of its advisory role and the important
contributions it can make to this process. In this
context, we believe that Sierra Leone - and that is a
point that has already been made a number of times -
is a model case for peacebuilding with the support of
the Peacebuilding Commission. The Government's
commitment to creating long-term peace and stability,
with the firm support of the international community

aligned behind the country's agenda for change, as well
as the United Nations Joint Vision, emphasizes the
principle of national ownership and helps to avoid
duplication through enhanced coordination.

Finally, I would like to thank the Japanese
presidency of the Security Council for preparing the
draft presidential statement, which has Austria's full
support.

