Mr. Tladi (South Africa): I thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2012/50) and thank the Legal
Counsel, Ms. Patricia O'Brien, and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov, for their briefings.

South Africa remains concerned at the continued
incidents of piracy off the coast of Somalia. We have
noted the continuing month-to-month decline in the
piracy attacks in 2011 due to, inter alia, the presence of
naval forces and implementation of industry-developed
best management practices and International Maritime
Organization guidance. We are hopeful that the trend
will continue into 2012 and beyond.

The report before the Council raises important
questions about further efforts of the international
community to fight the scourge of piracy off the coast
of Somalia, particularly in relation to the creation of
specialized anti-piracy courts.

The first point that we wish to highlight with
respect to the creation of specialized anti-piracy courts
is the need to ensure national ownership in the
establishment of such courts. The clearest reflection of
national ownership is the adoption of national
legislation, and in that regard we note the intention of
the Somali authorities to exercise their sovereign right
to adopt relevant legislation after the transitional
period, when a newly elected parliament will be in
place.

We have also taken note of the fact that the
authorities of Somalia would prefer not to have Somali
courts operating outside the territory of Somalia. The
creation of specialized Somali courts in Somalia
would, in addition to respecting the wishes of the
Somalis, have the added benefits of capacity-building
and infrastructure development. We are, of course,
cognizant that the security situation in Somalia makes
that a difficult prospect. But that fact should galvanize
us to make a greater effort to address the security
challenges and instability on land.

We also wish to highlight concerns expressed by
a number of national authorities about the creation of

new, specialized anti-piracy courts with jurisdiction
limited exclusively to piracy. Like those States, we are
concerned that this may serve to redirect the limited
prosecutorial and judicial resources from other crimes
that are of equal importance to those countries.

Moreover, the wisdom of creating specialized
courts, appointing prosecutors, judges and other staff to
deal only with piracy must be assessed, taking into
account the rate of prosecutions in the countries where
such courts are being considered. The figures presented
in the report of the Secretary-General indicate that
since 2006 there has been a total of only 639
prosecutions in the countries concerned. In that regard,
we concur with the assessment made in the report that
prior to embarking on what could be a costly project,
there should be an assessment of the anticipated
caseload.

The third issue that we wish to highlight is one
that is not addressed in the current report, namely, the
problem of illegal fishing and dumping off the coast of
Somalia. It is an integral part of the problems off the
coast of Somalia. The issue is considered in the
Secretary-General's report of 25 October 2011
(S/2011/661) and, for that reason, we can be fairly
brief. Given the presence of so many naval vessels in
the area, we find it difficult to understand how there
can be the kind of dearth of information reported in the
Secretary-General's report of October 2011.

We hope that, in the context of paragraph 24 of
resolution 2020 (2011), those States and organizations
with a naval presence in the area will provide the
Secretary-General with the necessary information to
enable the Council to take the matter further. If we fail
to take decisive action in that regard, we risk creating
the impression that the Council is willing to act to curb
piracy only because the vital economic interests of
some countries are threatened. Conversely, the lethargy
in acting against the plundering of Somali resources
could be construed as undermining the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Somalia, which the Council
reaffirms in all its resolutions.

I wish to conclude with, perhaps, the most
important point. Piracy off the coast of Somalia is a
serious problem with huge implications. However, it
remains a symptom of a greater problem, which is the
instability and political challenges on land. The
problem of piracy cannot be resolved until all the main
challenges are confronted. According to available
information, over $2 billion was spent in 2011 alone on
naval presence - excluding, of course, the other costs
that we have spoken about today - compared with a
measly $300 million that was approved for the support
of the African Union Mission in Somalia in 2011. That
is a picture that is out of balance.

