Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
very warmly appreciate the words of support and
commendation that the Committee has received. I am
particularly pleased that Council members and others
have warmly recognized the work of the Vice-
Chairmen, because the work of the subcommittees has
been absolutely crucial to the progress that we have
made on the reports. I really pay tribute to the amount
of personal effort and intelligent determination that
they have brought to the work of the subcommittees.

I am also glad that members of the Council have
recognized the excellent work of our experts, who have
formed a truly united team now, which has given us
tremendous help - and of the Secretariat. Council
members have also drawn attention to the contribution
of my own delegation, which comes better from you,
members of the Council, than from me. I want to
underline the debt of gratitude that I owe to Anna
Clunes and the rest of my team for maintaining an up-
front, initiative approach that has provided a real grip
on this subject for the whole Committee.

Let me go through a number of points that arose
in the interventions. Ambassador Mahbubani raised
three questions with his typical imagination. I think
that the criteria for self-assessment are going to emerge
from the work that our experts are doing, from their
experience of what they are finding in the reports. And
the Chair intends to offer to the Committee, with the
help of the experts, a synthesis of ongoing experience,
which will begin to amount to benchmarks for what we
are looking at and what we are looking for. We
discussed this with the experts, and in due course over
this next period, we will provide some advice to
members of the Committee that will be available to the
wider membership about what is coming of the reports
and what the emerging criteria are on which we are
working. I think it is better that this should come out
from experience and from an empirical approach rather
than from our trying to lay it down as a matter of
principles. We will discuss this within the Committee,
but I assure Singapore and others that the Committee
will work to produce what Ambassador Mahbubani is
working for.

As to preparing for the major annual review that
we will have in October, the United Kingdom
delegation will commit itself to putting around a paper
before that debate that will set out some issues worth
deeper discussion. They will be issues that will not be
unfamiliar to Committee members, because we discuss
most things, but we will try to set the framework for
that debate in late September or early October in
coordination with the presidency of the month. We will
try to make some suggestions to our colleagues on the
Council as to what we should be looking at.

Ambassador Mahbubani asked a third question.
He really set a little trap that is tempting to fall into. So
I shall. He asked for a layman's analogy, and what
occurred to me in response was that the Committee has
in a sense become a fitness trainer. A fitness trainer is,
in many respects, your friend, because he is aiming to
do you good; and in some respects he is your enemy
because he is hurting you. It hurts, but it prolongs your
life. The important thing about the Counter-Terrorism
Committee is that it is acting on doctor's orders. There
is the threat of a life-affecting disease that we are
having to attack. We have to raise our capability to deal
with this. Nearly all of us need help in doing so.

The CTC is the catalyst for the provision of the
instruments for raising that capacity. The fitter the
global system is, without exception, to meet the threat
of the disease of terrorism, the longer our global
society will remain healthy and will prolong its life. I
think this is a fair analogy, but do not forget that it is
under doctor's orders. It is your choice, Member States,
whether you respond to the programme, but your
doctor has laid out the prescription.

Many of you have referred to non-reporting
States, and we are working in cooperation with those
States to make sure that they report soon. I would like
to underline, please, the role of the regional groups in
making sure that their members do respond to the
requirement of resolution 1373 (2001). We were not
going to have a comprehensive debate today, and not
all regional groups have decided to contribute, but I
note that those regional groups from whom the great
majority of non-reporters come have not decided to
contribute today. There is a responsibility within the
region to make sure that members who have not
reported do not let down those members who have
reported.

A number of speakers - including Mexico,
Ireland, the European Union (EU) and the Rio
Group have commented on the relationship between
our work and the requirements of human rights, and on
the balance that is needed in this area. I think the
Committee has got this balance right in showing a
considerable awareness of human rights requirements,
but not taking on any responsibility as a function -
because it is not our function - and in having a good
relationship with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, with civil society and non-
governmental organizations who, at some point, I
would like the Committee to agree, should come in
some guise or other to have a discussion within the
Committee.

 

Let me just make one small comment on the
quotation from High Commissioner Mary Robinson
that came out of the Irish intervention. She says that
her shadow is cast by - and I paraphrase - by
excessive security. Yes, a shadow is cast on human
rights by excessive security. But a shadow is cast on
human rights and freedom by inadequate security. We
have to realize that there is a balance between the two.
The action of terrorists is an attack on human rights
and individual rights, and the fight against terrorism is
itself an extension of human rights. So let us get the
balance right.

I think many speakers have rightly focused on the
assistance programme. We are taking time to get it
going to a point at which it is of real practical help to
individual Member States. The appointment of two
experts in that area has accelerated the programme, and
the Committee is committed to producing a website
that is of real use within the 90-day period coming up. I
think that the United States is right to draw attention to
the fact that donors must offer more, because there are
donors out there - or potential donors - who have
not come forward. We will be enhancing our contacts
with them to accelerate the programme. I warmly
welcome the words of the European Union in
establishing itself as a major source of donor activity,
and we will be in contact with the European Union to
chase it up.

I will continue to have open meetings with United
Nations Members, and I have to say that I am
extremely grateful to the members of delegations who
come along to these meetings - in quite considerable
numbers - for the spirit with which they enter the
conversations and for the care they take to realize the
opportunity we give them to ask questions and to look
at areas where they are uncertain about the
Committee's approach. I think this is a very important
aspect of the Committee's work, and I appreciate the
response.

Finally, I think that the intervention of the Rio
Group made a good point about resources. We do not
have, in this area, the resources that the importance of
the subject dictates. That is something that we will
have to look at - not just the provision of assistance,
but the resources that come from the United Nations
family and the Secretariat in making sure that the work
of the Committee continues to be of real practical value
to all United Nations Members and that the momentum
behind the Committee is maintained. That is an area
that we will have to look at on the agenda of the
Committee.

I thank you, Mr. President, for your care in
having organized and presided over this meeting,
which I think has been very useful. We look forward to
reporting from the Committee on our next 90-day
period.

