I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; Ambassador Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations, on behalf of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, in his capacity as Coordinator of the Joint Commission established by the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA); and Ambassador Philippe Kridelka, Permanent Representative of Belgium, in his capacity as Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for their detailed briefings. Tunisia reiterates the view that the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is an important addition to the global non-proliferation architecture and that it significantly contributed to reducing the tensions over Iran's nuclear programme. While reaffirming the importance of addressing the legitimate security concerns in the region, we believe that the collapse of the JCPOA would in no way serve that purpose. We therefore renew our call for the full and effective implementation of this agreement and of resolution 2231 (2015) by all parties. Since resolution 2231 (2015) clearly states that the notification, envisaged in paragraph 11, should be received "from a JCPOA participant State of an issue that the JCPOA participant State believes constitutes significant non-performance of commitments under the JCPOA", and since the United States has, of its own volition, unilaterally withdrawn from the JCPOA, Tunisia was among the Security Council members that considered that the United States is ineligible to submit such a notification pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015). Accordingly, we could not support the actions requested in that regard at the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly, including the facilitation of the re-establishment of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and its Panel of Experts. We note that the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/1177) continues to state that the withdrawal of the United States from the agreement and the reimposition of national sanctions are contrary to the goals set out in resolution 2231 (2015), and that other steps taken by the United States may prevent Iran and other States Members of the United Nations from implementing their commitments under resolution 2231 (2015). We sincerely hope that this situation will soon be reversed. At the same time, we encourage Iran to reconsider its decision to no longer comply with its nuclear commitments. We take note of the continuing differences of interpretation regarding the implementation of the provisions of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015), in particular with regard to ballistic-missile related activities, and we renew our call to all the parties concerned to engage in constructive dialogue to resolve those differences. In the meantime, we encourage Iran to refrain from any activities that can deepen mistrust and exacerbate tensions in the region, which already reached an extremely dangerous level beginning in May 2018. We also reiterate our condemnation of all the unlawful attacks that have been perpetrated in the region and call on all parties to avoid all actions that could further aggravate the situation. Lastly, Tunisia welcomes all initiatives aimed at promoting dialogue and trust among the parties concerned, in particular the countries of the region, including through the creation of new platforms and mechanisms. At the same time, we reiterate our belief that the Conference on the Establishment of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction, established by the General Assembly, which successfully held its first session in November 2019, can be used as such a platform for regular dialogue and confidence-building on all issues related to non-proliferation, disarmament and regional security, and help reduce the tensions in the region. We therefore once again encourage all the parties concerned to constructively participate in the coming sessions of the Conference.
