Mr. Frlec (Slovenia): Slovenia welcomes the
opportunity to discuss the situation in Africa in the Security
Council at the ministerial level under the excellent
leadership of the Swedish Presidency. One of the turning
points in the history of the modern world and the United
Nations was the process of African decolonization. This
development changed the face of the world and captured
the imagination of a new generation of world leaders. It
advanced the belief in racial equality, individual liberty
and in the right of all peoples to self-determination. The
United Nations, therefore, cannot in good conscience fail
to address the current challenges facing Africans as they
strive to restore their proud past and secure a fruitful
future. It is not an exaggeration to say that the success or
failure of the United Nations depends on its ability to
make a meaningful contribution to the solution of the
contemporary problems of Africa.

Africa is a vast and varied continent, characterized
by intense contradictions. On the positive side, African
leaders are working hard to transcend their dependence on
others for the maintenance of regional stability and
economic prosperity. In the Central African Republic, for
instance, African mediators and troops are helping resolve
problems arising from a period of acute instability. In
Sierra Leone, a subregional organization, the Economic
Community of West African States, paved the way for the
restoration of the democratically elected Government.
This, hopefully, will signal the end of a protracted
insurgency. An increasing number of African nations are
abandoning inefficient State-dominated economic models
in favour of outward-looking, market-based systems. In
over two dozen countries, pro-democracy movements
have brought about substantial reforms and the growth of
democratic institutions, particularly a free press.

On the down side, African issues still dominate the
agenda of the Security Council. There is, therefore, a
widely shared perception that the progress attained so far
has not been sufficient and that the recent achievements
in Africa are still too fragile to serve as a bulwark against
conflicts. This state of affairs is all the more disquieting
in the light of some of the characteristics of these
conflicts. They include indiscriminate attacks on civilians,
the use of child soldiers in warfare, creation of large
refugee populations, the deliberate fomenting of ethnic
hatred and transborder interventionism.

It is dangerous to generalize about the sources of
conflicts in Africa as about most other things African. Yet
there is, unfortunately, a leitmotif associated with most of
the African crises. It is the recurrent bitter theme of
economic disparity and social deprivation.

A large part of the solution to the current African
problems therefore lies in the recognition of the intrinsic

 

link between the promotion of economic growth and the
construction of durable peace. In our opinion, this is also
one of the most powerful messages of the Secretary-
General's report on Africa of 13 April 1998.

The experience of many countries in transition,
including my own, has shown that accelerated economic
performance requires better use of existing resources,
increase in investment and strengthening of the private
sector. Macroeconomic reform is also essential, in particular
efforts to restructure public finance and secure an
independent monetary authority. Our experience also
corroborates the view of the Secretary-General that the
people themselves are the first and foremost resource for
economic development. The general education and training
of people, as well as the imparting of specialized
knowledge and know-how, is thus of utmost importance.

This experience aside, it is important to recognize that
the international community has an obligation to enhance
the capacity of African Governments to manage their
economies effectively. Many countries in Africa are still
hobbled by a lack of adequate basic infrastructure and by
severe fiscal problems. International involvement, especially
that of financial institutions, is also required to address the
pressing issue of unsustainable debt overhang. Action in
this area would contribute greatly to the restoration of
macroeconomic stability and investor confidence in Africa.

Many of the basic answers to the African problems are
economic in nature. However, it is equally clear that the
immediate challenges to peace and security in Africa fall
within the competence of the Security Council. These
challenges have to be given the highest priority, not the
least because peace is an essential prerequisite for growth
and development.

At present, the Security Council is seized with a
number of specific African situations. Additionally, the
Council has embarked upon an important endeavour to
formulate guidelines concerning several key issues of
conflict prevention and management in Africa in general.

Slovenia supports important new ideas that are being
advanced to strengthen the effectiveness of arms embargoes
imposed by the Security Council and to stem illicit arms
flows to and within Africa. We are also pleased by the
adoption of specific proposals for the strengthening of
African peacekeeping potential. We believe it is important
to establish a credible and effective rapid-response
capability, backed by sufficient political will and practical
assistance from the international community.

Furthermore, Slovenia supports the efforts to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity, as well as with other
regional and subregional arrangements. The focus here
should be on conflict prevention, management and
resolution. In this context, we would like to reiterate our
belief that such cooperation should be based on the
framework established by Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter.

This ministerial meeting demonstrates the universal
support for Africa and bears witness to the search for new
approaches to solving African problems. The resolutions
and presidential statements which have been adopted so
far address some of the basic issues and will prove
especially useful in the work of the Security Council in
the future.

In closing, let me emphasize that despite the
emergence of new conflicts in Africa during the past year,
the potential for positive change may also be greater
today than it has been for decades. Africa is not an arena
for proxy wars any more. The end of the cold war has
also reanimated the Security Council, thus allowing it to
play a greater role in the resolution of African problems.
Led by its second African Secretary-General in a row, the
United Nations is well poised to promote effectively
peace and security in Africa. Slovenia therefore reaffirms
its full support for the continuous efforts to attain these
noble objectives.

