Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): As this is the first time that my country is
speaking as a member of the Security Council, I should like
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir. Under your able
leadership and guidance, we are in the best possible hands.
That is my conclusion after having worked with you since
1 January. My delegation also takes this opportunity to
express its appreciation to you for your enormous diligence,
which has made it possible for our informal consultations
of recent days to conclude today and for the Security
Council to pronounce itself - however regrettably - on
the dispatch to Guatemala of a mission of military
observers.

Our gratitude also goes to the Group of Friends of
Guatemala and the Secretariat.

As a Central American country and brother of
Guatemala, Costa Rica has embraced the enormous task
undertaken by the Guatemalan people to achieve a firm and
lasting peace. Ten years ago in Guatemala, we Central
Americans took a firm decision to assume direction of a
negotiating process that we ourselves had designed and
agreed upon, which led to the end of fighting in our
region, the achievement of peace, the consolidation of
democracy, respect for human rights and the
reconciliation of our peoples.

In Guatemala in 1987, the Presidents of Central
America effectively endorsed a procedure for the
establishment of a firm and lasting peace in Central
America, known as the Esquipulas II Agreement, which
consolidated the fruits of the useful negotiations
undertaken over three years through the mediation of the
Contadora Group.

Based on Esquipulas II, Central America, with the
active support and solidarity of the international
community, carried through a broad political negotiation
and dialogue, the achievements of which are now before
us: War has ended in Nicaragua, El Salvador and, now,
in Guatemala. In the five Central American countries,
there are democratic Governments established through
free and pluralistic electoral processes. Throughout the
countries of the area, there is a broad pattern of respect
for individual freedoms and the rule of law is the basis of
political organization.

In this scenario developed by Central America, our
Guatemalan brothers have carried out an important
exercise of negotiation and national reconciliation that has
brought peace, an end to a long-standing conflict of over
35 years and the establishment of a series of political,
economic and social agreements aimed at transforming
and modernizing Guatemala.

Guatemala has not only put an end to war; it has
made significant strides towards establishing a broad-
based, pluralistic, multiethnic society that respects human
rights and whose fundamental aim, based on national
reconciliation, is the achievement of progress,
development, justice and equity for all its inhabitants,
without exception.

It is a source of special satisfaction to my country
that this noteworthy effort of the people of Guatemala has
always enjoyed the valuable support of the international
community, expressed, on the one hand, by the teamwork
of the Group of Friends - made up of Colombia, France,
Mexico, Norway, Spain, the United States of America and
Venezuela - in the context of the negotiating process;
and, on the other, by the United Nations, whose active

 

presence was essential in promoting a resolution of the
conflict and fostering the conditions necessary to the return
of refugees and displaced persons, the observance of human
rights and development assistance, and as an expression of
the political support necessary for the pursuance of peace
negotiations through the active and successful mediation of
the Secretariat.

For over 10 years, the United Nations has clearly and
unyieldingly supported the peace efforts of Central
America. Repeated resolutions of the General Assembly
have established the necessary political backing and support
for the tasks of development. Moreover, this Council,
through its own competence established under the Charter,
has given constant attention to the situation in Central
America and responded promptly to the peacekeeping needs
of the region, as evidenced by the operations of the United
Nations Observer Group in Central America, the United
Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador and the United
Nations Mission for the Verification of Human Rights and
of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala.

For all these reasons, my delegation deeply regrets that
on this, Costa Rica's first opportunity to participate in the
formal voting of the Security Council, and with regard to
a situation that has nothing whatsoever to do with the peace
process in Guatemala, one delegation has exercised its right
of veto. We have thus lost an excellent opportunity for the
United Nations to assume a leading and active role in that
brotherly Central American country.

The exercise of this veto is doubly regrettable, given
the clear and firm assertions of that delegation that it agrees
with the objectives and has no objection whatever to the
text of the draft resolution submitted to the Security
Council by the Group of Friends, which enjoys the
sponsorship of my country and several other member
States.

The situation in which we find ourselves following the
exercise of that veto is extremely damaging not to
Guatemala or to Central America, but to the United
Nations. The Government of Guatemala and the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca have faithfully
carried out all that was agreed in and established by the
peace accords. We are sure that, in the worst-case scenario,
there will be friendly democratic countries ready to carry
out the important functions that would have been entrusted
to that mission of military observers, if the Government of
Guatemala requests it of them. For the United Nations,
however, this is the loss of an extraordinary opportunity to
uphold the objectives of the Charter and to maintain its
presence and influence on a peace process that,
fortunately, is drawing to a close and with which not only
Guatemala, but the entire Central American region, is
closing the door on many years of war, death and
destruction.

It is particularly painful for the delegation of Costa
Rica to have to make this statement. My country has
played an active and leading role in the Central American
peace process. Without being involved in the armed
conflicts that have torn our region over the past two
decades, Costa Rica was actively committed to the
negotiations that ultimately achieved peace and
reconciliation in Nicaragua and El Salvador. We would
have been happy today if, with our vote, the Security
Council had unanimously approved the dispatch of that
mission of military observers to Guatemala. We deeply
regret that this has not been possible. The damage is to
the United Nations.

