Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today's topic is very current. Unless there is
a comprehensive approach to conflict resolution I do
not think it is possible to hope for any possibility of
restoring lasting peace in countries that have emerged
from a crisis. Experience has shown that the United
Nations peacekeeping operations are becoming
increasingly complex and include more and more
peace-building components. In this connection,
coordination between the Security Council and other
organs of the United Nations is particularly important.
This has already been spoken of today, and we are
delighted to welcome the President of the General
Assembly and the President of the Economic and
Social Council to our meeting.

With the participation of the United Nations
specialized agencies, a comprehensive approach
requires that there be no gap when making the
transition from one aspect of conflict resolution to
another. It is important that the Security Council
provide the political support for the peace-building
efforts in those cases when the central role is shifted to
the specialized agencies.

I want to say a few words about the situations that
were proposed for our discussion today. A graphic
example of the importance of a comprehensive
approach is Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro. Here,
there is close cooperation not only between the various
components of the United Nations system, but also
between the regional organizations that make an
important contribution to the overall cause.

Another conclusion with relation to the Kosovo
question is that a particular responsibility is borne by
the parties involved in a conflict. Unfortunately, the
positive changes achieved in the Kosovo settlement
were achieved basically due to the efforts of the
international presence in that province, whereas the
temporary self-governing bodies have often hampered
these efforts and abused the powers entrusted to them,
and have even tried to subvert basic Security Council
resolutions, for instance resolution 1244 (1999). This is
an important lesson we must take into account with
regard to other situations.

Now in Afghanistan things are complex, but that
situation is moving towards settlement. This is largely
because the settlement is taking place on the basis of
principles that were agreed to by the Afghans
themselves, with the coordinating, even leading, role
played by the United Nations. Those principles were
endorsed unanimously by the Security Council. We
think this is a guarantee for eventual success in
Afghanistan. At this crucial stage, when we are leading
up to the Constitutional Loya Jirga and the general
elections, the coordinating functions of the United
Nations in Afghanistan are more important than ever.

An important responsibility is entrusted to the
countries of the region, including complying with the
Kabul Declaration on Good-Neighbourly Relations,
which was supported by the Security Council. We
believe the Council could think about using that base to
work out a system of comprehensive guarantees of
non-interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan.

The peacekeeping lessons from Sierra Leone
show how dangerous it is to let one's attention wander
with regard to post-conflict social and economic
restoration. There we have seen a decrease in interest
of international donors in these tasks. In our view, this
means that the post-conflict process has not been
completed. In turn, this has become one of the reasons
why this conflict has spilled over into neighbouring
African countries.

Finally, with regard to Timor-Leste and the
experience of complex settlement solutions, it is
necessary, it is important that a flexible approach be
adopted, along with quick, clear reactions to changes in
the situation in the country, which is in a post-conflict
phase. This is extremely important for the success of
United Nations activities in the post-conflict settlement
phase.

In conclusion, all of these lessons must, to a
certain extent, be taken into account with regard to
post-war restoration in Iraq. The Secretary-General
appealed to us about this today, and the President of the
General Assembly also mentioned this point, as have
many other participants in our discussion. We are
convinced - and here we agree with the Secretary-
General - that we must clearly define what the United
Nations role and the role of the Security Council will
be at all stages of the post-war rebuilding of Iraq.

A special point on this issue was made yesterday
by Vladimir Putin, the President of Russia, after his
meeting with Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United
Kingdom. The Secretary-General also raised this point
today. As the President of Russia stressed, we do not
rule out the possibility that a settlement could be
effected in Iraq without United Nations participation.
Indeed, the war was launched without United Nations
authorization, but we doubt whether any settlement
achieved without United Nations participation would
be enduring, effective or just.

We believe, as the President of Russia suggested,
that we must first identify the action to be undertaken
to resolve the humanitarian problems of Iraq above and
beyond the steps that have already been taken.
Secondly, we must determine how to resolve the issue
of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. This question is
of concern to all, is directly related to the security
situation in the region and the non-proliferation regime,
and cannot be ignored. Russia is prepared to play a
very active role in supporting the activities of the
inspectors in Iraq. In this context, we must pursue and
conclude the inspections in the post-war period.

With regard to humanitarian questions, we are
prepared at this early stage to ease or even suspend
certain sanctions directly and exclusively relating to
humanitarian goods. The other components of the oil-
for-food programme could be resumed under United
Nations control while some sanctions remain in effect
and legitimate authority has not been established in
Baghdad during this period.

We believe that a debate on all of these issues
should be initiated in the Security Council and that we
must decide how we can reach agreement on these
questions. We are prepared for such discussions and the
sooner we launch them the better it will be, in
particular for the people of Iraq.

