Mr. Osvald (Sweden): Later in the debate, the
Netherlands will speak on behalf of the European Union.
We, of course, stand fully behind that statement.

While the people of Afghanistan has now endured 18
years of war, there are no indications that the warring
parties will heed repeated international appeals for peace
and a negotiated settlement. On the contrary, there are
reports that the fighting could intensify when spring arrives.
Innocent men, women and children will continue to suffer
the intolerable agonies of war.

A negotiated settlement, beginning with an immediate
ceasefire and the formation of a broad-based transitional
government, and ultimately followed by democratic
elections, is the only acceptable road to peace in
Afghanistan. Although the Afghan conflict can, in the end,
be resolved only by the Afghans themselves, the
international community must, in good faith, contribute to
such a solution. Such a contribution should consist of the
following elements.

First, outside involvement and interference in the
conflict, including the continued supply of arms to the
warring parties, must cease. Sweden calls on all States to
strictly observe the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan, and we encourage all States to
commit themselves, as the members of the European Union
have done, not to deliver arms to Afghanistan.

Secondly, the United Nations is the most appropriate
and credible facilitator for a political settlement between the
Afghan parties. All possible support must be given to the
United Nations Special Mission and the Secretary-General' s
special representative, Mr. Norbert Holl, in his efforts to
bring about the restoration of peace, normalcy and national
reconciliation in Afghanistan. It should be in the interest of
all States, in the region and elsewhere, for contributions
to the peace efforts to be channelled through or closely
coordinated with the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan. Only in this way can the international
community provide concerted and increased pressure on
the Afghan parties to resolve the conflict peacefully, and
thus promote regional stability in the long term.
Competing international efforts to bring about a
negotiated settlement risk being exploited by the parties.

Thirdly, the continuing violations of human rights
and in particular the increasing discrimination against
women and girls, are a cause of great concern. The
international community must give voice to this concern
and demand that these rights be respected. Human rights
standards are universal and must not be dishonoured or
subject to negotiation. Another source of grave concern is
drug trafficking, with its far-reaching negative effects
both inside and outside Afghanistan. Again, concerted
international efforts are necessary to confront this
dangerous threat not only to the health and well-being of
individuals but also to the peaceful development of
Afghanistan. Sweden is also concerned by reports of the
continued use of Afghanistan as a training base for
terrorist activities.

Fourthly, continued humanitarian assistance by the
international community could contribute positively to the
peace process, as well as to national reconciliation and
rehabilitation in Afghanistan. Sweden has for many years
been one of the major donors of humanitarian assistance
to Afghanistan. We have worked hard to help alleviate the
suffering of the people of Afghanistan and to assist in the
reconstruction of that tormented nation.

Afghanistan is a country in desperate need of peace
and a chance to rebuild and start anew. It is ultimately for
Afghanistan itself - all its people, all its leaders - to
make that decision. If it makes the right choice, I am
convinced that the international community will not be
found wanting in supporting Afghanistan on the road to
a better future.

