Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank the Chadian presidency for organizing this
timely debate.

(spoke in English)

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the European Union and would like to add a few
remarks in its national capacity.

The recent attacks in Pakistan and Yemen are yet
another terrible reminder of how terrorism threatens
international peace and security. We are deeply
concerned by the growing ties between terrorism and
organized crime, from trafficking in human beings,
drugs and arms to kidnapping. Criminal associations
and some terrorist groups use the same illegal
instruments and channels, starting with corruption.
These threats transcend the borders of individual
States and require a multidimensional approach ~ and
not only the military option - that addresses the root
causes. We therefore need to strengthen Government
institutions, the rule of law, governance, border control,
arms control and control of financial flows. We also
need to promote socioeconomic development, youth
employment, respect for human rights, and the fight
against poverty and corruption.

We reiterate the need for a comprehensive,
coordinated strategy at the global and regional levels.
Is such a strategy is to be applied, individual States, the
United Nations, regional and subregional organizations,
and civil society must all work together. At the same time,
it is critical to concretely apply international measures
aimed at preventing and reducing terrorism and
criminal activities. Starting with full implementation of
the Palermo Convention and its Protocols, particularly
the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by
Land, Sea and Air. This is the only universal legal
instrument dedicated to this crime. It seeks to prevent
and counter trafficking in migrants, protect their rights,
and strengthen cooperation between Member States.
This commitment was reiterated forcefully at the sixty-
ninth session of the General Assembly in the omnibus
resolution on organized crime, of which Italy was the
main sponsor again this year. It is in this perspective
that we recall the support our country lent to the
resolution on countering organized crime proposed by
the African Union and adopted yesterday.

My country has expressed its commitment to
fighting the terrorist threat by contributing to the birth
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, participating
in the main international and regional initiatives, and
fully implementing the sanction regimes and resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). Italy is also engaged in
countering the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
Libya, Syria and Iraq.

We encourage dialogue and cooperation among
countries of different cultures and religious traditions in
countering terrorism. Italy also believes that combating
terrorism, violent extremism and criminality cannot
be independent of efforts to resolve political and
institutional crises in the attempt to bring peace to
countries torn apart by violent conflicts, and to improve
socioeconomic conditions in less developed regions.
In West Africa and the Sahel, Italy has implemented
complete sets of programmes in the fields of the rule of
law, institution-building, and training. Teams of Italian
officers have supported projects to build the capacity
of law-enforcement agencies in Guinea-Bissau, Mali,
Sierra Leone, Senegal and Nigeria. Italy has also
promoted customized police-training programmes on
border-control techniques and trained African officials
at border postings in Italy.

With regard to initiatives to break up the marriage
of convenience between criminal networks and terrorist
organizations, the Italian anti-Mafia bureau signed
a memorandum of understanding with its Nigerian
partner on countering trafficking in human beings and
the related illegal financial income. All these technical
assistance programmes are encompassed in the broader
framework of development cooperation activities that
Italy continues to carry on in several countries of West
Africa and the Sahel region. New joint initiatives are
focused on the fight against trafficking in migrants in
all its aspects.

Today's debate rightly focuses on connections
between countering organized crime and countering
terrorism. Its outcomes can provide a useful
instrument for better coordinating the initiatives that
the international community is called on to enact to
address all forms of terrorism and transnational crime.
Italy will continue to contribute to these initiatives with
strong commitment.

