Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to begin
by thanking you, Mr. President, for having organized
this important debate and for your continued leadership
in strengthening our understanding of the linkages
between international terrorism and organized crime,
both of which, as we have just heard, have grown
substantially in scale and threat over the past 20 years.

I am here because my country, Ireland, believes that
debates such as this matter and can make a difference.
A vitally important step in countering the twin threats
that I have spoken of is to better understand the nature
and scope ofthe links that exist between them. We must
do more to deepen our understanding together here at
the United Nations, in our Governments and across
civil society.

I would like to draw from your useful concept note
(S/2019/537, annex), Sir, and make four brief points.

First, it seems like a truism but it is a fact that fuelling
both terrorism and organized crime are the complex
and evolving global systems of money-laundering
and terrorist financing. We believe that we have no
hope of addressing that issue individually or in silos.
A coordinated approach is key to effectively tackling
it. Ireland's own response brings together a range of
Government departments and agencies, including the
Central Bank of Ireland, the Irish police, our Criminal
Assets Bureau and Irish Revenue Commissioners. But
we know we need more. The Security Council must
play its own part. We were pleased to co-sponsor
the French-led resolution 2462 (2019), setting out a
comprehensive approach to combating the financing of
terrorism. As ever, the challenge now is to move from
rhetoric to implementation.

Secondly, we know that organized crime groups
and terrorist organizations are increasingly recruiting
from the same pool of largely marginalized and often
vulnerable people. Prisons are particularly fertile
grounds for recruiting. Petty criminals and members
of organized criminal groups are often radicalized.
We believe that police training and the meaningful
involvement of women and youth are crucial in
combating that.

Thirdly, multilateral engagement and collaboration
are a sine qua non for effectively countering those
threats. My country, Ireland, sees a central role for the
United Nations in leading the coordinated and inclusive
response of Member States, guided by the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We believe that we ought
to make a concerted effort to increase the visibility and
effectiveness of United Nations activities on counter-
terrorism.

As a candidate for a seat on the Security Council
for the term 2021-2022, we believe two things - first,
that this is indeed a threat to our collective peace and
security; and secondly, that the Council not only can
but must play a role in understanding and combating
the links between terrorism and organized crime.

As an active member of the European Union (EU),
we want to acknowledge the important work undertaken
by the European Union Judicial Cooperation Unit in
improvingjudicial cooperation in countering organized
crime and terrorism. We also greatly value the work
of the European Border and Coast Guard Agency and
Europol and the support that they offer in facilitating
information-sharing among EU member States.

Fourthly and finally, we strongly believe that
counter-terrorism measures, especially cross-border
information-sharing, should never undermine our
obligations under international law, including human
rights law and international humanitarian law. Civil
society plays a crucial role, and we encourage further
efforts to strengthen that partnership. Put simply,
building and maintaining trust between public, private
and non-governmental organizations is the bedrock
upon which we must take this fight forward.

The Security Council, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the United Nations system
as a whole possess a wide variety of tools to combat
these threats. Our job is to ensure that we put them to
use. My country, Ireland, reiterates our unwavering
commitment to engaging actively with partners here
at the United Nations, and hopefully with the support
of this Chamber as a Security Council member in the
future, we will work actively to address the threats. We
believe that we owe at least that to the countless victims.

