Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Head of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM), for their briefings.

The use of chemical weapons is entirely
unacceptable under any circumstances. There is full
agreement within the Security Council on that point,
and it is shared by the entire international community.
The fact that chemical weapons have been used
multiple times in Syria, resulting in the deaths of
numerous civilians, is extremely serious and represents
a challenge to international peace and security.

The Security Council has played an important
role in addressing chemical weapons in Syria. As
High Representative Nakamitsu noted, 25 out of
27 chemical-weapon-production facilities have
been destroyed under resolution 2118 (2013). That
verification and destruction process should continue for
the remaining two facilities. At the same time, we also
heard from the High Representative that cooperation
from the Syrian Government remains insufficient. As
a party to the Chemical Weapons Convention and in
order to maintain and strengthen the non-proliferation
regime for weapons of mass destruction, Japan calls
on the Government of Syria to constructively engage
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).

In the context ofthe Syrian chemical-weapons issue,
the Council established an important tool, namely, the
JIM. The Council established the JIM. in 2015 through
resolution 2235 (2015), since the OPCW fact-finding
mission was not mandated to attribute responsibility for
the use of chemical weapons. Although Japan was not
a member of the Council at that time, we welcomed the
commencement of the JIM's work on accountability for
the use of chemical weapons.

In line with the seventh report of the Mechanism
presented by Mr. Mulet today (S/2017/904, annex),
Japan acknowledges that the Mechanism has identified
to the greatest extent feasible that the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
are perpetrators of the illegal use of such weapons.
Japan continues to have confidence in the expertise,
impartiality and professionalism of the JIM, which are
reflected in the seventh report.

The Council has three main tasks with respect to
chemical weapons in Syria. The first is to continue
to confirm the verification and destruction of
chemical-weapons facilities. The second is to prevent
the further use of chemical weapons. The third is to
ensure accountability for the use of chemical weapons
and to prevent impunity. The JIM. is vitally important
for those three tasks, particularly the latter two. To
put it another way, we rely on the JIM's continued
work in order for the Council to be able to meet its
own responsibilities.

Japan takes note of various discussions on
strengthening or improving the work of the JIM. We
believe that, if necessary, the Secretary-General can
play a role in identifying any possible improvements. In
any event, the JIM. should not halt its operations while
enhancing its capabilities.

The sad reality of chemical-weapons use in Syria
continues, demonstrated most recently by the fact-
finding mission's report on the use of sarin in Ltamenah
in March. Until all perpetrators have been identified,
the work of the JIM. should continue.
