Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me first thank
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
informative briefing.

Every day, the situation in Syria becomes more
complex. But one thing remains constant-the enormous
suffering of the civilian population in Syria on a scale
that is unique in today's world. As we are painfully
aware, civilians - including children - continue to
pay the highest price as a result ofthe ongoing hostilities
in the country. In recent times alone, dozens have
been killed and injured during simultaneous ongoing
hostilities in north-eastern and north-western Syria. We
once again reiterate our call on all parties to the conflict
to implement all ceasefire agreements and to ensure the
unhindered and safe access of all humanitarian actors
to the entire territory of Syria. Most important, access
must be granted in priority areas, including cross-border
deliveries of humanitarian assistance, in a manner that
ensures the safety of humanitarian personnel.

While much of the international community's
attention is now focused on north-eastern Syria, in the
north-western part of the country, after a temporary
break from hostilities in Idlib in October, there has
unfortunately been a recent upsurge in air strikes
and ground-based strikes, including yet more attacks
affecting medical facilities. Faced once again with
those unacceptable attacks, we would like to strongly
emphasize the need for the full compliance of all parties
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. In that context,
let me express Poland's support for the work of the
United Nations board of inquiry to investigate attacks
on United Nations-supported medical facilities in
north-western Syria. We also underline the obligation
borne by all parties to the conflict for the protection
of civilians and civilian infrastructure. The protection
of civilians should be at the centre of our debate. We
remain deeply troubled by the severe situation of
the most vulnerable victims of the Syrian conflict,
especially children and women, members of religious
minorities and internally displaced persons. We must
put in place practical measures to effectively prevent or
minimize civilian casualties and incidental damage to
civilian objects.

Let me reiterate our strong support for the
cross-border assistance mechanism, which enables
humanitarian supplies to cross into Syria, provide aid to
those in urgent need and support basic service delivery.
Without that, it would be extremely difficult or - let us
be frank - impossible to ensure life-saving assistance
for millions and to reach those in need. Examples of
the usefulness of that mechanism could be multiplied,
but let me just recall the words of doctors working in
Idlib who told us that, without cross-border assistance,
they are simply not able to work. As we heard from
Mr. Lowcock, without the cross-border mechanism we
would face catastrophic humanitarian consequences.
Let me therefore join other Council members in calling
for the timely extension of resolution 2165 (2014).

Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement remains the only way towards peace. That
requires a genuine political transition in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/20l2/522, annex).
