The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Sudan, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, With the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item Without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamad
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Le Roy to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support.

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Malcorra to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
2
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, contained in document 8/2008/659.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Susana
Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.

I now give the floor to Mr. Le Roy.


