Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me begin, as others have, with a word on what
happened in Abuja, Nigeria, this morning. The United
States condemns in the strongest possible terms the
horrific attack on the United Nations offices in Abuja
this morning. The Victims are humanitarians,
development experts, and members of our United
Nations family. We stand ready to offer whatever help
and assistance are needed by the United Nations and
our Nigerian friends to recover, to rebuild and to bring
the perpetrators to justice. We extend our deepest
condolences to the United Nations, to the people of
Nigeria and to the families, friends and colleagues of
the victims.
I am honoured to convey the United States warm
thanks to India and to you personally, Sir, for having
organized today's open debate on peacekeeping
operations. It is particularly appropriate for India to
have organized this debate, given its decades-long
commitment as a leading contributor of troops and
police to United Nations operations across the globe.
We thank your for your country's contributions and
sacrifice.

We would also like to extend our compliments on
the thought-provoking concept paper (S/2011/496, annex) that you circulated to the Council to stimulate
discussion. The paper has helped to bring to the fore
issues on which we hold different perspectives, and has
also enabled us to see where we are all in clear
agreement.

First and foremost, we fully concur that the
success of United Nations peacekeeping is dependent
on a strong partnership among the Security Council
members, the troop-contributing countries (TCCs),
police-contributing countries (PCCs) and the
Secretariat. We are particularly pleased that today's
draft presidential statement calls for concrete measures
to enhance the Council's consultations with TCCs and
PCCs, and seeks more regular input from United
Nations force commanders, police commissioners and
other current and acting serving uniformed personnel
who can provide us with a critical understanding of the
challenges and realities they face on the ground. We
also welcome India's suggestion that the Council more
regularly enlist the good offices and diplomatic
engagement of TCCs and PCCs in countries or regions
where peacekeeping operations are deployed and where
their engagement could bolster efforts to overcome
challenges and obstacles to a peace process.

As we take these steps, we concurrently renew
our commitment to the full peacekeeping reform
agenda that has been the subject of intense discussion
in the Security Council and the General Assembly's
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Several aspects of that reform agenda remain important
works in progress.

With respect to the protection of civilians, we
welcome the work being done by the Secretariat to
develop operational training and planning tools to
enhance the ability of United Nations peacekeeping
operations to effectively implement their protection of
civilians mandates. We encourage troop and police
contributors, as well as missions in the field, to use this
material and provide feedback.

With respect to helicopters, we share the concerns
of the Secretariat and the TCCs that the chronic lack of
military helicopters significantly hampers the ability of
United Nations peacekeeping operations to implement
their mandates, including for the protection of
civilians. We believe that addressing this strategic gap
should remain a high priority and requires a
multifaceted response and creative thinking from
Member States and the Secretariat alike.

On mission leadership, we appreciate the
Secretary-General's recent efforts to strengthen the
appointment process for senior field personnel. The
quality of mission leadership can sometimes mean the
difference between success and failure. We support
measures to equip and empower mission leaders to
implement their mandates and to hold them
accountable for results. But this responsibility is not
the Secretary-General's alone. We, the Member States,
must put forward our very best and most qualified
candidates for senior leadership positions.

On standards and capabilities, properly equipping
mission leaders means providing them with troops able
to meet clear performance standards. We welcome the
Secretariat's recent work to develop model standards
for infantry battalions.

On the rule of law, we believe that equal if not
greater attention is required to enhancing the United
Nations performance standards in the areas of police,
justice and corrections. The work to strengthen local
rule of law institutions is critical to building a self-
sustaining peace. Further, the different parts of the
United Nations system engaged in the rule of law need
to strengthen their partnership and deliver as one.

On civilian capacity, the rule oflaw is one but not
the only area where there is much work to be done to
ensure that the United Nations has qualified civilians
available as and when needed. The Senior Advisory
Group report on civilian capacity (S/2011/85)
illuminated the issues that we must address to provide
post-conflict countries and special representatives of
the Secretary-General with the best deployable civilian
expertise to support political processes and develop
national capacities. The United States welcomes the
work of Under-Secretary-General Malcorra and her
team to develop implementable measures from the
Gue'henno report's recommendations.
There is a lot of good work being done to
improve United Nations peacekeeping, but there are
equally some serious challenges and gaps. As we go
forward, we encourage the Secretary-General to give
us candid assessments of what missions can and cannot
do within the capabilities available to them. If a
mission is unable to effectively discharge its mandate
for the protection of civilians because it lacks
adequately trained and equipped troops, is missing

11-4815]
desperately needed helicopters, suffers from deficient
command, control and communications systems, or
struggles with certain TCCs maintaining national
caveats, then we need to know. And while it is true that
gaps may exist between mandates and means, let us
also recognize that a third key ingredient is the
political will of individual missions or troop
contingents to take robust action when they have the
means and the mandate to do so.

We look forward to further discussion among all
peacekeeping stakeholders on providing peacekeepers
with the mandates and means they need, as well as the
resolve that host populations rightfully demand and
expect. The United States applauds the many
achievements of United Nations peacekeeping over
more than 60 years. We honour the sacrifices of the
men and women - military, police and civilian - who
have served under the blue United Nations flag in the
furtherance of peace, and especially remember with our
deepest gratitude those who have lost their lives in
service.

