Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by welcoming you, Sir, to this
Chamber today and to congratulate you on the
initiative of placing this very important subject on the
agenda of the Council.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
establishes parameters for the distribution of work,
responsibilities and duties shared by this universal
Organization and regional arrangements and entities. It
requires that their work be consistent with the purposes
and principles of the Charter. That legal framework has
assumed particular importance since the carrying out of
joint activities between international, regional and
subregional organizations was incorporated into the
mandate of the Security Council. Resolution 1631
(2005) reflected that development and provided us with
a useful inventory for extending and strengthening the
areas of cooperation that are evident in our discussions
and decisions on the issues on the agenda of the
Council.

In addition to their advantageous position with
respect to the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
regional and subregional organizations have also been
participating in peacekeeping operations. Furthermore,
they are currently being called upon to take part in
institutional and material reconstruction efforts. They
are able to do this, because they know well the
structural problems that lie at the heart of conflicts, and
they have an overall view of the internal and regional
problems that bring together aspects of security,
development and human rights.

In many cases, these capacities can be
strengthened, thanks to horizontal and vertical
cooperation. But this cooperation must be adapted on a
case-by-case basis to each specific organization, and in
particular must be adapted to each region, within the
framework of the United Nations Charter. This is why
we need to deepen further the contacts between the
United Nations and these regional organizations at the
institutional level, as well as on the ground.

We have to recognize that this interaction is not
without problem areas; sometimes this arises from the
constitutive agreements of the regional organizations
or their degree of institutional strength; but in other
cases this arises because of a lack of political will on
the part of the actors or because of their relative lack of
weight in the relevant organization. That explains why
this specific experience of collaboration in the field is
rather mixed; there are some positive cases and some
not quite so positive.

I would now like to refer to three areas in which
the Council has been active - namely, peacekeeping
operations, institutional strengthening and
peacebuilding. The primary responsibility to act
rapidly and effectively in the areas of peace and
security is the duty of the Security Council. On that
basis, it is important to mobilize cooperation with
regional organizations and to ensure that we are able to
deploy rapidly with adequate logistics and troops. In
these kinds of cases, and to be effective, we must take
into account the disparate capacities, both military and
financial, that the forces of the regional organizations
may have available. And we should check that the
operations that require United Nations funding be in
line with the patterns and criteria established in the
Charter for the maintenance of peace and security.

On the other hand, with regard to the mandates of
many of these peacekeeping operations, support is
included for the holding of elections, for the
channelling of political dialogue and for the
reconstruction of democratic institutions in post-
conflict situations. It is these aspects that help to
guarantee the stability of a country or a Government.
International or subregional organizations are,
therefore, called upon to complement the efforts of the
international community, including by early warning
systems, in order to dissipate tensions and to prevent or
slow down the violation of human rights.

Together with the strengthening of the political
institutions, there are also the economic and social
needs that have to be dealt with in order to consolidate
peace. The regional and subregional organizations must
continue to make their contribution to bringing about
an international environment that will strengthen
stability, support development projects, facilitate trade
and promote private investment. As part of this
reconstruction effort, multinational companies should
also be included, grouped together, for example, in the
Global Compact.

In conclusion, we feel that there is a broad and
promising area that can be developed further here, so
that the regional and subregional mechanisms can
cooperate and accompany multilateral action at the
global level to strengthen the principles and purposes
of the United Nations, paying attention to the
specificities of each region and maintaining the
framework of subsidiarity and complementarity
established in the United Nations Charter.

