At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to the victims of the recent floods in the Niger, the Sahel, East Africa and other regions of the world. As we examine the effects of climate change, these foreseen disasters, which are not the first such alerts, remind us once again of the gravity of this recurring phenomenon that puts at risk our way of life and undermines the ecological stability that has ensured, thus far, a certain harmony between humankind and the environment. I would like to emphasize that all regions of the world are experiencing, in varying degrees, the effects of climate change. Nevertheless, nowhere is this phenomenon more acute or responses to it feebler than on the African continent. That situation can be explained by pointing to various constraints, including adaptation challenges, desertification, the scarcity of water and arable land, as well as decreases in or disappearing water levels. These all adversely affect the economic and social life of people worldwide, often in extremely precarious situations. That is particularly the case in the Sahel region and the Lake Chad basin, which are characterized by great fragility and exponential population growth. Indeed, as we already know, those regions are subject to very high climate variability, which is reflected in changes in rainfall patterns, the appearance of extreme weather events and recurring droughts - three in the past decade, with tangible effects on agricultural land, pastureland and water availability. The Niger, for example, is losing 100,000 hectares per year. The frequency of these climatic shocks greatly reduces the resilience of the population. As indicated by His Excellency Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, President of the Republic of the Niger and Chairman of the Climate Commission for the Sahel region of the twenty-second session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the situation in the Sahel shows the extent to which climate disruption and environmental degradation have an impact on food and nutritional security. Along with conflicts, it is indeed one of the causes of the increase in famine in recent years. In a region where the vast majority of the population depend on agiculture for their livelihoods, if not handled properly, an increase of 2°C by 2050, could lead to a 15 to 25 per cent reduction in food production, in the context of a population that doubles every 18 years in the Niger. In addition to the climate shock I mentioned earlier, the Sahel is also undergoing a security shock, with devastating and tragic consequences. The escalation of violence in the Sahel strip and the Lake Chad basin has led to an increase in the number of displaced persons throughout the region. Currently, one in four people in the Sahel live in conflict zones and 4.5 million people are either internally displaced or refugees. That represents almost three times the number in 2012. In the context of this double shock, as the agencies on the ground have so aptly stated, climate change and conflict dynamics create a feedback loop in which the impacts of climate change create additional pressures, while conflict undermines the capacity of communities to cope. Moreover, no implementation of environmental restoration projects is possible in areas depopulated as a result of terrorist attacks and insecurity, thus leading to further degradation. The climate-security-development nexus is indisputable. The effective handling of this problem requires cooperation policies better adapted to these new challenges that spare no country and pose a real threat to the peace and stability of States and the fate of future generations. That is why taking climate change into account requires a more global and concerted approach, because it is only together that we can tackle it. Combating the security risks linked to climate change will require a behavioural change of open-mindedness with regard to the ongoing quest for harmonious balance that will eventually reconcile humankind with our environment. As the Security Council, our objective is not only to resolve conflicts; we also have the fundamental responsibility to prevent them. Understanding the causes, effects and complexities of climate change, especially in conflict zones, is therefore essential in that regard. It is critical that the international community ensure international humanitarian law so as to enable the delivery of aid, without political considerations, to millions of women and children made vulnerable by the triple impact of conflicts, the coronavirus disease pandemic and the effects of climate change, particularly in Syria, Palestine, Yemen and Libya. Combating the humanitarian effects of environmental degradation on peace and security is a multidimensional struggle. It integrates the protection and recovery of land, the prudent management of natural resources. In a word, we must lay the foundation for sustainable development that, by meeting the needs of the people, also safeguards them from the propaganda of terrorist groups. As is often said, poverty and precariousness are the breeding grounds for violent extremism and terrorism. I would like to reassure the Council of my country's commitment to supporting any regional or international initiative that provides robust responses to the problems related to environmental degradation and its impact on peace and security. In the same vein, I would like to reassure the Council of my country's readiness to improve its cooperation with States, international organizations and stakeholders.
