Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for briefing and his efforts
to advance the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).

Thanks to the efforts of all parties, the six
mediators recently reached an agreement with Iran.
China welcomes the agreement, which marks a
significant first step in the diplomatic settlement of
the Iranian nuclear issues and proves yet again that
dialogue and negotiation are the only viable approach
to the settlement of the Iran nuclear issue, which is in
the common interests of all sides.

China hopes that all parties will duly implement
the agreement so as to maintain the momentum of
dialogue and negotiation and make progress towards a
comprehensive, long-term and thorough settlement of
the Iranian nuclear issue. China supports the IAEA's
efforts to continue to play a constructive role in the
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. We also support
the IAEA's efforts to reach an agreement with Iran on
a joint statement on the framework for cooperation
between the IAEA and Iran. We hope that both sides
will strengthen their cooperation and gradually settle
the pending issues between them.

China has always been of the view that all parties
have the obligation to implement the relevant sanctions of
our resolutions in an honest, accurate manner. Sanctions
are only a means, however; they are not the purpose of
the resolution, nor are they a benchmark to measure the
progress achieved by the 1737 (2006) Committee. At
this time, the Committee should focus its attention on
the overall situation and the long-term goal. It should
support and collaborate with the diplomatic process. As
far as specific actions are concerned, the Committee
should help Member States to implement the resolution
in a comprehensive, balanced and manner. In line with
the principles of objectivity, impartiality and pragmatic
action, it should settle sensitive cases involving alleged
violations of the resolution in an appropriate manner
and strengthen its guidance to subsidiary bodies.

China will continue to work with the Committee
so as to play a positive and constructive role in taking
forward the work of the Committee. As a permanent
member of the Security Council and a member of the
dialogue mechanism on the Iranian nuclear issue, China
has always maintained an objective, impartial and
responsible position and has actively promoted peace
talks. It has also played a significant role in taking
forward the dialogue process. China will continue to
take into account the general direction of a political
settlement and will continue to work with all sides to
make unremitting efforts to reach a final settlement of
the Iranian nuclear issue.

