Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to echo the words of previous
speakers by conveying my sincerest condolences to the
Government and people of China and the families of
the victims of this morning's devastating earthquake.
It is an honour for me to speak on behalf of the
Arab Group to assess the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

We would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing earlier. It was important, as it reminded the
international community of its responsibilities towards
the Palestinian people suffering a terrible occupation
by Israel, which persists in contravention of its
international commitments and continues to occupy
Arab territories.

It is unfortunate that after more than 60 years of
considering the Palestinian question, which is at the
core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, the international
community remains preoccupied with the issue as a
result of its inability to achieve a peaceful solution for
the Palestinian people and to restore their land to them.
Israel, the occupying Power, ignores the will,
resolutions and repeated appeals of the international
community. It continues to occupy Arab and
Palestinian territories and to stifle peaceful efforts to
relieve its illegal occupation, which has gone on since
1967, in defiance of the international community.

Israel's practices in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including the Gaza Strip; its inhuman siege
of Gaza, its construction of the separation wall;
restrictions on the free movement of people; the
Judaization of Jerusalem; and the recent decision by
the occupation forces to deport tens of thousands of
Palestinians from their homes in the West Bank and in
Jerusalem while enabling Jews from all over the world
to settle in Palestine, including Jerusalem East, are all
proof that Israel, the occupying Power, is simply the
defying international community, international law and
United Nations resolutions. That contradicts the claims
of the Israeli authorities that Israel is a partner in the
peace process and that it respects its commitment to a
two-State solution. Prime Minister Netanyahu gave a
speech last month in which he said that Jerusalem is
Israel's eternal capital and that settlements will
continue. That is proof of Israel's intransigence and
contempt for Security Council resolutions and the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Times of War.

The international community condemns such
provocations and escalation. It is clear that the
persistence ofthe occupation is not only due to Israel's
refusal to accept the will of the international
community and its international obligations vis-a-vis
the Security Council and the United Nations Charter,
but also because the Security Council allows it to
behave in all impunity, as if it were above the law. That
has contributed to Israel's persistent lack of respect for
United Nations resolutions and the resulting political
instability and insecurity in the region. That is why the
Security Council today must shoulder its legal
responsibility and adopt measures to create an
independent Palestinian State, with its capital in East
Jerusalem, within the 4 June 1967 borders.

The Quartet met in Moscow last month and
condemned Israel's settlement activities. We call upon
the Quartet to remain faithful to its basic position of
principle that calls for an end to Israel's settlement
policies in Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, and to so-called natural growth, which are
serious obstacles to a just and comprehensive peace.
The international community today must reject Israel's
arguments as it seeks to justify its settlement activities
and must pressure it to respect Security Council
resolutions 465 (1980) and 497 (1981), on this issue.

It is obvious that Israel interpreted the Arab Peace
Initiative as a sign of weakness, so it persisted in its
aggressive practices and violence against the
Palestinians and intensified its blockade of Gaza, with
its consequent humanitarian tragedy, as witnessed by
the Board of Inquiry and by the Secretary-General
during his recent visit to the region. The Secretary-
General stated that the blockade had led to
unacceptable human suffering and that Israel must lift
it and abstain from implementing measures to block
humanitarian aid.

Israel is harming religious sensitivities by
desecrating holy places and by placing the Ibrahimi
and Bilal bin Rabah mosques on its heritage list. These
buildings lie within occupied Palestinian territory, and
their identity cannot be changed, which is what Israel
is doing when it seeks to change the Arab character of
East Jerusalem and other occupied Arab land. The Arab
Group appreciated the resolution adopted by the
Executive Board of UNESCO, rejecting Israel's
unilateral measures to change the demographic
character and the status of Jerusalem.

Given the fact that there is no serious Israeli
interlocutor willing to shoulder its international
responsibility, we fear that the Arab Peace Initiative
may become a dead letter because of Israel's illegal
practices and policies and its unilateral measures aimed
at changing the demographic and geographic character
of the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem.
Israel is seeking to circumvent the underlying
principles for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital.

In that context, I reaffirm the Arab position
demanding Israeli withdrawal from all Arab territories
occupied since 4 June 1967, including Shab'a farms,
Kafr Shouba and the village of Ghajar in southern
Lebanon, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003), as well as the Road Map, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the principle of land for peace, which are
all aimed at achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.

