Mr. Kooijmans (Netherlands): The
representative of France is to speak on behalf of the
European Union. We fully endorse everything in his
statement, and I will limit myself therefore to making
the following remarks.

While we welcome the fact that the Government
has reduced UNITA's conventional war capability, this
development has not led to an improvement in the
security situation. In the absence of dialogue, Savimbi
has reverted to all-out guerrilla warfare, and since
Government control tends to be limited to urban areas
his forces are able to terrorize rural populations in
many parts of Angola.

As a result, the humanitarian situation remains
bleak. One in five Angolans is now displaced. Most of
the displaced cannot return and remain dependent on
outside assistance. Relief workers are being
deliberately targeted by UNITA. This year alone the
Netherlands has already supported relief activities with
some $7 million. But there is more that the Angolan
Government, for its part, could do as well. It should
take steps to improve security in rural areas, allow
relief workers full access to the population and
promote demining and other activities aimed at
returning the displaced.

What should now be possible, however, as a
result of the consolidation of Government authority
throughout the country, is for the Government to
engage in efforts leading to a political settlement.
Paragraph 9 of the Secretary-General's report seems to
suggest as much. It is promising that Angolan civil
society is nudging the Government in the direction of a
meaningful dialogue, and we should encourage
President dos Santos to welcome such developments.
In this context, the moment has come for the United
Nations Office in Angola to play an active role. We
therefore welcome Professor Gambari's confirmation
of the imminent appointment of the Head of that
Office.

Sadly, the human rights situation all over
Angola's territory remains as alarming as that
described in the Secretary-General's previous report.
We fully agree with the Secretary-General that respect
for human rights and good governance should be part
of any effort to bring the conflict to an end. Actions
like those taken against journalists are incompatible
with the efforts of the international community to assist
the Government in pacifying the country and, through
this, contribute to the well-being of the Angolan
people.

There are signs that at long last the efforts of the
international community to put pressure on UNITA are
beginning to have the desired effect. Sanctions really
seem to be biting, and it stands to reason that we
should step up our efforts. Therefore, we eagerly await
the first report of the second Panel of Experts tasked
with monitoring implementation of the sanctions.
Equally important are the developments within the
diamond industry, where an awareness is growing of
the unacceptability of "blood diamonds". We hope the
proposals of the recent World Diamond Congress in
Antwerp will be implemented effectively as soon as
possible.

At this point I should like to second the words of
praise addressed once again by many around this table
to Ambassador Fowler for his very important and
highly innovative work for effective implementation of
the sanctions against UNITA. I am sure that
Ambassador Fowler would agree that this is perhaps
also the appropriate moment for the Security Council
to recognize the groundbreaking work that non-
governmental organizations have done in this regard.

Finally, it is very good news that the Angolan
Government and the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) have agreed to a staff monitored programme. We
see this as a first step towards the long overdue
normalization of Angola's relationship with the IMF
and other international donors. The Angolan
Government should recognize that transparency and
accountability are essential elements of further
progress down this path. We urge the Government and
the IMF to commit themselves to a successful
completion of the programme.

