Mr. Berger (Germany) (spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the Portuguese delegation):
I would like to thank the Portuguese presidency for
convening today's meeting.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
Foreign Minister Zacarias da Costa in the Council
today. I thank him for coming the long way to New
York to report on the developments in his country. My
delegation also appreciates the presence of the
Portuguese Foreign Minister and the Brazilian Vice-
Minister. Let me also welcome Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ameerah Haq, whom I wish
to thank for her briefing and whose leadership of the
Mission I again commend. Germany thanks the entire
United Nations team, both in Timor-Leste and at
Headquarters, for their successful contribution to the
Timorese future.

Before I offer some national remarks, let me
underline that my Government aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later in the debate by the
observer of the European Union.

Germany takes note with satisfaction of the fact
that the overall situation in Timor-Leste remains calm
and stable. We share the assessment of the Timorese
Government and of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/64l) that certain volatility remains but that
there is reason for confidence that the Timorese
institutions, in particular in the security sector, will
weather the upcoming electoral and post-electoral
seasons. We are also confident that continued capacity-
building, if maintained at the current speed, will enable
the Timorese security forces to fully meet the security
needs of the country as international support is
reduced. Close coordination with regard to the
modalities of the drawdown of the international
stabilization force will also be essential.

My delegation is encouraged by the handover of
complete primary policing responsibility to the
Timorese police, so far without any negative impact on
the overall level of crime. However, it remains of
pivotal importance to continue to ensure the highest
standards that the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
committed itself to in its Joint Development Plan with
United Nations police, including through adequate
budgetary provisions.
Germany is confident that the remaining time
prior to the elections and before the end of the
transition will be used to continue to close the
remaining capacity gaps, including in the management
of logistics. While the strengthening of the Timorese
army is also ongoing, Germany learned with
appreciation that first Timorese military contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon is being prepared.

Against the backdrop of those encouraging
developments in the security sector, we welcome the
overall joint transition plan between the Timorese
Government and the United Nations, which represents
a true innovation. It outlines a comprehensive scenario
for the drawdown of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), as well as an
understanding of the national budgetary consequences.
However, as my delegation pointed out here in
February (see S/PV.6485), the post-UNMIT phase is
fast approaching - if the current positive trends can be
sustained. We note that, for the United Nations, one
crucial question remains unanswered, namely, what
comes after the transition. While certain fundamental
decisions can only be made by the next elected
Government, Germany encourages maximum attention
to be dedicated to concrete planning for the
post-UNMIT phase. Obviously, the Timorese
Government will lead the way in that regard.

It is clear the United Nations has a long-term
commitment to Timor-Leste. The joint transition plan
ranks the continued fight against impunity at all levels
of society and the strengthening of public confidence
in the justice system among the long-term challenges.
In that context, we note some progress with regard to
the so-called certification of police officers who face
disciplinary and criminal charges. As identified by the
joint transition plan, other areas with considerable
further support needs include governance and
sustainable economic development. The role of women
in all that can hardly be overestimated.
In conclusion, Germany would like once more to
thank UNMIT for its highly committed and
professional work, as well as to assure the people and
Government of Timor-Leste of Germany's continued
friendship and solidarity.

