Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this meeting at the request of several Council
members, including the Kingdom of the Netherlands. I
thank the briefers for the enlightening information they
have provided on the election preparations. I reiterate
our support for Special Representative Leila Zerrougui.

Today, I will address three main points:
electoral preparations; the implementation of the
New Year's Eve agreement; and the support of the
international community.

My first point relates to the electoral preparations.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes President
Kabila's decision not to seek a third term, in accordance
with the Congolese Constitution. This represents
a crucial step in preparing for elections. We also
welcome the recent increased engagement on the part
of the Independent National Electoral Commission
and political parties, and we welcome the creation of
additional provincial courts of appeal.
Nonetheless, much remains to be done to ensure
that the elections are free, credible, transparent and
peaceful. It is essential that all parties have confidence
in the Commission and in the electoral preparations.
A number of political parties have expressed concerns
regarding key steps, including the timely delivery,
storage and distribution of voting machines, as well as
their use. Furthermore, the means for a citizens' audit of
the electoral list are still not clearly established. Those
are all significant challenges for the Commission, and
we encourage all parties to commit to dialogue in order
to resolve them. We note with satisfaction that the
Congolese Government has funded apart of the electoral
budget. However, it is essential that the remaining
funds be transferred on time. We would like to know
whether Mr. Nangaa believes the electoral budget
will be covered. We emphasize the willingness of the
international community to provide logistical support.
We encourage Commission and the Government to
make the relevant requests by the deadlines. We regret
that the head of the Commission, Mr. Nangaa, had to
cancel his participation in this briefing.

My second point has to do with the importance of
the implementation of the 31 December 2016 political
agreement, which is incumbent upon all signatory
Congolese parties. That agreement is the only possible
way for the elections to be accepted by the entire
Congolese population. Consequently, the continued
lack of significant progress in the implementation of
de-escalation measures is a cause for serious concern.
All candidates must be able to participate under equal
conditions of competition. The electoral process
must be inclusive. CENI has deemed six candidates
ineligible. We call on all stakeholders to continue to
show maximum restraint pending the results of any
appeals. We urge the authorities to ensure that the
process is inclusive.

Another critical step is the liberation of all political
prisoners, including emblematic cases. I would like to
note that prisoners of conscience, including the five
members of Filimbi, have been denied their right to a
fair trial.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is also gravely
concerned by the low level of women's participation,
as was underscored by Ms. Zerrougui and Ms. Solange
LwashigaFuraha. Women comprise 12 per cent of
candidates in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a
setback for the region. Certain political parties have no
female candidates. Ms. Lwashiga Furaha is evidence,
however, that the country does not lack female leaders.
We call on all parties to intensify their efforts to include
Congolese women in the electoral process.

My third and final point is on the will of the
international community to support the Congolese
people. In addition to the electoral process, the fight
against the new Ebola epidemic in the east ofthe country
also requires international support. Combined with the
serious security risks, this new epidemic could easily
devolve into a new humanitarian disaster. All Member
States must do all they can to prevent an escalation of
the crisis. We welcome that the Council will have an
opportunity to discuss the situation tomorrow morning.

In conclusion, the Council's upcoming visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo next October will
be one of solidarity with the Congolese people. It will
take place at a key moment. With the African Union,
the Southern African Development Community, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and other relevant stakeholders, the Council will
continue to work alongside the Democratic Republic
of the Congo throughout this crucial year. We cannot
simply look away.

