Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me start by thanking the
Lithuanian presidency of the Security Council for its
initiative to hold this open debate on the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and for preparing the
concept note thereto (S/2014/75, annex).

Albania has aligned itself with the statement made
earlier on behalf ofthe European Union (EU), and I will
therefore limit myself to some remarks in my national
capacity.

The correlation between rule-of-law institutions
and the maintenance of peace and security in conflict
and post-conflict situations and in the context of many
other diverse fragile situations resulting from economic,
political and social downturns, as well as their impact
on development, social cohesion and human rights, has
been established beyond any doubt. It is now known
only too well that, when rule-of-law institutions fail or
lack strength, peace, with all its benefits of development
and human flourishing, cannot be sustained. In many
examples around the world, Adam Smith's words - a
society, while it can exist with some inequality, cannot
exist without justice - remain so true.

For that reason, the role of the United Nations, and
especially ofthe Security Council - as the body tasked
with maintaining collective security - is central
when it comes to ensuring that peacekeeping and the
peacemaking operations under its mandate include
the restoration of justice and of institutions seeking to
strengthen the rule of law.

I would like to make a couple of remarks on some
issues that my delegation believes are interconnected,
which is why efforts to address them ought to be
concerted as well.

First, regarding the design of mandates, we think
that clarity on issues such as the accountability of the
actors involved in peacekeeping and peacemaking
operations, transitional justice and rule-of-law
processes, and the transparency of activities are
indispensable to enhancing legitimacy and improving
performance.

For rule-of-law policies to be effective, they
should respond to the demands of particular situations
and reflect the diverse social, political and economic
conditions and imperatives of local societies. That
approach does not betray the universal principle at hand
here, which is to seekjustice; rather, it raises awareness
of the blind spots and tensions that can be found in
policies, and consequently creates better conditions for
the implementation of rule-of-law reforms.

Secondly, on the sequencing and continuity of
support, my delegation believes that United Nations
mandates ought to ensure that the attention and focus on
rule-of-law reforms do not displace attention from other
aspects of societies in transition, namely, economic
development and general human development. Hence,
a holistic approach is needed to embrace other vital
aspects of development. Furthermore, long-term
commitment is essential in creating conditions that
build trust in rule-of-law institutions and in supporting
local actors that have a vital stake in restoring and
consolidating justice.

Thirdly and lastly, there must be cooperation with
local actors and coordination of activities. National
ownership and the internalization of rule-of-law
institutions are conditions that can be created through
an inclusive process and by embracing various local
actors. That approach favours the democratization
of local societies and builds trust that solutions to
problems can be found locally.

The rule of law would mean little without the
guarantee of respect for human rights and building
civilian capacities as indispensable tracks for building
trust, for reconciliation and for re-assembling societies
scattered in pain and hatred. Hard decisions that
many countries have made to bring the perpetrators
of huge injustices before the international criminal
courts - like the International Criminal Court and the
ad hoc tribunals, particularly the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia - are signs of
healing and an embracing of the principle of impunity.
Safeguarding that legacy and further building upon it is
an obligation for all nations.

The rule of law is a pervasive concept, and thus
every actor involved might contribute a bit to further
strengthen it. In that respect, I would like to particularly
point out the precious contribution and achievements of
regional organizations such as the European Union in
support of rule-of-law reforms, within the EU and in its
neighbourhood. The Security Council and the United
Nations can only benefit from the knowledge and
resources of regional organizations, in particular by
relying on them to provide further rule-of-law reforms
and to monitor local conditions and situations.
I conclude by reiterating Albania's firm commitment
to the rule of law and justice and to the efforts to
embrace it in all activities of the United Nations.

