Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): We thank
the Russian presidency for convening this timely
debate to address the root causes of the conflicts and
serious challenges facing us in the Middle East and
North Africa region, where the Palestine question
remains at the core of our instability and is the crux
of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Multilateral efforts are
urgently needed in the region to promote the realization
of a just, comprehensive and lasting solution, firmly
rooted in international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

The tragedy inflicted on the Palestinian people
remains a source ofintense anger, despair, mistrust and
fear, particularly across the Arab and Muslim world;
it impairs perceptions about the international system's
fairness and fuels toxic narratives of double standards,
constituting a formidable force to be reckoned with.

Seventy years since Al-Nakba and 51 years since
the Israeli occupation began, in 1967, the sense of
injustice has only intensified, deepening with every
veto that absolves Israel, the occupying Power, of its
crimes, as again happened on 1 June (see S/PV.8274).
That has been matched by an equivalent decrease in
confidence in the Security Council's authority, as
attempts to de-escalate violent eruptions and uphold
human rights and humanitarian principles, including
to protect civilians and advance peace efforts, are
repeatedly obstructed.

The conflict's protraction, chiefly due to a
systemic lack of accountability for Israel's violations
across decades, has entrenched a destructive culture
of impunity in the region, which has weakened
international norms and fuelled cyclical crises,
ensuring an environment ripe for further proliferation
ofconflict, with far-reaching political, social, economic
and security impacts.
The human cost has been immense, with profound
insecurity, suffering and humanitarian disasters
affecting the region and beyond, including as a result of
the forced displacement of millions of civilians, among
them over 5.5 million Palestine refugees. Increased
poverty and the mutation of conflicts has allowed for
the spread of extremism and terror, incited religious
conflict and undermined the potential of religion as a
force for social good. Those who deny or dismiss those
facts further fuel those phenomena and impede the
efforts to stabilize our region and find lasting solutions
that can ensure peace and security for all.

The Security Council has the duty and the capacity
to remedy this situation and launch a new reality in
the Middle East, benefiting all countries of the region,
neighbouring countries and the goal of global peace.
That must begin with action to address the crises
before us, including in the besieged Gaza Strip, and
justly resolve the Palestine question as a whole. The
parameters of that solution are well known and are
enshrined in Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. On that basis, there remains a solid
international consensus and responsibility to act. In
that connection, we recall the most recent resolution
on that issue, resolution 2334 (2016), and the Council's
clear call for collective action as it, inter alia, urged

"the intensification and acceleration of international
and regional diplomatic efforts and support aimed
at achieving, without delay, a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East on the basis of
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land
for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map and an end to the Israeli occupation that
began in 1967 " (resolution 2334 (2016), para. 9).

The Security Council's continued failure to
advance such demands is a direct result of both Israel's
intransigence and disrespect and the paralysis caused
in the Council by the use of the veto by one permanent
member. However, that cannot be accepted as the
norm. The Security Council must uphold the primacy
of international law and implement its resolutions. Only
within the law and through multilateralism can a just
and lasting solution for the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
be found.

We condemn all unilateral measures, whether
colonial or otherwise, rejecting schemes to illegally
impose facts on the ground and forcibly impose unjust
solutions. Moreover, there is no military solution to
our conflict or any of the region's conflicts. We reject
the politicization of humanitarian work, as has been
egregiously done to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We call for the empowerment of women and youth in
any peace initiative, and we reject attempts to falsely
equate the just cause of Palestine with terrorism. We
have publicly aligned ourselves with the global front
against terrorism.

We have never sought to force a solution, as the
occupying Power and its supporters do; we have
simply sought the law's application to peacefully end
the conflict and achieve our rights. That is all we have
asked for at every juncture: what we are entitled to as a
people, as per the law and not beyond what is legislated
in United Nations resolutions.

For 30 years, since agreeing to the two-State
framework, we have made historic and painful
compromises and engaged in good faith in every
peace initiative and endless negotiations, adhering to a
peaceful, political and non-violent path. Despite many
setbacks, we remain firmly convinced that the Charter
of the United Nations, the law and United Nations
resolutions will be the guarantors of a just solution that
resolves all final-status issues.

Any viable peace agreement must ensure the
realization of the Palestinian people's inalienable rights
and the independence of a sovereign, contiguous State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side in peace with the State of Israel within
secure and internationally recognized borders and
based on the pre-1967 lines, as well as a just solution
for the Palestine refugees, as per resolution 194 (III)
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

We reiterate our call for a multilateral, political
process to achieve those objectives, once again
reaffirming in this Chamber our readiness to engage,
including in an international peace conference. We urge
the Security Council, based on its Council mandate, to
call on the Quartet members - the Russian Federation,
the United States, the European Union and the United
Nations as a whole - to uphold their obligations and
exert every possible effort to that end, in cooperation
with, and supported by, all regional partners concerned,

the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and all peace-loving nations, with the vital good offices
of the Secretary-General.

Only through such a collective drive for peace
can we end the Israeli occupation and the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict, fulfil the decades-long promise of
freedom, independence and justice for the Palestinian
people and truly contribute to peace and security in the
Middle East and North Africa and to the establishment
ofa more just, stable and peaceful world.

