Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The aggression of the United States and the
United Kingdom against Iraq deserves strong
condemnation and should be stopped immediately. The
Security Council should fulfil its primary responsibility
in the restoration of the international peace and
security that have been shattered by this act of
aggression.

The United Nations, including the General
Assembly, must exercise all the powers and functions
entrusted by the Charter to guarantee peace, security
and the political independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq, Kuwait and all the States of
the region; to protect the Iraqi people and re-establish
the implementation of international law and
international humanitarian law, particularly that of the
Geneva Conventions and Additional Protocol I; and to
ensure respect for the human rights of the Iraqis,
especially their right to life.

We all had hopes, but we all knew this would be
the outcome. More than two thirds of the members of
the Security Council and three of its permanent
members tried for weeks to avert war, noted its
potential consequences and offered diverse solutions
inspired by two premises: that any unilateral attack
would be a violation of the Charter and international
law; and the necessity of the complete implementation
by peaceful means of the relevant resolutions of the
Council itself.

Nevertheless, the inspections were suspended
when tangible progress was being achieved. We duly
noted the risk that the scope of resolution 1441 (2002)
would be manipulated or distorted and we were
sceptical about the public assurances given then by
those who later started the war.

In reality, Iraq had been sentenced long before.
We know that Iraq neither offers nor is able to offer the
slightest threat to the national security of the United
States or its allies. Rigorous analysts have submitted
evidence that the attack against Iraq had been planned
even before the criminal terrorist act of 11 September
against the twin towers.

President Fidel Castro has addressed the causes,
pretexts and factors of the crisis and offered solutions,
particularly in his speeches of 28 January; 14 and 25
February; 6 and 22 March. In Kuala Lumpur, our
President stated:

"In his speech to the graduating cadets of
West Point on 1 June 2002, the United States
President stated: 'Our security will require
transforming the military you will lead - a
military that must be ready to strike at a
moment's notice in any dark corner of the world.'

"That statement was not made by the
Government of a small and weak nation, but by
the leader of the richest and mightiest military
Power that has ever existed, the same that
possesses thousands of nuclear weapons -
enough to obliterate the world population several

times over - and other fearful conventional
military systems and weapons of mass
destruction.

"That is what we are: 'Dark corners of the
world'. That is the perception some have of the
third world nations. Never before had anyone
offered a better definition.

"The former colonies of Powers that divided
the world among them and plundered it for
centuries constitute today the group of
underdeveloped countries. There is nothing like
full independence, fair treatment on an equal
footing or national security for any of us; none is
a permanent member of the Security Council with
a right of veto; none has any opportunity to be
involved in the decisions of the international
financial institutions; none can keep its best
talents; none can protect itself from the flight of
capital or the destruction of nature and the
environment caused by the squandering, selfish
and insatiable consumerism of the economically
developed countries.

"After the last world carnage in the 1940s,
we were promised a world of peace, the reduction
of the gap between the rich and the poor and the
assistance of the highly developed to the less
developed countries. It was all a huge lie. An
unsustainable and unbearable world order was
imposed on us. The world is being driven down a
dead end."

It is necessary to halt this course of events if we
want to survive - Europe and the developed and
developing countries, without exception - as
sovereign and independent States; if we want to
preserve peace and the collective security system that
cost humankind 50 million deaths and hundreds of
thousands of lives to the United States people; and if
we want to defend the already precarious existence of
the United Nations as a main element and symbol of
multilateralism.

Cities are not "secured" but destroyed by bombs;
precision-guided ammunitions do kill and mutilate
civilians and traumatize millions of people terribly. All
prisoners deserve humane and honourable treatment
and are protected by the Geneva Conventions and the
Additional Protocol I. International humanitarian law
should be totally and universally implemented and
respected.

The priority now is to stop the bombing of and
aggression against Iraq. It is also a priority to protect
and provide urgent humanitarian assistance to the
civilian population, for which the United Nations and
its Secretary-General have all the necessary powers.

Nevertheless, we cannot accept that the
aggression and the occupation of territories should be
legalized or endorsed under humanitarian pretexts,
which would serve only to encourage war and would
essentially distance us from the ceasefire and from
those very humanitarian principles and objectives that
have been declared.

The Security Council and the Secretary-General
must be extremely careful in their mandates and
responsibilities. Nothing should be done against the
political independence and sovereignty of Iraq or its
territorial integrity. The aim of the United Nations is
now to achieve a ceasefire and to stop the aggression,
not to speculate or to do anything under the pretext of
being anticipators able to validate an eventual Anglo-
American occupation Government in Iraq, or whatever
it may be called; nor to invent in advance United
Nations mechanisms on the ground or procedures to
commit those who opposed war to undertake the costs
of a distant and unpredictable reconstruction.

The main thing is to do the impossible to stop the
death and destruction and to achieve the end of the war
and the withdrawal of the invading forces from the
occupied territories. Public opinion, that extraordinary
and booming force, shall be severe in the judgement of
our conduct.

