Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): My delegation has
already had the opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
France's assumption of the presidency for March. We
should like once again to commend your leadership and
express our satisfaction at seeing you lead the Security
Council's deliberations.

I also wish to reiterate to the Council the full
gratitude of the people and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the United
Nations efforts to preserve the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of my country and to ensure its
peace and stability. I would further pay sincere tribute
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his ongoing
concern and his personal involvement in peacebuilding
in my country.

Be it with respect to the strategic review and the
logical consequences to be drawn therefrom; the forced
disarmament of the Rwandan rebels of the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR); the
evolution of the presence of Ugandan rebels of the
Allied Democratic Forces-National Army for the
Liberation of Uganda (ADF-NALU) in the north-
east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo; or the
political consequences of the end of the Mouvement du
23 mars rebellion, the position of my Government on
these specific issues, as well as on the overall question
of the relationship between the United Nations and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, was best expressed
before the Council on Thursday, March 19 (see S/PV.7410), by His Excellency Mr. Raymond Tshibanda
N'tungamulongo, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, and I therefore do not intend
to go over it again.

However, the situation on the ground has changed,
dialogue between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO) has been restored,
and the discussions that started here in New York
continue in Kinshasa, as announced by the head of the
Congolese diplomatic corps.

The Council has just renewed the mandate of
MONUSCO for another year, until March 2016. We
take due note of this, especially since the spirit and the
text of resolution 2211 (2015) converge on the opening
of a constructive dialogue between the Government of
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and MONUSCO,
which we hope will help to effectively harmonize our
respective points of view on issues that hitherto have
not been clarified.

However, let me go over some passages of the text
of the resolution that, in the opinion of my delegation,
contain inconsistencies that cannot be explained in the
light of current developments. I refer in particular to
the eighth preambular paragraph, in which the Council
claims, on the one hand, to recognize the efforts
undertaken by the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo in the neutralization of armed
groups, including the FDLR, while at the same time it
accuses that very same Congolese army of collaborating
with the FDLR.

On a separate issue, my delegation remains
convinced that a reference in paragraph 9 (f) to
paragraphs 1 and 2 ofresolution 1807 (2008) would have
been necessary to circumscribe the scope of the arms
embargo on the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
order to avoid any confusion and eliminate once and
for all the tendency to apply the embargo to the regular
army, although it is intended to apply only to non-State
armed groups and all negative forces, precisely in
order to help the army to restore peace throughout the
national territory.

Furthermore, the wording in paragraph 15
concerning the Congolese Rapid Reaction Force is
also difficult to justify, especially since the Force has
been trained and equipped with three brigades: the
11th Brigade, composed of three battalions trained
with Chinese cooperation; the 21st Brigade, composed
of three battalions trained by South Africa; and the
31st Brigade, composed of three battalions whose
troops have been trained with Belgian cooperation.
These forces have been put to use in several previous
pacification operations in North Kivu, and will soon be
deployed in the pursuit of the FDLR in the Congolese
forest.

Without overstating our concerns about the
substance of the issues addressed in the text of the
resolution, Iwould say in conclusion that my Government
has taken note of them. I take this opportunity to assure
the Council that we shall maintain our cooperation with
the United Nations in the best interests of the Congolese
people. Similarly, we intend to continue to work closely
with the Council to launch a profound reflection
on the future of the United Nations presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to establish the
parameters and criteria that could determine the future
of that presence on Congolese soil in a responsible and
orderly manner that also honours and enshrines the
immense sacrifices made by the United Nations and the
international community to ensure the survivial of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Government
will do so in cooperation with the Council through
existing mechanisms or by new mutual agreement.

Finally, I wish once again to congratulate
MONUSCO, and the Force Intervention Brigade and its
constituent countries in particular, for the high quality
of their work throughout the mandate that has just come
to an end. The work of the Brigade alongside the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo has
given us hope. We hope that the beginning of the new
mandate of the Intervention Brigade will definitively
crown the efforts already made to bring peace to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and throughout the
Great Lakes region.

The meeting rose at10.20 am.
