Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Nigeria is immensely
grateful to President Thabo Mbeki for his tireless
commitments to find a durable solution to the crisis in
Darfur and in the Sudan in general. We are also
grateful for the leadership Mr. Menkerios has provided
to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
under very difficult circumstances. We welcome the
participation of the representative of the Government
of the Sudan and of the representative of Southern
Sudan, and we thank them for their contribution.

Nothing casts a darker shadow on the hopes for
peaceful relations between North and South Sudan in
the era following the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) than the spectre of renewed conflict. We are
therefore deeply concerned about the unauthorized
military activities in Abeyi and the fighting along the
disputed border between the North and South since 5
June 2011. There are reports of the Sudanese Army
amassing heavy weaponry in Southern Kordofan amid
intermittent fighting and heavy artillery shelling. We
feel that the outbreak of fresh hostilities is palpable.

The situation is quite clearly at a tipping point.
Neither the Sudan nor the international community can
afford a renewed conflict, which would undo much of
the progress achieved since the signing of the CPA in
2005. The obligation at this crucial junction is to
ensure that the situation does not deteriorate further.

In that context we welcome the high-level
meeting between President Al-Bashir and Vice-
President Salva Kiir in Addis Ababa and the
agreements on temporary arrangements for the
administration and security of the Abyei Area that were
reached today. We commend both leaders for their
courage and commitment to dialogue and negotiation.
We also commend the African Union High-Level Panel
under the leadership of President Mbeki for facilitating
the agreement.

As we welcome the good news of a major
breakthrough by the parties, the real significance of the
temporary agreement lies in its effective
implementation. Both parties must now pursue all
efforts to implement a decision to demilitarize the
Abyei Area, withdraw all military troops from the zone
and deploy in the territory an interim security force
composed of Ethiopian troops. Indeed, the agreement
should serve as an impetus for intensified strategic-
level discussions of the political and security
arrangements between the North and the South. In that
regard, we welcome the agreement by the Prime
Minister of Ethiopia to contribute peacekeepers to
facilitate the implementation of the agreement between
the parties.

Nigeria reiterates its firm support for the Security
Council's presidential statement of 3 June
(S/PRST/2011/l2) and calls on both parties to firmly
embrace the ongoing high-level negotiations under the

auspices of the African Union Panel. If continued in
good faith, those discussions could result in
agreements on the outstanding CPA and post-
referendum issues before 9 July.

We urge the NCP and SPLM. to full implement,
and without delay, all the provisions of the Kadugli
agreements. Our commitment to achieving a peaceful,
equitable and mutually beneficial relationship between
North and South Sudan requires that we remain
engaged with the parties to the CPA. We must not only
assist them to devise a framework for continued
dialogue beyond July; we must also play an important
role in their geo-political transformation into two
viable States.

The impact of the deteriorating security situation
on the civilian population is all too evident. Abyei, the
Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan have all seen mass
displacements caused by genuine emergencies. That
situation makes an urgent case for enhanced
international humanitarian aid. We commend the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
World Food Programme, the World Health
Organization and other humanitarian agencies for their
relief support for internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugees.

The parties should respect humanitarian
principles and allow all humanitarian personnel timely
and unfettered access to vulnerable communities,
including those who have taken refuge outside the
UNMIS compound in Kaldugi. Conditions should be
created to allow the prompt and safe return of IDPs to
their homes. All parties must also refrain from attacks
on peacekeepers and respect the mandate of UNMIS.

In addition, as we await the emergence of South
Sudan on 9 July, there should be no unilateral action by
the parties. Actions must be realistic and consistent
with the spirit of the CPA and the package agreement
reached. They must build on the achievements reached
to date between the parties and continue to work
closely with UNMIS and the African Union High-
Level Panel under the leadership of President Mbeki.

