The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my national capacity
as the Secretary of State's Special Representative for
Syria Engagement, and at the invitation of Ambassador
Haley. I thank her for her leadership to support
the people of Syria and her invitation to be present
here today.

I thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings.

Before I continue, I would like to express sorrow to
our Security Council partner Russia for the tragic loss
of life when the Russian plane was downed yesterday.
The unfortunate incident reminds us of the need to find
a permanent, peaceful and political resolution to the
conflict, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).

For 3 million Syrians, Idlib is their last hope for
refugee from the Al-Assad regime's reign of terror, as
we just heard from the Under-Secretary-General. Those
people know Al-Assad's brutality all too well. That is
because many of them, 1.4 million of them to be exact,
already fled their homes before.

One of those people is a 24-year-old woman
named Hiba.

Hiba and her family left the town of eastern Ghouta
in March. At that time, the Secretary-General described
the assault on eastern Ghouta as "hell on Earth". Hiba
and her family were forced to flee to Idlib, hoping to
find a place where they would not have to fear for their
lives. But now Hiba is on the front line once again. As
she told a reporter,

"We saw enough bombing in eastern Ghouta. I
cried so much when I heard the warplanes again.
There is nowhere to take shelter."

It is for Hiba, for the 3 million civilians struggling
alongside her in Idlib and for all her fellow citizens
across Syria and in the diaspora that we need to see
not just another stop-gap arrangement but a lasting
ceasefire that paves the way for a credible political
solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva process.

As President Trump has stated, Bashar Al-Assad
of Syria must not recklessly attack Idlib. There is no
military solution to this conflict. Russia wants the world
to believe that after a military campaign everything will
go back to the way it used to be. That is why they ask for
the three Rs: recognition of the regime, reconstruction
money and pushing Syria's neighbours to send refugees
home before it is safe to do so, trying to sweep the
past seven years of violence under the rug. Let us be
serious. Al-Assad and the henchmen who unleashed
these atrocities will never be welcome in the world
of civilized nations. They will get no help to rebuild,
certainly not from us. I cannot imagine that any other
Government would want to explain to its people why it
would send aid to the barbaric Al-Assad regime.

There will not be stability in Syria as long as
Iran and its proxy forces remain. Those groups are
responsible for some of the most egregious violence in
this war. They have directed the regime's starve-and-
surrender campaign. They are now on Israel's doorstep.
That is unacceptable. Iran cannot dictate the future for
the Syrian people. If Russia is interested in bringing
peace to Syria, it should make sure that Iran and its
militias leave Syria once and for all. The risk of a
broader conflict will leave with them.

Iran is responsible for creating the Syria we see
today: a broken and violent country. The Syrian people
know full well who did this to them. No one will
forget. We must prevent the people of Syria from facing
yet another catastrophe at the hands of the Al-Assad
regime, and the only way forward is a lasting ceasefire,
as called for in resolution 2254 (2015).

Yesterday, as we just heard, Russia and Turkey
agreed to stabilize the situation in Idlib. We call on
all parties to commit to a lasting ceasefire and to take
immediate steps to advance the Geneva peace process
further. Again, the only way forward is a genuine and
inclusive political solution.

Last week, I and others met with Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura to determine how we advance the
Geneva political process. That has to be our focus.
We need talks that stick to the road map for a new
constitution and elections in line with resolution
2254 (2015). The United States is fully committed to
that effort, which is why I am here today to support
Ambassador Haley and her team here in New York.

In our view, Special Envoy De Mistura should
therefore immediately move forward as he has laid
out, with the convening of a constitutional committee
in keeping with his mandate. We have been discussing
such a committee since January. We understand that
Russia, back at the beginning, told us that it was fully
on board and promised that the committee would
fully support the United Nations Geneva process. As
Mr. De Mistura said, it is urgent to move forward now.
The United Nations should therefore set a date for the
first meeting of the committee and move forward with
creating such a new constitution. We should hear back
from the United Nations on its progress by 31 October.
I urge other Security Council partners to support such
an approach.

I now resume my functions as President of the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.

