Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank Under-Secretaries-General
Lynn Pascoe and Susana Malcorra for their
presentations, as well as our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Somalia.

Two months ago almost to the day, the insurgents
of Al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam rejected the path of
dialogue and launched a major offensive. This was and
is aimed against the Transitional Federal Government,
which has the support of the international community,
and also against the positive political process that
President Sherif is leading by calling upon all parties to
join in the Djibouti process.

The fightng goes on, as recalled by Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe, with its violence and
suffering. The cost of the attacks is high, and the
victims always the same: women, children and other
vulnerable people. Two hundred thousand more people
have had to leave Mogadishu - and some families had
just recently returned. These latest victims are added to
the 2 million people who are surviving in makeshift
shelters and the more than 3 million who already rely
on international assistance.

The conditions in which the humanitarian
workers are operating have worsened even further. It
must be recalled that last year more than 30 of them
were killed. The same is true for journalists, who often
give their lives to carry out their profession. The
number of refugees in neighbouring countries is
growing, in particular in Kenya, where the sites hosting
them are overwhelmed. France joins the international
community in firmly condemning the attacks and the
violence.

We note with the greatest concern reports
indicating that the insurgents are benefiting from
reinforcements of extremist foreign fighters and the
support of foreign Governments, specifically Eritrea, in
the form of weapons, which is in violation of the arms
embargo imposed by the Council.

France carefully noted the decisions taken at the
African Union summit in Sirte and is prepared to
continue to follow the path of sanctions against all
those who jeopardize the Djibouti Agreements. In that
respect, we look forward to the report the Security
Council has requested from the Monitoring Group. As I
cited the Djibouti Agreement, let me also underscore
the very positive role played by Djibouti in dealing
with crisis in Somalia, despite the challenges that
country has faced since the June 2008 military attack
against it by Eritrea.

The Transitional Federal Government is under
attack, but it is resisting those continued attacks. The
international community must continue to provide full
political support and strengthen its technical and
material assistance. The training of Somali security
forces is key to building the country's military
capacity. For that reason France, as it pledged at the
Brussels conference, will begin to train 500 Somalis
this month in Djibouti.

European Union ministers meeting in Brussels
have begun to consider how the Union could combine
our initiative with a possible training mission under the
European Security and Defence Policy.

Here, we wish to highlight the courage of
AMISOM's troops, in particular those from Uganda
and Burundi, who are resolutely providing support to
the Transitional Federal Government. We pay tribute to
them at a time when they are regularly targeted by the
insurgents.

The international community must provide firm
support for the African force. In Sirte, the African
Union decided to strengthen the number of troops
deployed on the ground in order to reach the mandated
goal of 8,000 troops requested by the Somali
Government. We are pleased by and welcome that
commitment. France has contributed to the training of
four contingents for AMISOM. The European Union,
which is the leading contributor to the United Nations
budget and the leading financial partner of the African
Union, including through the Peace Facility for Africa,
provides resolute support to AMISOM. Here, I would
endorse the statement that the Permanent
Representative of Sweden will make shortly on behalf
of the European Union.

The United Nations too has an important role to
play to facilitate strengthening AMISOM. I thank
Ms. Malcorra for her information on the United
Nations logistical support package. More than ever
before, we need to respond rapidly and in concrete
ways to the most urgent operational needs of the
African forces.

All of this makes action to fight piracy off the
Somali coast even more necessary. Since the initial
operations to protect World Food Programme (WFP)
vessels launched by France in November 2007, the
fight against piracy has grown in scope. The European
Union, in launching Operation Atalanta, is playing a
very active role in fighting piracy, protecting
vulnerable shipping and providing security for the
increasingly significant international aid shipments on
which millions of Somalis depend. The money spent to
keep the European Union naval forces afloat permits
the transport of that aid. Those efforts are far from
useless; here I would point out that WFP food
shipments have quadrupled from 2007 to 2008. Those
efforts must continue.

Just yesterday a Turkish ship was attacked by
pirates off the Somali coast. It must be remembered
that in the past two years French forces have arrested
more than 200 pirates in the course of more than
80 maritime operations. For that reason, the European
Union has extended the mandate of Operation Atalanta
for one more year and is considering a full range of
measures that will make it possible to take better
account of the various dimensions of counter-piracy
operations on the sea and on land. Here I stress the
particular importance of capacity-building for States of
the region so that they can try and imprison pirates
who have been arrested. United Nations support will be
crucial.

Because of the gravity of the situation, it is
reasonable to give priority in this debate to short-term
measures, while bearing in mind more long-term
measures such as the fight against impunity, because
the culture of impunity that prevails today in Somalia
is a major hurdle to peace. There is also a need, once
the situation allows, to resume political dialogue,
without which there will be no lasting peace in
Somalia. In that regard, let me commend the role of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, and assure him of
France's full support.

In conclusion, I would like to state my
delegation's support for the draft presidential statement
prepared by the United Kingdom, for which I express
my thanks.

