Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Let me begin by joining others in thanking the Secretary- General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his introductory remarks, as well as the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing. I also welcome President Mahmoud Abbas of the State of Palestine; Ambassador Danny Danon, Permanent Representative of Israel; and the Secretary- General of the League of Arab States to the Chamber this morning. The moral purpose of the United Nations is to ensure freedom for all nations and peoples - for all States, big and small. The foundational pledge to respect the political independence and territorial integrity of all States is one that our forebears did not take lightly. They knew all too well that, without mutual guarantees of sovereignty, the consequences would be anarchy and immense human suffering. For a small State like ours, which depends so heavily on a robust body of international law for our peaceful existence, it is particularly unnerving to witness the slow unravelling of those internationally agreed norms. Indeed, one of the essential contributions to be made by small States like ours is the tireless advocacy for timeless principles enshrined in international law. We consider it our solemn obligation not only to articulate those principles but to ensure that they are applied consistently and upheld in the international community as universal truths, rather than as selective, uneven and unpredictable tools. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is deeply concerned about any attempts to deviate from the settled parameters governing the delicate quest for peace between Israel and Palestine. In that connection, we call for the full implementation of all relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions calling for a cessation of all Israeli settlement activities, including those relating to Jerusalem and confirming that the latter is an integral part of the occupied Palestinian territory. We wish to underscore that any measures aimed at altering the legal, geographic and demographic character or status of Jerusalem and the occupied Palestinian territory as a whole are null and void and have no legal validity whatsoever. While we acknowledge the ongoing efforts of the United States of America to reinvigorate the Israeli- Palestinian peace process, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains committed to the international community's long-standing, principled support for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including to self-determination, and for the two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders. That vision still reflects the will of the international community and ought to be our starting point. We will not resolve the conflict by simply moving the internationally agreed goalposts on an increasingly uneven playing field. We therefore support the calls for the resumption of negotiations under those internationally agreed parameters. Echoing the Secretary-General's call, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is also of the view that we must never foreclose dialogue. There can be no real dialogue - and indeed, no real solution - without all parties at the table. However, there is a need for mediators that are acceptable to both Israel and Palestine. In the struggle for sustainable peace, we can claim no easy victories. Unresolved conflicts can be addressed only through equity and harmony. History has taught us that lasting peace can be achieved only through earnest attemptsat reconciliation. Indeed, there can be no peace without togetherness, and no togetherness without justice for all.
