Mr. Malielegaoi (Samoa): Today's debate dedicated
to addressing peace and security challenges facing small
island developing States is a rarity in this Chamber. The
Government of New Zealand is to be commended for
this timely initiative, and we are grateful to members
of the Security Council for providing a platform so
that peace and security issues from the perspectives of
small island developing States can be the focus of the
Council's time and occupy centre stage, even if only for
just a day.

The exceptional political capital demonstrated by
the high-level of participation of small island developing
States (SIDS) this morning is a strong reaffirmation that
important issues entrusted to the Security Council are
of equal priority and importance even to the smallest
Member States of the United Nations. The SIDS
message to the Council is unequivocal. No region, no
group of countries and no selective security issues
should continue to have a monopoly of the Council's
time, attention and resources. SIDS form an important
constituency of the Security Council in their own right,
irrespective oftheir sizes, economic influence, political
clout or military strength. Their concerns matter like
everyone else's in this Chamber, their voices deserve to
be heard, their views need to be understood and their
challenges considered and addressed.

The Small Island Developing States Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA Pathway) (General Assembly resolution 69/15, Annex) is our global
pact. It is a blueprint of the needs and aspirations of
SIDS, together with the opportunities and means to
implement them. The agreed outcome of the third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States (A/CONF.223/10) held last year categorically
reaffirmed the importance ofpeace and security issues
for this special group. That is a part of the record of
the United Nations, and we are not inventing something
new.

To contextualize those challenges from the
perspective of the Pacific region, one can say with
confidence that we have largely maintained a peaceful
and secure environment. On the surface of it, because
we are not situated in the world's troubled spots nor are
we homes to any of the current conflicts, it is tempting
to equate that perceived tranquility with the absence of
security challenges for our islands.

Nothing could be further from the truth. The
Pacific's security concerns are varied, complex and
many. A great external threat stems from globalization.
The global context is changing rapidly. Relative
isolation and remoteness no longer shield us from
globalization's reach and impacts. Our vast ocean
adds to our vulnerability in terms of security, and the
difficulty of providing effective maritime policing
and surveillance compounds that further. We have
witnessed significant serious transnational organized
crime activities in the region. They include drugs
and firearms trafficking, financial crimes and money
laundering, human trafficking and people smuggling,
labour and sexual exploitation.

Some organized crime groups and networks are
gradually becoming entrenched in our region, which
will continue to test the ability of our capacity-
constrained law enforcement agencies to combat
organized crime groups. International crime is unlikely
to decrease in the immediate future. If allowed to
take a firm foothold, it will not only be detrimental to
those Pacific island countries currently affected, but
also to the entire Pacific. In response, the Pacific has
adopted a regional approach as the only viable means
to coordinate the efforts of national and regional law
enforcement agencies to facilitate information-sharing
and avoid duplication of efforts and resource wastage.

For Samoa, our Transnational Crimes Unit works
closely with the law-enforcement agencies of our
regional and international partners to help seize illicit
drugs, arrest criminal fugitives, confiscate money-
laundering proceeds and halt the misuse of social
media, to name a few.

Global interconnectedness through fast, efficient
transport links and information technology have brought
many undoubted benefits to our region. However, even
the Internet now also comes with a cautionary note of

risks to peace and security through dangerous content
and its use for criminal activities and for inflammatory
purposes, problems that our small islands' jurisdictions
and societies are currently not well equipped to handle.
Samoa has taken steps to try to address the risks of the
Internet, but we will need the support of our partners in
order to find fully successful solutions.

It is therefore imperative that the United Nations
and its Member States commit to tackling threats to
international peace and security, especially through the
Security Council. Our organization was founded upon
values of collective security. We continue to see the
United Nations, through the Security Council, as the key
arbiter for the maintenance of international peace and
security, stability and prosperity. That is important for
our countries, which risk a reversal of the development
gains they have made owing to external forces over
which we have little or no control. To cement and build
upon development goals already achieved, international
peace and security must be maintained, and it is the
responsibility of all Member States, particularly those
in the Security Council, to work in close cooperation to
ensure that happens.

A fortnight ago today, the Polynesian Leaders
Group issued their Climate Declaration in Tahiti,
French Polynesia. Our declaration accepted that climate
change and its adverse impacts are a threat to territorial
integrity, security and sovereignty, and in some cases
to the very existence, of our islands because of the
submersion of existing land and the regression of our
maritime heritage.

My reference to climate change should surprise no
one. In 2013, in their Majuro Declaration for Climate
Leadership, the Pacific Forum leaders called as a
region for collective international responsibility and
action to urgently reduce and phase down greenhouse
gas pollution, including by Pacific island countries
themselves. The Samoa Pathway again recognized
that sea-level rise and other adverse impacts of climate
change continue to pose significant risks to small island
developing States and represent for many the gravest
threat to their survival and viability, including through
the loss of territory. We will therefore continue to
advocate at every available opportunity and forum, the
Security Council included, for the need for the United
Nations community to be open-minded and not to reject
out of hand the security implications of climate change.

While the Council has traditionally focused
on inter-State conflict, it has not shied away from
acting proactively to address the root causes of other
non-conventional security issues, including HIV/AIDS,
refugee issues, children in armed conflicts, poverty
and development, and Ebola. The global response to
those challenges is a powerful illustration of what is
possible when States collaborate and cooperate to
achieve common and critical goals.

Without putting too fine a point on it, that is why
we are here as Pacific nations and as SIDS. It is to take
up this rare opportunity to inform the Security Council
that the challenges we face, including the impacts of
climate change, present real threats to the peace and
security of our island countries and peoples. As our
modest contribution towards our collective security,
we will continue to provide police officers to United
Nations peacekeeping missions in order to honour a
commitment we made in 2000.
Today's event has garnered so much positive spirit
and goodwill that it would be truly most unfortunate if
the debate were to be an end to itself and a once-only
occurrence. Iwould therefore like to conclude by placing
before you, Mr. President, and members of the Security
Council, a special request on behalf of SIDS, namely,
to consider including in the Council's future schedule
a day dedicated to the consideration by the Council of
the peace and security challenges facing small island
developing States. That would be a tangible outcome of
our open debate today.

