Mr. Muharemi (Croatia): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing and
candid description of the reality on the ground. It is
regrettable to note that the picture has not substantively
improved since his briefing last week, particularly with
regard to the humanitarian indicators.

We have followed recent developments affecting
Gaza and southern Israel with concern and alarm. Our
delegation regrets that consensus on a presidential
statement was not reached last week, despite
significant effort. As our debates last week and today
have shown, the pervading sense of deep concern about
the humanitarian situation in Gaza is widely shared. As
we have said before, we see all measures designed
indiscriminately to target the civilian population as
reprehensible and call for them to be brought into
conformity with international humanitarian law.

We welcome the Israeli measures aimed at easing

the humanitarian situation in Gaza. However, the

continued closure of the crossings between Israel and

Gaza is worrisome, particularly in View of the reports

of rapidly diminishing food supplies and the growing

backlog of United Nations agency relief trucks. We

encourage all steps taken by Israel and the relevant

agencies to find alternative solutions to that problem
and to ensure humanitarian access.

Following the disquieting developments last
week on the border between Gaza and Egypt, it is
reassuring to know that efforts have been undertaken to
find a peaceful and orderly solution to the recent
disturbances. In that regard, we would like to express
our support for the proposal by the Palestinian
Authority that it assume responsibility for control of
the Gaza crossings.

However, the situation in Gaza cannot be
addressed in isolation from the context and the Israelis'
right to self-defence. The continuing rocket attacks on
Israeli soil, as well as all other activities that
essentially target civilians, are unacceptable. We
reiterate the call on all parties to immediately end all
acts of Violence. Furthermore, the situation should be
addressed against the wider backdrop of the process
started with the Annapolis conference. Annapolis
reaffirmed the two-State solution and produced a joint
understanding that aims at reaching a peace agreement
before the end of 2008. Let me reiterate our full
support for the goals agreed in Annapolis. We are
encouraged by the sustained contacts between the
parties and the beginning of the negotiations on all
outstanding issues, including the final status issue. We
hope the negotiations will lead to comprehensive, just
and lasting peace based on the Land for Peace
principle, the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Road Map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the previous
agreements between the two parties.

The efforts of both parties should be commended
as should the leadership of the United States. We are
pleased to note the recent visit of President Bush to the
region. Equally important is the continued engagement
of the Arab States - their broad participation at the
Annapolis conference was a promising sign.
Furthermore, there is an active role to be played by the
wider international community, notably in enhancing
the governance capabilities of the Palestinian Authority
and building a viable economy, as underscored by the
Paris conference in December.

That said, we feel that hope for peace can be
undermined by the lack of tangible improvements on
the ground. This places the obligation on both sides to
act with prudence, commitment and restraint. At this
point, prominence should be given to the
implementation of the respective obligations from the
first phase of the Road Map, including the freeze on
settlements, ensuring freedom of access and movement
on the Israeli side, and ending Violence, terrorism and
incitement of violence on the Palestinian side.

Without underestimating the challenges, we
appeal to the political courage of both sides to keep
working towards the conclusion of the peace agreement
before the end of this year, guided by the long-term
interests of their peoples.

We are following the developments in Lebanon
with concern. Yet another target date for the
presidential elections has passed. We fear that with
every delay, the risk of further destabilizing the fragile
Lebanese society grows. We therefore welcome the
mediation efforts of the Arab League.

The recent terrorist acts and unrest in Lebanon
are very disturbing, with violence only adding fuel to
the cycle of political crisis. We appeal to all sides to
engage in an all-inclusive political dialogue and to
work to preserve the sense of national unity.

