Mr. Moreno Charme (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
The Government of Chile commends Argentina's
initiative to hold this open debate on cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations in order to
consider the maintenance of international peace and
security from a regional perspective. I thank President
Cristina Fernandez for this opportunity.

The Latin America and the Caribbean region is a
zone of peace. That has enabled us to cooperate in our
pursuit of sustainable development as one of the pillars
of stability. For us, meeting the needs of our peoples is,
in essence, a collaborative effort for peace. That vision
guides the Organization of American States, the Union
of South American Nations (UNASUR), the Common
Market of the South (MERCOSUR) and the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States. The task that
we face today is to pursue development through joint
integration projects.

The issue that brings us here today is of particular
relevance to Chile, whose foreign policy is based on
fundamental principles such as the sovereign equality
of States; non-interference; the binding nature of,
and respect for, international treaties; the defense of
democracy and respect for human rights; the peaceful
settlement of disputes; and international cooperation.
Those principles, which are set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations, constitute the basis of international
coexistence and a guarantee of world peace and stability.

Collective action is imperative in addressing
traditional and emerging threats. Such action is
strengthened by the involvement of regional and
subregional organizations. That is Chile's interpretation
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, and that understanding
prompts us to promote effective multilateralism that is
genuinely capable of incorporating the contributions
of regional and subregional organizations to address
crises or conflicts that may affect security and peace.

Our country recognizes the importance of the
inter-American system, which has provided our region
with a set of instruments that constitute a fundamental
political and legal heritage for governance in the
hemisphere. That system should help foster linkages
and coordination between the region and global spheres.

We also wish to highlight the positive relationship
between integration and security in the Latin American
and South American region. The region has been
enriched by the establishment of different regional
and subregional bodies, which we understand to be the
guided by the principles of solidarity, cooperation and
the rule of international law.

Regional agreements have produced a series of
advances under the scope of security in the broadest
sense ofthe term, such as the declarations ofpeace in the
Andean region and the establishment of MERCOSUR
and UNASUR. In that connection, Chile attaches
importance to the adoption of democratic provisions,
integration projects and confidence-building measures,
which play an effective role in conflict-prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict processes. We would
also like to underscore the role our countries are playing
in the reconstruction of Haiti through the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, as well as the
various forms of cooperation that support different
regional and subregional mechanisms.

We also wish to highlight the contribution that
UNASUR has made in this area. That organization has
drawn attention to the importance ofconsensus - as you
mentioned in your statement, Madam President - as
well as to transparency in military expenditures, the
establishment of a peace zone in South America, the
peaceful settlement ofdisputes and political cooperation.
Those are factors that contribute effectively to the
achievement of peace, and they are principles that we,
the member States of UNOSUR, incorporated into the
2012 declaration of South America as a zone of peace.

Peace and security in our region is one of the major
drivers of integration, as well as a fundamental element
in making progress along the path to development while
also ensuring the appropriate inclusion of the region as
a whole in the international arena.

Collective action can be enhanced through the
involvement of regional and subregional organizations,
in particular in the areas of conflict-prevention,
development and post-conflict situations. As I have
already said, that is how we understand Chapter VIII of
the Charter, inasmuch as we are a country that strongly
promotes multilateralism and its rules.

In conclusion, as the Secretary-General said
himself here, the United Nations needs to continue to
strengthen its links with regional organizations as a
critical element of the Organization's work to achieve a
better and more secure world for all.

