Ms. Ramirez (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): The Security Council is considering the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti (UNSMIH). We view this with great satisfaction, as
it would mean the culmination of a process leading to a
lasting solution to the protracted and painful Haitian
situation.

I wish first of all to express appreciation for the
comprehensive reports of the Secretary-General dated 1
October and 14 November 1996. While the reports state
that during July, August and September last, the wave of
Violence subsided, we believe that much still remains to be
done in terms of consolidating domestic security and
strengthening institutions in order to guarantee a State based
fully on the rule of law that respects human rights and
individual freedoms.

We believe that the United Nations, which has
invested a considerable amount of resources in the process
of stabilization, must remain attentive to the evolution of
the process.

Allow me to emphasize once again the important role
being played by the United Nations Civilian Police. The
task of assisting the Government of Haiti in the
professionalization of the civilian police and in the
maintenance of a secure and stable environment is not a

 

simple one. Nevertheless, the results have been
encouraging. The most recent report of the Secretary-
General informs us that progress has been made in the
areas of respect for human rights and compliance with
professional standards. We believe that this new
institution is of significant importance in consolidating
democracy in Haiti.

I also wish to convey my country's recognition for
the efforts undertaken by the Organization of American
States, in particular for the contribution of the
International Civilian Mission in Haiti (MICIVIH) in
promoting democracy in Haiti.

The Republic of Argentina also acknowledges in
particular the crucial role of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr. Ter Horst, in
coordinating the activities of the United Nations system
and in the promotion of democratic institutions, national
reconciliation and economic rehabilitation.

Economic rehabilitation and reconstruction represent
important challenges for the people of Haiti. We trust that
soon the generosity of the international community will
make itself felt strongly in that country.

Aware of the magnitude of these challenges, the
Government of Argentina is firmly committed to assisting
in the socio-economic reconstruction of Haiti, a
commitment that is reflected in our decision to cooperate,
through the "White Helmets" initiative, in providing
drinking water and in the dispatch of medical personnel
and social workers. In this connection, Argentina enjoys
the valuable and active cooperation of the Government of
France.

Argentina has been committed to the Government
and the people of Haiti ever since the re-establishment of
democracy on 15 October 1994. Two months later, in
December of that year, the Government of Argentina sent
a high-level mission to discuss with the Haitian
authorities opportunities for cooperation. That mission
resulted in a number of projects, some of which have
already been successfully completed and others that are
under way.

We also eagerly await President Preval's visit to
Argentina, which will undoubtedly help to cement our
excellent relations with Haiti, a country with a rich and
diverse culture that has suffered ignominious dictatorship
and that has taught us so much on its road to freedom.

 

