Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Madame President,
I thank you for giving me the opportunity to share with
the Council some personal observations concerning the
Committees I have had the honour to chair. More
specifically today, I will speak about the Sudan
Sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005). I will also say a few words about the state
of play within the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, which Austria has chaired
since January 2009.

As members of the Council will remember, I
already had the opportunity to give my assessment of
the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) on
15 November (see S/PV.6424). I will therefore not
reiterate what I said on that occasion; I will simply
2

return to two points that I made in my personal
capacity when I briefed the Council then. At that time,
I said that, under the current guidelines, if consensus
cannot be reached, any de-listing request may be
submitted to the Council for review and subsequent
majority decision. In my View, it would thus seem only
logical to adopt the same decision-making procedures,
that is, a majority vote for de-listing decisions of the
1267 Committee.

I also referred in November to the point that the
procedure of the triennial reviews of the 1267
Committee could be changed to require a positive
reconfirmation of each list entry under review. That
adaptation of the review process would have the same
effect as the introduction of a time limit or sunset
clause for listings and would thus put an end - from
my point of View, in any case - to the question
whether the sanctions regime is of a punitive or
preventive nature.

Turning to the 1591 Sanctions Committee on the
Sudan, let me say that chairing the Committee was a
challenging task. It is not easy, if I may put it in these
terms, to monitor and enforce an arms embargo that
covers only part of a State's territory in an environment
where every use of arms potentially violates the
embargo and where arms are used quite regularly.
While all members of the Council and the Committee
share the objective of bringing peace and stability to
Darfur, their interpretation of the nature of the conflict,
the role of sanctions in resolving the conflict and the
sanctions regime itself differs. The work of the
Committee would benefit from a common
interpretation of the regime. In that regard, resolution
1945 (2010) was an important step towards clarifying
the embargo exemptions and requiring end-user
documentation for arms supplies not prohibited by the
embargo.

A main objective during Austria's chairmanship
was to promote dialogue between the Committee and
all relevant stakeholders. As Chairman, I maintained
regular contacts with the Permanent Representative of
the Sudan as well as with the Permanent
Representatives of other relevant States. Such direct
contacts proved to be very useful and, I believe, should
be continued in the future.

We also established a regular dialogue with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) through Committee meetings with
10-70084
the Joint Special Representative. The Committee held
close contacts with the Secretariat's Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on the development of
provisional guidelines for peacekeeping missions to
facilitate the work of panels of experts, which are used
for all expert panels that interact with peacekeeping
operations.

The Committee also made headway regarding its
contacts with the private sector. It heard briefings by
the Executive Director of the Global Compact and by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
business and human rights. More needs to be done,
however, to increase due diligence and create
awareness of the sanctions regimes among companies
operating in the Sudan and particularly in Darfur.

As regards the travel ban and assets freeze, no
persons have been designated on the Committee's list
since the adoption of resolution 1672 (2006). In my
View, those responsible for attacks on the United
Nations, especially UNAMID, clearly meet the listing
criteria and should be considered for listing by the
Committee in the future. I do believe that the Security
Council has a special responsibility in protecting the
missions it has mandated. In that context, I think that
looking at listing people who have attacked those
missions is logical and of key importance. It is also an
important point for the credibility of the work of the
Council. Let me also say that the same applies to
individuals who commit sexual and gender-based acts
of violence. Those crimes often go unpunished. We
believe that the Committee can also play an important
role in alleviating that situation.

Regarding confidential annexes to reports
received by the Committee, it would certainly facilitate
the work of the Committee and indeed of the Council
itself if those annexes, which mainly contain listing
proposals, remain confidential. I would like to
underline my full support for the work of the Panel of
Experts in order to provide the Committee with high-
quality information. We must assist their work and
fully respect their independence.

In view of my country's strong focus on the rule
of law, we were also pleased and satisfied to be able to
chair the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. Under our chairmanship, the Working Group
held 26 meetings in 2009 and 25 meetings this year.
The Group maintained a close dialogue with
10-70084
representatives of the affected countries and host
countries.

In order to increase transparency, raise awareness
and provide an opportunity to hear the views of the
broader United Nations membership, in October 2009,
for the first time ever, the Austrian Mission organized
an Arria formula meeting on residual issues of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) that was open to all States
Members of the United Nations. Moreover, at the
biannual public Security Council briefings by the ICTY
and the ICTR, I regularly briefed the Council on the
activities of the Working Group. We started to publish
annual reports of the Group and also included a chapter
on the work of the Working Group in the annual report
of the Security Council for the first time.

Over the past two years, the Working Group has
considered various requests by the Presidents of the
Tribunals to facilitate their completion strategies. In
2009 and 2010, the Council has adopted nine
resolutions on the ICTY and the ICTR introduced by
my country after agreement was reached in the
Working Group. The last two resolutions, as Council
members will recall - resolutions 1954 (2010) and
1955 (2010) - were adoptedjust last week.

After more than two years of negotiations, a final
agreement on the establishment of an international
residual mechanism for criminal tribunals is now, I
strongly believe, within reach. The envisaged
mechanism will continue certain essential residual
functions of the Tribunals, including trials of fugitives,
management of archives, protection of witnesses and
supervision of enforcement of sentences.

The package that I presented as Chairman,
together with Legal Adviser Konrad Buhler, who
supported me in these matters, consists of the
following elements: a draft resolution to be adopted
under Chapter VII, in which the Security Council
would decide to establish the residual mechanism with
two branches, one for the ICTR in Arusha and one for
the ICTY in The Hague; an annex I, with the statute for
the mechanism; and an annex II, with transitional
arrangements.

The establishment of the residual mechanism will
send a strong message from the Security Council
against impunity. High-level fugitives indicted by the
Tribunals, such as Ratko Mladie or Fe'licien Kabuga,
cannot hide and escape justice. At the same time, the
draft resolution would send a clear signal of the
Tribunals' intention to complete their work
expeditiously, prepare their closure, and ensure a
smooth transition for the mechanism.

I believe that it is in the interest of all delegations
to use this window of opportunity to conclude the
negotiations. There is a sense of urgency for the
Council to reach agreement now in order to allow for
sufficient time to make the necessary arrangements for
a smooth transition to the mechanism, while avoiding
any increase in costs.

We have presented a carefully balanced
compromise package that attempts to reconcile all the
different views presented. All issues can be resolved
with the necessary flexibility and political will. I
therefore very much hope that we can adopt the draft
resolution in the coming days, before the forthcoming
holiday season. I would call on all delegations to
support us in that endeavour.

Before closing, I would like to express my
gratitude to all delegations for their support and active
contributions. I also thank the Monitoring Team and
the Panel of Experts for their excellent work and
cooperation. My sincere thanks also go to the
Secretariat staff, in particular the sanctions Branch and
the Office of Legal Affairs, for their invaluable support
and advice over the past two years. I would like to
thank my own collaborators, who have made it much
easier and, in fact, possible for me to chair three of the
Committees all together. More specifically, as I have
already said, I want to say a word of thanks to our
Legal Adviser, Mr. Buhler, who in fact led most of the
work of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals.

