Mr. Duval (Canada)(interpretation from French):
Mr. President, first we would like to thank you and to
congratulate you for having made today's debate possible.
We welcome the presence of the Secretary-General at this
debate.

 

Canada hopes that the debate on the peaceful
settlement of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the ideas that will be discussed, can serve to
define a solution to this conflict, which, unfortunately, has
extended throughout the region and which now affects
several countries.

At the outset, Canada reaffirms that a military solution
cannot resolve a dispute that is essentially political, and that
only negotiations can lead to a lasting solution and restore
peace and stability to a region that has already undergone
too much suffering. Like the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the Security Council, Canada attaches the
highest importance to respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, whether those of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo or those of its
neighbours.
Agreement to an immediate ceasefire, coupled with
serious and sincere discussions involving all parties, offers
the only solution to the military stand-off which has
resulted from eight months of conflict involving the armed
forces of eight countries and a dozen militias.

The people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the peoples of the entire region want peace. They want
respect for their sovereignty and their borders, and security
guarantees. They desire not war, but a return to the
productive work of development and to the establishment
of democracy.

Canada supports without reservation the efforts of
regional leaders to achieve a negotiated solution. We join
with our colleagues on the Security Council in inviting
President Chiluba of Zambia and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) to continue their tireless
efforts. A great deal has already been achieved. A ceasefire,
however, has yet to materialize.

All the forces involved must participate in a ceasefire
while respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The ceasefire must
be accompanied by a timetable for the withdrawal of all
foreign forces involved in this conflict and by monitoring
arrangements in accordance with the Lusaka agreements. In
our View, this is an essential condition for the restoration of
peace and stability in central Africa.

Canada, as it announced in autumn 1998, is prepared
to examine the active involvement of the United Nations,
in coordination with the Organization of African Unity, in
the implementation of an effective ceasefire agreement and
of an agreed process for the political settlement of the
conflict. We would support adoption by the Security
Council of concrete, sustainable and effective measures to
this end.

As in any conflict, it is the civilian population that
suffers the harshest consequences. The humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
seriously deteriorating and contributes to an increased
number of displaced persons. Moreover, we are
unfortunately witnessing serious human rights violations
by all parties to the conflict. The Congolese population
has suffered enough. We commend the courageous efforts
of the United Nations Children's Fund to implement a
major vaccination programme throughout the country. We
trust that the goodwill shown on all sides in support of
this campaign, regardless of their various allegiances, will
be renewed when humanitarian organizations undertake to
relieve the suffering of the Congolese people.
The ceasefire, monitoring arrangements and
humanitarian assistance will, however, remain tenuous if
they are not followed by dialogue among the various
elements of Congolese civil and political society. This
dialogue must lead to a national consensus, and to purely
Congolese institutions chosen and approved by all
Congolese. This transition will allow for the re-
establishment of the rule of law, the restoration of a fair
and independent judicial system and respect for the rights
of all with no discrimination based on ethnic origin. It
must also combat the culture of impunity which is still
rampant in the region.

In our view, implementation of these elements is
essential to national reconciliation among Congolese, and
to the reconstruction and stability of the country and the
region as a whole.

(spoke in English)

To ensure a lasting peace, we must find solutions to
the various problems that have burdened the Central
African region for too long. The worsening situation has
led to plans to convene, under the auspices of the United
Nations and the OAU, an international conference on
peace, stability and socio-economic development in the
Great Lakes region of Africa.

Canada supports this idea. We believe that not only
the countries of the region, but also African civil society
as a whole, must participate in such a conference. The
problems of the region, including those of nationality and

 

the application of customary as opposed to judicial law,
cannot be resolved without the vital contribution of the
region's civil societies. Canada invites the international
community to continue its consideration of this important
issue so as to allow the holding of such a conference when
the opportunity arises.

Our support for the regional mediation process and a
peaceful and lasting solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains steadfast. We
strongly encourage the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
to continue to work actively with the Secretary-General of
the OAU and with all the parties concerned to reach a
peaceful solution, and we hope soon to consider his
concrete recommendations on a possible role for the United
Nations to that end.

