Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu for her
briefing on the report of the Secretary-General on
small arms and light weapons (S/2017/1025) issued
pursuant to resolution 2220 (2015), which sheds light
on the developments and trends with regard to small
arms and light weapons.

The threat posed by the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and its devastating
consequences for international peace and security
is indeed a source of serious concern. We know its
devastating consequences from the experiences of
our region, which has been awash with such weapons.
Small arms and light weapons are by far the most
widespread and most used weapons in different parts
of the world, and they continue to be key enablers
of numerous international conflicts and civil wars,
which has resulted in enormous harm to civilians,
including women and children. Furthermore, small
arms and light weapons are creating instability and
long-term governance challenges, thereby complicating
conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts. Such
weapons also end up in the hands of both domestic and
transnational terrorist groups. The increased linkages
between transnational organized crime and terrorism,
as well as the wider use of emerging technologies for
illicit trafficking and production, is therefore a matter
of growing concern that should be seriously addressed.

The role of the Security Council in addressing the
illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons in an integrated and
holistic manner that incorporates political, security,
development, human rights and rule-of-law activities is
imperative. We could agree more with the Secretary-
General on the need to mainstream the issue of the
illicit trade, misuse and excessive accumulation of
weapons into all relevant Council discussions. We also
recognize that addressing the scourge of illicit small
arms and light weapons requires coordinated action at
the national, regional and international levels.

For us in Africa, the African Union's strategy
on the control of illicit proliferation, circulation and
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, as well
as corresponding action plans, is the comprehensive
policy framework to carry out the fight against illicit
arms. There is a need to support such regional efforts,
and we appreciate the existing cooperation with the
relevant United Nations entities in that regard. We hope
they will continue to be strengthened.

At the international level, we note the positive
progress achieved during the reporting period, which
include the unanimous adoption of the Disarmament
Commission's recommendations on practical confidence-
building measures in the field of conventional weapons.
We believe that will be instrumental in enhancing
cooperation and confidence-building measures with a
view to promoting progress in arms control.

The third Review Conference on the Programme
of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons, which
is scheduled to be held in June 2018, will be an
important platform to encourage Member States to
undertake a set of measures at the national level and to
further strengthen efforts at subregional and regional
cooperation, coordination and information-sharing
mechanisms, in particular transborder customs
cooperation and information-sharing, with a view
to preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit
transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of
small arms and light weapons.

In conclusion, we need to underscore the critical
importance of addressing the resource constraints and
restrained capacities that different United Nations
entities and international organizations encounter in
addressing those challenges.

