Mr. Dauth (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
and welcome to New York. We want to thank the
United Kingdom for convening this second open
debate on justice and the rule of law, and we very much
welcome the report of Secretary-General (S/2004/616),
which will be a valuable tool in our collective efforts to
achieve transitional justice and entrench the rule of law
in States which have been torn apart by conflict.

As others have remarked, the report identifies
valuable lessons learned, and articulates important
recommendations for United Nations approaches to
transitional justice and rule of law issues, which, as
Mark Malloch Brown so wisely said, are too important
to be left to lawyers. These issues include the need to
assess existing capacity in a State emerging from
conflict, the importance of developing comprehensive
long-term approaches, the need to ensure that
responses are tailored to the specific political, cultural
and social characteristics of the State concerned, the
importance of involving all domestic constituencies
throughout the process, and the need to build national
capacity.

Australia's long history of involvement in
peacekeeping operations and other assistance missions
confirms these lessons. Let me talk about some specific
lessons learned by Australia in recent experience.
These flesh out the sorts of general points which I
thought Mark was making so eloquently in his helpful
remarks.

The experience of the Australian-led Regional
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands is
particularly relevant for us and, I think, more generally.
The reason for the request by the Government of the
Solomon Islands for assistance was a fundamental
breakdown in law and order in the very institutions of
the State. It was only through restoring the rule of law
that a durable peace could be achieved. In devising and
implementing a regional response, Australia and
Pacific Islands Forum partners worked closely with the
people of the Solomon Islands to develop a
comprehensive rule of law strategy. This included
assessing the state of the Solomon Islands' justice
system, providing assistance for the judiciary and to
strengthen correctional services, and the deployment of
300 police from the region, who were authorized to use
executive powers within the Solomon Islands to
support the Royal Solomon Islands Police Force. The
police were supported by a deployment of defence
force personnel who assisted the deployment and
provided additional support for police personnel. This
strategy has now paid rich dividends with the arrest of
a large number of alleged criminals and, importantly,
the removal and destruction of small arms. Law and
order have now been re-established, and peace and
security restored in the Solomon Islands.

The experience of Timor-Leste also indicates the
importance of long-term strategies to develop the rule
of law. Successive United Nations missions have
played an important role in the establishment of the
rule of law in Timor-Leste, of course. As the Secretary-
General's report notes, activities at the community
level to achieve transitional justice and
reconciliation - including the work of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation - hold important lessons for the United
Nations in devising, implementing and supporting rule
of law strategies in the future.

The Secretary-General's report notes that a major
obstacle to effectively addressing rule of law issues
from the outset of a peace operation has been the fact
that police are often too slowly deployed; frequently
have insufficient mandates or skills; or, indeed, are in
too short a supply, I think we need to note. To address
that critical gap, Australia has created the International
Deployment Group, a body consisting of 500 police
available to participate in peace, capacity-building and
stability missions. These police will be drawn from
Australian police services and will have specialized
training to equip them for such missions. Many of them
will have previous experience in peace operations - in
the Solomon Islands and East Timor, for example. We
urge other States to consider developing such
mechanisms to ensure that trained civilian police are
available to participate in peace operations.

The report also notes the importance of
international institutions in supporting domestic efforts
to deliver justice and entrench the rule of law. In that
context, the establishment of the International Criminal
Court was a highly significant development. The Court
has an essential role to play in facilitating justice and
accountability, particularly through the
complementarity principle, which is a central feature,
of course, of the Court's Statute.

As the Secretary-General's report notes, another
recent approach to achieving transitional justice is the
provision of international support for mixed
institutions, such as in the case of Cambodia. Australia
welcomes Cambodia's signature on 4 October of the
agreement between Cambodia and the United Nations
to establish an Extraordinary Chambers in Cambodia to
try senior Khmer Rouge leaders. We remain committed
to assisting this process and call on Cambodia and
other States to join Australia in providing funding for
the trials. That will enable justice to be done - justice
for which the people of Cambodia have been waiting
for far too long.

Let me, in closing, note the forthcoming review
by the Executive Committee on Peace and Security on
matching resources with peacekeeping operations to
facilitate the establishment of the rule of law and
transitional justice. Australia will continue to follow
that process closely.

