Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express its sincere appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his most useful report
(S/l995/279) of 10 April 1995, the tenth in the series of
progress reports on the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia (UNOMIL). We also commend and express
appreciation to the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and the leaders of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for their
untiring efforts to bring about peace in Liberia.

From the report, the Indonesian delegation notes that
developments towards a resolution of the situation have
not been encouraging and that actions unfolding in the
country at present are not of the sort to create a climate
conducive to the attainment of peace, stability and
national reconciliation. The report states that the peace
process in Liberia remains at an impasse and, further, that
the breakdown of the cease-fire has led to a further
deterioration in the overall situation.

This situation has resulted in large part from the
failure of the parties to reach agreement amongst
themselves on the instalment of a Council of State. We

 
deeply regret the failure of the factions and of the political
parties to reach such an agreement, despite the untiring
efforts of the Chairman of ECOWAS and other ECOWAS
leaders. What is missing is the political will to implement
the Accra Agreement in good faith. It is our sincere hope
that the Liberian parties will now strictly adhere to the
Accra Agreement, demonstrate their readiness to implement
it fully, and make evident their political determination and
commitment to achieving peace and stability in Liberia.
Furthermore, it is our hope that the follow-up consultations
on these matters will result in agreements on the installation
of the Council of State.

Another issue of concern to the Indonesian delegation
is the question of a sustained extension of humanitarian
relief activities to the areas controlled by the factions,
which has been impeded by the absence of credible security
guarantees from the factions in Liberia. We believe that
sustained security guarantees will ensure that sufficient
quantities of life-saving assistance reach the civilian
population throughout the country. It is in this context that
we would like to express our hope that the ECOWAS
summit can take place as soon as possible in order to
coordinate and harmonize policies on Liberia and promote
the implementation of the Accra Agreement. In this regard,
we cannot fail to pay tribute to the Government of Nigeria
for agreeing to host the ECOWAS summit meeting.

The draft resolution on Liberia before us today, which,
inter alia, extends the mandate of UNOMIL until
30 June 1995 and establishes a Committee of the Security
Council to monitor the effective implementation of the arms
embargo imposed under resolution 788 (1992), enjoys my
delegation's support, and we will vote in favour of its
adoption.

The extension of the mandate ought to be seen as an
opportunity for the parties to the conflict to respect the
cease-fire and implement all the relevant agreements, and
as providing sufficient time to prepare and convene the
ECOWAS summit. It is our hope that, within this period,
the Liberian parties will be afforded a significant
opportunity to demonstrate their willingness to resolve their
own problems and to respect the role of international,
regional, and subregional organizations.

