Ms. Power (United States of America): As is
reflected in our gathering today, the United Nations, the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and the international
community as a whole have all played important
leadership roles in support of Yemen's critical transition
period. I would also like to recognize Foreign Minister
Al-Qirbi, Foreign Minister Bishop, who has now left
the Chamber, Secretary General Al Zayani and other
leaders who are here.

My delegation has appreciated the chance to
engage, during the current week, with the various actors
mentioned and to listen to their views in the Chamber
today. The United States shares many of the aspirations
that they have expressed. We firmly support Yemen's
transitional process, including the National Dialogue
and the confidence-building measures undertaken by
President Mansour. We join with Yemen's regional and
global partners in standing behind Yemen's efforts to
strengthen the country's political stability, security,
unity and development. And, of course, we are aware
of the many challenges to Yemen's internal peace and
economic progress, but we share the determination
expressed by many here today to continue our efforts
in coordination with Yemen's friends to build on the
important forward steps that have been taken.

As Special Adviser Benomar pointed out in April,

"The National Dialogue Conference has opened
a new chapter in the transition for which Yemenis
are now writing their own pages. Groups which
only a year ago were engaged in armed clashes are
now gathering in the same hall to discuss a common
future for their country."

Given the nature of past grievances and the scope
of current challenges, it is proving very difficult to do a
variety of things, namely, to decide on the structure of
the State with a view to resolving deep-seated regional
grievances, to consider the question of accountability
for past violations and, at the most basic level, to meet
humanitarian and social needs.

My Government was pleased to note the substantive
discussions within the Dialogue's working groups, as
well as vigorous efforts aimed at outreach that have
been undertaken and the inclusion of women, which has
been referred to in the Chamber several times today, as
well as of men, from all parts of the country, into the
process.

In recognition of the historic nature of this moment,
our shared objective now should be to ensure that the
outcomes of the National Dialogue are translated into a
new constitution and legislative agenda and explained
to the Yemeni people. We need to work together to
ensure that the electoral commission updates the voter
registry, organizes the constitutional referendum and
prepares for important national elections early next
year. We urge the Yemeni Government to produce a
detailed plan and budget for the elections process to
help donors identify resource gaps.

My Government also continues to support
President Mansour's efforts to restructure Yemen's
military and security services, including the decrees
he has issued to outline a new brigade structure and to
otherwise professionalize and enhance the capabilities
of the armed forces. We encourage the Government
to maintain and expand its efforts to implement that
essential aspect of the Transition Agreement. We all
know how important security is, as the foundation for
all else.

In addition, we strongly commend the President
and his Government for the leadership they have shown
in countering the threats posed by violent extremist
groups. We join with others in condemning recent
attacks, including the vicious assault on Shabwa on
20 September that killed and wounded dozens of
soldiers who were simply there to do their jobs. Yemen
is determined to build a better and more stable future
for its people; terrorists will not be able to stand in the
way of that landmark initiative. In Yemen, as elsewhere,
open and constructive policy debate should be welcome,
but efforts to divide and destroy through violence must
be resolutely opposed.

Looking ahead, we are encouraged by the
commitment shown by the United Nations, the
GCC and other partners to support Yemen during
this pivotal period. It is essential that the transition
remain on track and that progress also be made in
implementing economic reforms, fighting corruption
and strengthening governance, which is, of course,
also foundational, as is security. I emphasize as well
the persistence of food insecurity and other urgent
and dire humanitarian needs within the country. The
United Nations response plan for Yemen remains
severely underfunded; it is critical that countries who
have pledged deliver on their pledges and do everything
necessary to see that basic requirements are met. The
United States has provided over $320 million over the
past three years in support ofthe United Nations appeal.

Ultimately, the success or failure of the transition
depends on the choices made by Yemen, by Yemen's
Government and by Yemen's people. That is
appropriate, and it is a challenge for all of us to work
as diligently as we can to attain the goal we all seek: a
Yemen that is stable, confident, at peace with itself and
its neighbours, and moving in the right political and
economic direction.

In closing, I'd like again to commend the
leadership being demonstrated by President Mansour
and his Government, by Special Adviser Benomar
and by the members of the GCC. In this joint effort
of extraordinary importance, the United States remains
ready and willing to do its part.

