Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): We
welcome your presence among us today, Madam
President, at this timely meeting on Guinea-Bissau.
The events of last week showed how important it is for
the Council to maintain its commitment to the efforts
being made by Guinea-Bissau to strengthen peace and
consolidate democracy.

(spoke in English)

Canada is pleased with the return to peace in
Guinea-Bissau, and we welcome the Vice-Prime
Minister and his delegation to our consultations today
and the opportunity to discuss the situation directly
with him.

Canada joins other members of the Council in
reiterating support for the democratically elected
Government of Guinea-Bissau. We urge the
Government to continue its efforts to strengthen
democratic institutions, including the subordination of
the military to civilian rule. Military challenges to
Government authority only destabilize Guinea-Bissau
and the region more generally. Further, the continuing
commitment of the international donor community and
the viability of its efforts depend on maintaining
stability in Guinea-Bissau.

In this regard, Canada agrees fully with the point
of the draft presidential statement that stresses the
importance of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration as a key element for promoting
sustainable democracy and stability, and we commend
particularly the efforts of the Bretton Woods
institutions, especially the World Bank, in this
connection.

We support the work of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau for the
consolidation of peace and democracy and the
promotion of respect for human rights and the rule of
law.

We commend the President of Senegal, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries for their
contributions. We urge all the parties to work together
to address the root causes of unrest in order to restore
lasting peace for the benefit of the people of Guinea-
Bissau and stability for the region.

With respect to the Secretary-General's requests
for Council members' support for the implementation
of the Brahimi report, particularly as regards quick
impact project funds for his special representatives
abroad, he can count on Canadian agreement.

