Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Before I
begin, I want to take a moment to honour some very
important people. As we gather together in the Security
Council, many around the world are preparing to gather
with their families to celebrate a season of peace and
generosity. Amid this celebration, we remember the
men and women of our military who are away from
their families, fulfilling their solemn vow to defend our
nation and its allies against those who would harm us.
My prayer this Christmas is that our words and deeds
today will contribute to our shared cause of peace and
that they honour those who keep us safe.

And with that, I would like to specifically thank
my Chinese colleagues for working with us on the
negotiations of resolution 2397 (2017). I want to thank
all other members of the Council that quickly moved to
make action and allow this to come forward.

Today, for the tenth time, the Council stands united
against a North Korean regime that rejects the pursuit of
peace. The Kim regime continues to defy the resolutions
ofthe Council, the norms of civilized behaviour and the
patience of the international community. Its arrogance
and hostility to anything productive has set its country
on a destructive path. Nine times before today, we have
asked the North Korean regime to choose the path of
peace. And it should do so, we would welcome it back
into the community of nations. But Pyongyang has
chosen the path of isolation. As we have in the past,
we will continue to match the Kim regime's choice
of aggressive actions with actions of international
sanction. I commend the members of the Security
Council for their unity and persistence in this sustained
international defence of peace and security.

On November 29, Pyongyang launched an
intercontinental ballistic missile. This was another
attempt by the Kim regime to masquerade as a great
Power, while its people starve and its soldiers defect.
But for the international community, this is an
unprecedented challenge from a defiant State. We have
therefore leveled an unprecedented response.

Resolution 2397 (2017) ratchets up the pressure
on North Korea even further, building on our previous
resolution on this topic, resolution 2375 (2017), which
included the strongest sanctions ever imposed on that
country. Those sanctions fully banned textile exports
from North Korea. They banned all joint ventures and all
new work permits for overseas North Korean labourers.
And, critical to the regime's ability to develop its nuclear
and missile programmes, the previous resolution cut
off 55 per cent of refined petroleum products going to
North Korea.

Today, we cut deeper. After North Korea's
September nuclear test, the Council capped refined
petroleum exports into North Korea. Today's resolution
achieves an 89 per cent total reduction of the Kim
regime's ability to import gasoline, diesel and other
refined products. And should the North Korean regime
conduct another nuclear or ballistic missile test, the
resolution commits the Security Council to take even
further action. It sends the unambiguous message to
Pyongyang that further defiance will invite further
punishment and isolation.

Resolution 2375 (2017), adopted in September,
banned all new permits for North Koreans who work
abroad and send the majority of their earnings to
Pyongyang. That is a source of over $500 million
each year to the Kim regime. Today's resolution goes
further; it requires that countries expel all North Korean
workers within 24 months. Previous resolutions banned
90 per cent of North Korea's exports. This resolution
bans all remaining categories of major North Korean
exports - a loss of nearly $250 million in revenue
to the regime. Previous resolutions cracked down on
the smuggling of banned items, such as oil and coal.
But sanctions evasion has continued, so this resolution
closes the loopholes in the system and requires countries
to seize and impound ships caught smuggling illicit
goods. The list goes on.

The unity that the Council has shown in leveling
these unprecedented sanctions is a reflection of the
international outrage at the Kim regime's actions. But
we are not the only ones who are appalled by the North
Korean regime. We are not the only ones sacrificing for
a solution - not even close. At our most recent meeting
on North Korea (see S/PV.8137), I called on all nations
to sever diplomatic and trade relations with North
Korea. I reiterate that call today. I would ask any nation
that continues to support the Kim regime to consider
the nature of that regime, and to consider this crisis
through the eyes of the North Korean people.

I would ask them to imagine being a North Korean
soldier, so desperate and so ravaged by hunger and
disease that he would take five bullets from his fellow
soldiers in order to escape across the Demilitarized
Zone; to imagine being a 12-year-old in North Korea
and being forced to attend public executions as a
reminder of what would happen if he stepped out of
line; to imagine being a mother, so desperate for a
better life for her child that she would risk rape, torture
and imprisonment if she were caught trying to leave
the country; and then to imagine getting caught, being
forced to abort her baby without anesthesia, and then
trying again and again to escape. These are real stories
of real people. These things happened. They should
motivate us to do more.

I am grateful to my colleagues for the serious
measures we have enacted on behalf of the North
Korean people. And I ask them keep those people in
their thoughts and prayers this holiday season as we
continue to fight against this, the most tragic example
of evil in the modern world.

