Mr. Maqungo (South Africa): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to congratulate Judge Patrick
Robinson on his election as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and to thank him for his statement
to the Council. I also wish to thank Judge Dennis
Byron, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), for his statement to the Council.
We are also grateful to the Tribunals' respective
Prosecutors - Mr. Serge Brammertz and Mr. Hassan
Jallow - for their statements. We would also take this
opportunity to express our gratitude to the Tribunals
for having received the Informal Working Group
during its visits to The Hague and Arusha, Tanzania.

The two ad hoc Tribunals established by this
Council have made an important contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security. They
have brought to justice persons responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law, rendered
justice to the victims of international crimes and are an
important factor in the restoration of peace and
stability in their respective jurisdictions. The
significant achievements of the Tribunals have clearly
proven that peace and justice are complementary and
mutually reinforcing.

My delegation commends both the ICTY and the
ICTR for the efforts that they are making to ensure that
they fulfil their completion strategies. In particular, we
commend ICTR for the dutiful steps it is taking to
complete the evidence phases of all its trials with the
aim of meeting the target date of 2009.

My delegation takes note of the information that
several permanent judges of the ICTR may retire to
take up positions in their national systems. We are
eager to ensure that cases currently being tried are not
interrupted and that these trials be brought to full
adjudication. Keeping in mind the target date of 2010
for the Tribunal to complete all of its work, my
delegation therefore supports the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda's proposal to continue to
engage the departing judges remotely for the purposes
of writing judgements.

Furthermore, we support the proposals to make
maximum use of ad litem judges by assigning them to
cases without the requirement of the presence of
permanent judges and to increase the number of these
ad litem judges as necessary to ensure that the
completion strategy is eventually met. We recognize
that these steps will require amendments to the statute
and the rules of procedure and look forward to
receiving the proposed amendments from the Courts.

The completion strategy is time bound and,
therefore, we find it imperative that imaginative steps
be taken in order to meet the deadline and realize our
goals of completing all the work of the Court by 2010.
My delegation urges the Tribunals to continue to
identify further reforms to complete their work as
efficiently and promptly as possible.

We remain, however, disappointed at the decision
of the appeal division to deny the request of the
Prosecutor of the ICTR to refer some of the
outstanding cases to Rwanda. We are, however,
encouraged at the cooperation between Rwanda and the
Office of the Prosecutor following the decision of the
Appeals Division and hope that, eventually, all of the
concerns expressed by the Appeals Division shall be
resolved and that referrals to Rwanda shall occur
sooner rather than later. We view referrals to national
systems as central to achieving the completion strategy.

In both the ICTY and the ICTR, there are indicted
persons still at large and some of them are of a
particularly high-level and are accused of holding the
greatest responsibility in the perpetrating of
international crimes. Ideally, they should be tried at an
international level by an international court. It is
important that these fugitives be arrested and brought
to justice and we therefore call upon the cooperation of
all States, in particular the States that have been
mentioned in the report, to surrender these fugitives to
the Tribunals.

The ad hoc Tribunals were established as efforts
to maintain international peace and security and, as
they now complete their work, it is important that they
leave a legacy that affirms the national justice systems
of the territories Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. It
is for that reason that my delegation strongly supports
referrals to these national systems.

Much work has already been done by the
informal working group of the Security Council on the
Tribunals under the able chairmanship of Belgium. We
take this opportunity to thank Belgium for their
leadership and for having made the trip to the Tribunals
possible.

It is important at this stage that this work that has
been done by the informal working group be placed in
an official report of the Security Council so that the
incoming members of the Council can build upon what
has already been done.

