I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing today. At today's meeting, we would like to emphasize the following points. First, my delegation would like to stress Viet Nam's categorical condemnation of the use of chemical weapons in any form, by anyone, anywhere, under any circumstances or for any reason. It is our consistent policy to advocate for the complete disarmament and non- proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We believe that the obligations of States parties to respect and fully implement the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) are undoubtedly of utmost importance to fulfilling the common commitment to a world free of chemical weapons. Secondly, as a committed advocate of multilateralism and international law, Viet Nam supports the work entrusted to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) by the CWC. It is imperative that the OPCW, that is, all of the States parties and all of its relevant bodies and mechanisms, strictly abide by the Convention. While being conducted in line with the CWC, investigations into any possible use of chemical weapons should focus on the goal of establishing irrefutable facts and evidence. Therefore, it is fundamental that all investigations be carried out in a comprehensive, conclusive, objective and impartial manner, based on verified information and without any politicization. Thirdly, Viet Nam would like to express concern over the reported use of chemical weapons in Syria, which can have disastrous and long-term effects on civilians and their living environment. The actual implementation of the CWC hinges upon primarily each State party as well as their nationals and all persons on its territory or under its jurisdiction. We take note of the continued engagement during the reporting period between the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the relevant Syrian authorities in the face of certain obstacles caused by the coronavirus disease in the past few months, including the video-teleconference between the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian National Authority on 27 July, the submission of Syria's eighty-first report on 18 August, and so on. We believe that continued cooperation and engagement can help address and clarify all outstanding issues. We look forward to the finalization of the plan of action for the resolution of outstanding issues as well as the rescheduling of the twenty-third round of consultations between the Declaration Assessment Team and the Syrian National Authority. From our own experience, we have found that the cooperation with and assistance by the OPCW have been quite useful at all stages of CWC implementation, from the initial declaration to all types of inspections, technical assistance visits and soon. We call on all relevant parties to enhance dialogue and cooperation, in a constructive and non-politicized manner, to fully address the remaining gaps and work towards the full implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). Fourthly, as a member of the OPCW, we take note of the Executive Council's Decision dated 9 July 2020, entitled "Addressing the Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons by the Syrian Arab Republic", and we also note that divergent views remain regarding that decision. Viet Nam will continue to closely follow and actively engage in the relevant mechanisms. Last but not least, we would like to stress the importance of unity in addressing the issue of chemical weapons in Syria. A strong agreement, perhaps as in the case of our consensual support for the political process, is very much needed to find a long-term solution to this issue. To bring about sustainable peace and stability in Syria and the region, Viet Nam would like to reiterate our support for the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015) and in full adherence to international law and the United Nations Charter.
