Mr. Arizaga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I bring
fraternal greetings from President Rafael Correa,
Minister for Foreign Affairs Ricardo Patifio Aroca and
our citizens revolution. My delegation would like, at the
outset, to express its pleasure at seeing you, Madam
President, presiding over this meeting of the Security
Council and our gratitude for the work that Chile has
been carrying out during its presidency of the Council.
I am all the more pleased to be here today, on Martin
Luther King, Jr., Day, which celebrates that Nobel
Peace Prize winner, someone who fought tirelessly for
inclusive development.

In the twenty-first century, peace can no longer
mean only the absence of war. Peace without inclusion
and justice is not genuine peace. Overcoming poverty
is the greatest moral imperative facing the planet today,
because for the first time in the history of humankind,
poverty is not the fruit of a lack of resources or of
naturally occurring factors, but rather the outcome of
systems that are unjust and exclusionary.

As far as Ecuador is concerned, human beings must
be at the centre of everything - not capital. For my
country, the main thing is to live well, in harmony with
nature. With that in mind, over the past eight years,
Ecuador has empowered its Government. That has
made it possible to plan and design public policies and
to regulate, monitor and redistribute wealth. Thanks to
that great effort, we have been able to lower national
poverty in terms of income by 15 per cent. We raised
equality levels by 8 points, as measured by the Gini
coefficient. We universalized basic education, tripled
our public health-care services and guaranteed free
higher education, enhancing our investment in such
education to bring it to the highest level in Latin
America. We have enhanced the supply and quality
of our public services, brought attention to unpaid
domestic labour and increased social security services
for over 1.5 million Ecuadorians, which is to say 10 per
cent of our population, all while maintaining the highest
rate of public investment in Latin America.

The Government of Ecuador has embarked upon
a new era, and now our country is full of ideas and
has great faith in itself and enhanced self-esteem and
sovereignty. Despite the difficulties stemming from the
global crisis and the current decrease in the price of oil,
which is my country's main export, the Government of
Ecuador has confirmed that it will deliver its budgetary
allocations for the social sector.

We must recognize that, internationally, we are
still suffering from the fallout of a global order that
is not just unjust but also immoral. As we approach
the seventieth anniversary of the establishment of the
United Nations, my delegation would like to share the
following thoughts on the issue before us today.

First, it is our view that the origin of the global crisis
stems from the belief that everything is a function of
capital and, more specifically, financial capital. Solving
the crisis, however, must involve society regaining
control over the market.

Second, we must come up with a new international
economic order that is based on a framework of fair
trade that is in solidarity with developing economies
and a new international financial architecture that
gives priority to environmental conservation and social
inclusion projects, helps us reach food sovereignty and
guarantees that the cycles of life can continue.

Third, the crisis facing us should, in and of itself,
mark a turning point in strengthening the United
Nations role in global economic governance with
a View to initiating a comprehensive reform of the
international financial system and democratizing
international relations.

Fourth, as part of this framework, in Ecuador's
view, human beings are still the priority. As I have
already mentioned, the moral imperative for us is to
extricate human beings from poverty. To do so, we must
ensure that we use our natural resources responsibly.

Fifth, let us promote development that is based on
human talent, education, knowledge and innovation, but
that is also sovereign and respectful of human rights.
Reducing extreme poverty, poverty and inequality
must be the fundamental parameter for gauging such
development. All efforts undertaken with that vision
in mind, in which humankind and its well-being are
at the heart of the work of States and international
organizations, must be supported, because they are
essential if we are to build genuine, lasting peace.

This year in particular, issues such as the post-2015
development agenda, the challenges posed by climate
change, the serious problems facing small island States
and landlocked States and the impact ofnatural disasters
compel us to look into how inclusive development is
now becoming the key focus of domestic action within
States, cooperation between States and peacebuilding.

Sixth, the drive for limitless wealth and concentrated
power leads to more human rights violations. One
example of that is the abuses committed by certain
transnational companies, whose activities should be
regulated under a universal, legally binding instrument.
We are currently reviewing and negotiating such an
instrument in Geneva.
Seventh, my country reiterates the urgent need to
make progress on our reform of the United Nations so
that the Organization can be more democratic, efficient
and transparent. After 70 years of existence, the
Organization cannot continue to reflect the reality of
the 1940s. Not only is reform necessary, but it is critical
for the future of the Organization and requires all of
us to be committed to it. Let us not miss the historic
opportunity offered us this year, and let us ensure that
we go to the General Assembly at its next session with
specific, consensus-based proposals.

Eighth, I align myself in advance with the statement
to be made shortly on behalf of the Group of 77. The
bodies of the United Nations must fulfil their mandates,
each in its respective field.

Ninth, and finally, I would like to reiterate the
important role inclusion plays in political stability,
democratic governance and our countries' development.
Let us tackle the sources of exclusion and create early-
warning systems to that end. It is my beliefthat we must
learn from good practices. My country is prepared to
share its experiences and to learn from other successful
models.

Finally, I thank the delegation of Chile for its
work and its concern about tackling key issues on the
international agenda. We must be proactive, set clear
objectives and work towards specific outcomes in this
area. My country, Ecuador, will lend its full support to
achieving that objective.

