Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): At the outset, I wish to
join others in commending you, Madam President, for
this initiative in keeping the issue of Ebola in front of
the international community. I wish you all the best for
your month as President of the Council.

We can all agree that we have turned a corner.
From the beginning of the outbreak of Ebola, a sense
of pervasive fear invaded all our collective thoughts
and the three nations directly affected. We now have
a sense of collective hope and optimism for the future.
This has come at a very high cost. In Sierra Leone, we
are determined not to look back in anger or frustration,
or to find fault, but to learn the hard lessons that we are
supposed to learn and develop the best practices that we
are supposed to develop.

As we sit here today, we sit in remembrance of
those who have made the ultimate sacrifice: the health
workers, the doctors, the burial teams, and the innocents
who have been struck down by this disease. We can do

our best to commemorate them by making sure that our
collective actions from this point on fully justify the
faith they had in us and the loss that their families now
endure.

As we move forward from emergency to recovery
and resilience, we as States - Sierra Leone and, I am
sure, my colleagues in Liberia and Guinea - do so in
the firm conviction that we fully recognize that the
primary responsibility for the care, safety and health
of the citizens of our countries lies with our political
leadership. Therefore, we know that the heaviest
burden falls on us. However, we continue to look to the
international community to ensure that we discharge
our burden in the manner in which we wish to discharge
it.

Our health systems - health-care delivery and
management - were found wanting. We are grateful
for the teams and the material, financial and other
support that we received, but we realize that these
systems must be rebuilt, and they must be rebuilt
better than they were before. To that end, we look to all
nations that have fully developed health-care systems
to see what we can learn and what we can adapt to our
local conditions. We will also make sure that we hear
the message that comes loud and clear from the lowest
and simplest communities within our nations - that
anything done in their name must include them in the
planning, the design and the execution, and must fully
reflect their local cultures and values.

We are mindful to ensure that the Ebola virus
disease, if it does comes back, is successfully
combatted. We are mindful of the fact that the mosaic
of various responses must be complete. That is what
we also refer to as a jigsaw puzzle. In other words,
quite simply put, the logistical, scientific, diplomatic
and national efforts must all be in harmony. There can
be no disjointed efforts; there can be no duplication.
Within the United Nations, the Secretary-General has
made it quite clear that the various institutional silos
should not operate as such, but operate as one. Within
the subregion of West Africa, we fully embrace the
belief that if one State remains affected, all of us are
still at risk. Therefore, Guinea's successes are Sierra
Leone's successes and Liberia's successes; Liberia's
relapse is also the relapse of Guinea and Sierra Leone.
Therefore, we stand together and we hope that we shall
succeed together.

There is a sense in this crowded global diplomatic
agenda that each issue should enjoy its 15 minutes of
fame and promptly move off the stage. However, we
know that that should not be the case with Ebola.

We are told that even after 42 days of no new cases,
there is a possibility ofrelapse. We are also informed by
the best scientific minds that in any region where Ebola
has appeared, it might reappear again. The question is
not if Ebola will reappear; it is how we respond as a
nation and a community when it does. Therefore, the
health systems, the early warning systems and the
cross-border surveillance must be in place. We look to
Nigeria and Uganda as States that have effectively and
efficiently combatted the appearance of the Ebola virus
disease so asto learn lessons about early warning and
about how to move swiftly and effectively to curtail the
threat.

I speak to the Council as the national of an
exhausted but grateful nation that looked to the world
community, put out a hand seeking assistance, and
received the assistance it needed. As I said before, we
are fully mindful of our national responsibilities. We
are fully mindful of our national failings, and realize
that we must do better by our populations without
reluctance or hesitation. There is a sense that the
first public health mission is perhaps something of an
anomaly; some consider it a bit far-fetched, perhaps,
but it has shown its mettle. It has proven to us all that
it is worthwhile. The risk in setting up such a health
mission of unprecedented proportions has met with
success. Resilience, quite simply put, means that the
nations affected must be able to withstand any future
pandemic or epidemic that comes down the line.

The Ebola virus disease, unfortunately, has
threatened our peacebuilding gains, and we therefore
welcome the strong and vocal initiative of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the peacebuilding
architecture to take the lead in sounding the alarm
and the warnings. We also appreciate the efforts of
the non-governmental organizations that were out in
the field at the very outset, including Medecins Sans
Frontieres, which made the call and continued to sound
the alarm loudly and vociferously. They also now
warn that we should not be complacent and that, as we
approach the last mile, we should not start celebrating
prematurely.

It has, as I said before, been a long and difficult
path that has led to losses and bereavement and had a
heavy cost. National democratic systems of governance
have been fully tested and pushed to the breaking
point. There were missteps and mistakes, but I believe
that at the end our relationship with the international
community has been strengthened. Our relationship
with the United Nations system has been strengthened,
and we believe that the strength of any relationship lies
not in whether there are disputes, disagreements or
discord, but in how we deal with those disputes when
they arise.

I do believe that the nascent Ebola recovery and
resilience communities that have arisen - which of
course include Dr. Nabarro and Dr. Chan - are ones
that now understand each other. From the national
systems, the national leadership and the national Ebola
recovery response teams, there is a sense that the
medical protocols that have been developed have to
be followed. There is a sense within the communities
now that the Governments of the respective affected
countries now work for them. There is a sense at the
global-community level that we are all in it together
and that if we can establish the firewall in West
Africa, the risk to the rest of the world will diminish
correspondingly.

We are all committed to seeing the back of this
disease, but beyond that we are grateful for the efforts
being made at the regional, subregional, continental
and global levels to ensure that there is a proper system
of disease control, not only at the regional level but
also at the continental level, so as to make sure that any
epidemic and pandemic that does come along will be
swiftly dealt with. As our medical doctors in Freetown
have said to us, it would be a tragedy if we were to
successfully deal with Ebola, only to have cholera
come down the line in two months' or half a year's
time. Therefore, there has to be a medical firewall and
a system of improvement.

In closing, while we aspire to a system of medical
excellence, we have now made sure that our Ministry
of Health aspires in the short term to a national health
system of reasonable competence - in other words, one
that can deliver satisfactorily to its citizens whenever
we have this kind of pandemic or epidemic. It has been
a year and a half of fear, but going forward I do believe
that we have learned the hard lessons and can therefore
look forward with hope and cautious optimism. The
international community has stood by Sierra Leone and
the affected States, and it is incumbent on the affected
States to stand by their citizens.

As we go forward and approach the busiest period in
the diplomatic calendar, it is gratifying that the various
agencies and institutions of the United Nations family
have remained focused on the Ebola virus disease and
its eradication. Our watchword must be vigilance so
that we can achieve the much-desired resilience.

