The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to compound the humanitarian crisis across Syria. As I mentioned before, we are doing what we can to support the Syrian people and we provided $30 million to tackle the threat of COVID-19 in Syria. That is in addition to almost $400 million this year in humanitarian support. That support is a clear demonstration of our unwavering commitment to the Syrian people and to the aid community. I want to join others in expressing our steadfast support, in particular, to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World Health Organization, both of which play a critical role in the coordination of the humanitarian and health responses in Syria. That support is all the more important as aid workers continue to work in incredibly challenging circumstances, having to deal on a daily basis with obstructions to their vital work and threats to their health and safety. In particular, I want to condemn the attack against the Turkish Red Crescent Society in Al-Bab on Monday, which resulted in the death of an aid worker and the wounding of another. The deliberate targeting of aid workers is a clear violation of international humanitarian law, and such attacks are abhorrent. We call on all parties in Syria to uphold their obligations. We also remain concerned about the lack of adequate personal protective equipment and medical equipment, as well as the continued rise in cases of COVID-19 among United Nations staff and aid workers. This increased pressure on aid workers comes against the backdrop of devastating reports of avoidable civilian deaths, which further add to the humanitarian caseload. As we heard from Under- Secretary-General Lowcock, the combination of the devastated health system and the challenges of COVID-19 can result in many more unnecessary deaths and illness. We were also deeply saddened to hear of the 11 deaths caused by a car bomb in Afrin. It is unacceptable that pro-regime forces continue to launch indiscriminate attacks that result in the death of civilians. As the Human Rights Council's Commission of Inquiry again makes clear this week in its latest report (A/HRC/45/31), these attacks may amount to war crimes. Indeed, the report further shines a light on the brutal crimes against humanity that the regime continues to commit through enforced disappearances, murder, torture and imprisonment. If we ever needed evidence that the regime does not have the best interests of its people at heart, then this is it. As we also heard today, access problems persist in north-eastern Syria, with a continued lack of cross-line access into the regions where vulnerable people need it most. It was striking to hear Under-Secretary-General Lowcock's example of Al-Tabqa. It is especially galling to hear of 100 aid trucks being delayed from crossing into north-east Syria because of bureaucratic procedures. That is another sign that despite the assurances of the allies of the Syrian regime in the Council that we could make cross-line access work, obstruction continues. Let us be clear - the obstruction is calculated. It is also unacceptable. The United Nations must be given unfettered access and must be allowed to deliver aid to those who need it most. Like others, we remain concerned about persistent water and electricity shortages and disruptions to the Allouk water station. We urge all parties to take steps to swiftly resolve water supply disruptions and to deconflict and minimize further conflict-related damage to civilian infrastructure. At the last Council meeting on this issue (see S/2020/758), we talked about the 9.3 million people who are currently food insecure. Fires have since then ripped through north-western Syria. Given that October and November are the sowing seasons for wheat and barley, and with the fires destroying large swaths of arable land, there is a risk now of devastating famine and further impacts on people's livelihoods. So, the picture is bleak. It is vital that the Council come together to prevent a worsening of the humanitarian disaster as we approach the winter months in Syria. As a priority, civilians and aid workers urgently need to be given the access and tools they need to alleviate suffering while there is still time to prepare for the coming months ahead. Finally, I am glad that Ambassador Heusgen raised the ongoing trial in Germany. The reality is that the testimony there represents the tip of the iceberg. The Syrian regime, as we know, is willing to indiscriminately bomb innocent civilians in schools and hospitals. One can only imagine what they are capable of in Al-Assad's dungeons. Before supporters of this regime raise the question of sanctions and the lifting of sanctions, let us again reiterate that the path to the removal of sanctions is clear. Rather than interfering with aid, bombing schools and hospitals, detaining and torturing people, the Syrian regime must heed the calls of its population and engage seriously with Special Envoy Pedersen and the United Nations-led political process to achieve a peaceful end to the conflict.
