Lord Ashdown: It has been just four months, I
believe, since I last spoke to the Council. As the
President just indicated, members have before them a
detailed report on developments in the second half of
2004. So, given that our time is somewhat constrained
this morning, I hope the Council will forgive me if I do
not intend to cover in detail all the ground in that
report. Let me just pick out the main highlights.

First, perhaps the Council will recall that, when I
was last here, just 16 weeks ago, I wanted to warn in
rather stark terms of the threat posed to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's future by the failure of the Republika
Srpska authorities in particular to honour their
obligation to cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
Republika Srpska being, of course, one of the two
entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I warned the
Council bluntly that that failure was now the biggest
stumbling block to a brighter future for Bosnia and
Herzegovina - an obstacle that risked bringing to a
complete halt the country's progress towards the
European Union and NATO, that being the only future
the country can have.

A few weeks later, regrettably, the NATO
Ministerial had to reject for the second time Bosnia and
Herzegovina's application to join the Partnership for
Peace. I followed that announcement with further
measures, adding to those I took in July of last year, to
address individual obstruction of the ICTY - the
Hague process - and to address systemic changes to
Republika Srspka's security structures that had been
identified by NATO and the Chief Prosecutor, Carla
Del Ponte, alike. Shortly afterwards, Foreign Minister
Ivanic, together with his colleague Prime Minister
Mikerevic of Republika Srpska, resigned briefly in
protest. Foreign Minister Ivanic has now had a change
of heart, and the Government in Republika Srpska has
changed its leadership, but not its makeup.

But now it seems that I am able to report to the
Council rather more hopefully. I am happy to tell
members that now, at last - 10 years after Dayton -
the Republika Srpska has started to hand over indictees
to the Hague Tribunal. It is early days, and it is only
natural that seasoned observers - many around this
table - of events in the Balkans should remain
sceptical; that is the default position until this has been
properly opened up. But, since I am here to make
political judgements, I now believe that we may be
seeing a change in the attitude of the Republika Srpska
authorities and an acceptance that the way to Brussels,
to the European Union (EU), to NATO and to the
country's future must lie through the Hague Tribunal.
Here, let me pay a tribute to the Chief Prosecutor,
Carla del Ponte, for her implacable, iron determination
to ensure that this process begins and ends in full.
Thanks to that, we have been able to make the progress
we have seen over the past two months.

In the past two months, the Republika Srpska
authorities have transferred, either on their own or
working with the authorities in Belgrade - and that
itself is a step in the right direction - five of the major
Hague indictees to the Hague Tribunal, whereas in the
nearly 10 years previous they had not transferred a
single one. Four of those transfers have taken place in
the past two weeks.

Earlier this morning, Vinko Pandurevic -
arguably the third most senior indictee, after Mladic
and Karadzic - who has been indicted for genocide
and crimes against humanity at Srebrenica, arrived in
The Hague. Pandurevic and the other generals have
handed themselves in, but their commander, Ratko
Mladic, remains on the run. General Mladic might take
a moment now to reflect on the fact that it is a curious
military code in which a general lets his subordinate
officers carry the can for actions carried out in his
name while he scurries from safe house to safe house
like a common criminal. A question on which he might
reflect is whether or not he might have the courage of
his own generals and do the right thing - submit
himself to The Hague - which he has so far failed to
do.

Now, I do not claim that the events of the past
few weeks yet constitute the full cooperation that the
Tribunal requires and that the international community
demands. Ten years after Srebrenica - and we
commemorate the dismal tenth anniversary of that
terrible event this year - the call of justice does not
fade away and must not be allowed to fade away. This
process will not end until Karadzic and Mladic and all
of the other main indictees are in custody. The sooner
that day comes, the sooner Republika Srpska will be
able to discard dishonour in this matter and the sooner
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able to begin to
discard the chains of history and concentrate on its
future.
This process has only started; it is not yet
completed. Nevertheless, I commend the Republika
Srpska authorities for the progress of the past few
weeks. The crucial thing now is that it continue. We
cannot tolerate any slackening of this effort; there is no
scope for that. Because - and this is my second
point - as winter gives way to spring, Bosnia and
Herzegovina faces some fundamental decisions by the
European Union and NATO about its future. For both
organizations, cooperation with the Hague Tribunal is
non-negotiable, as the European Union's recent
decision on Croatia has shown. NATO, I know, is
keeping the question of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
Partnership for Peace application under close review,
and it may well be that, around the third week of April,
NATO will again consider that question.

For its part, the European Commission has made
clear that it hopes to be able to form a view as to
whether Bosnia and Herzegovina is ready to begin
negotiations on a stabilization and association process
as early as mid-May.

So these are crucial weeks. Those two steps -
the Partnership for Peace and the beginning of the long
road that leads to European Union membership - are a
watershed for Bosnia and Herzegovina, a moment
when, once those gates have been passed through,
everything within the country changes, and the
international community's relations with the country
ought to change as well.

On Monday, European Commission Enlargement
Commissioner Olli Rehn met with Bosnia and
Herzegovina Prime Minister Adnan Terzic in Brussels.
In addition to ICTY cooperation, he made clear that the
other cardinal issue on which the European
Commission expected to see significant progress
before mid-May was police restructuring - the
creation of a single national, statewide policing
structure for policing in Bosnia and Herzegovina - in
line with the three principles that the Commission has
repeatedly espoused and has required the country to
conform to.

The Police Restructuring Commission, under the
chairmanship of former Belgian Prime Minister
Martens, finalized its work in December 2004 and
presented its recommendations in January 2005. The
Commission - which is the greatest concentration of
security and police experts ever drawn together in
Bosnia and Herzegovina from domestic and
international resources - recommends the creation of
a single state-level policing structure, but with
operational policing delegated to the local level. It
proposed a map drawing up the new police areas based
on operational efficiency, not political control. What
that means is that, where it is necessary for police and
security reasons that police areas cross the inter-entity
border line, then that should be done where it is
operationally expedient.

The Commission's proposals are currently being
widely debated in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Most agree
that the system needs to change. Most citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina believe that there is too much
political influence in policing, and they are right; that
they receive poor service from their police, and they
are right; and that the criminals get away far too often
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and they are right in that
too.

But there is, I must admit, a great if unfounded
anxiety in Republika Srpska that an end to poor
policing arrangements is really part of a clever ploy to
abolish Republika Srpska itself. Let me state
categorically again, before this body, that that is not the
case. The position of Republika Srpska is protected by
Dayton, and my job as High Representative is to
protect and enact Dayton. The position of the
Republika Srpska within Dayton is guaranteed. There
is neither policy nor intent on the part of anybody in
the international community to alter that arrangement.
It is not correct to say that police reform is part of a
general policy aimed at that outcome.

Nevertheless, police restructuring must happen,
in line with the European Commission's principles, if
Bosnia and Herzegovina wants to get the green light
from Brussels in May and embark on that historic road
to Europe. Whether or not that happens now lies, once
again, with the authorities in Republika Srpska, who
are the only significant body now blocking that reform.

Thirdly, we are continuing to move ahead with
the rest of our reform agenda, in line with the four core
tasks set out in the mission implementation plan of the
Office of the High Representative.

The new War Crimes Chamber and maximum-
security prison facilities were opened in Sarajevo
earlier this month. It is one of the attributes of
sovereignty and statehood that a State should be able to
try even the most egregious crimes within its own
domestic institutions. Bosnia and Herzegovina is now
the first country in the Balkan region to have set up its
own domestic procedures for trying its own war
criminals to international standards. I want to pay
tribute here to Judge Theodor Meron, President of the
Hague Tribunal, who has been such a powerful
advocate and a dynamo driving that process forward.

Meanwhile, the Indirect Taxation Authority,
which will deliver the value added tax on a State-wide
basis, started full operation in January this year. The
single account operating State-wide is now working.
Overall, preliminary information reveals that the
revenues it is collecting are up compared with the same
period for last year by some 5 per cent to 6 per cent,
reflecting both greater efficiency and a greater capacity
to be able to collect taxes which had previously been
avoided.

On defence reform, NATO took over the
leadership of the international community on the issue
of defence at the turn of this year. The goals for 2005
include amalgamating the functions of the entity
Ministries of Defence into a single State-wide Bosnia
and Herzegovina Ministry of Defence, establishing a
single defence budget and creating single personnel,
logistics and training commands. Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to make progress on schedule on
those objectives if it is to satisfy the requirements of
the NATO Partnership for Peace and if it is to rectify,
as it must, the systemic weaknesses in security
structures which both NATO and Carla Del Ponte have
highlighted as a primary cause of its failure to
cooperate effectively with the Hague Tribunal.

If it does those things, it will have made huge
strides forward - not just towards membership of the
Partnership for Peace, but in due course towards
membership of the Atlantic alliance itself. It pains me
therefore to report that there have, however, been signs
in recent days of backsliding on defence reform -
again, I regret to say - by the authorities in Republika
Srpska. I accept that we are asking a lot of the
Republika Srpska authorities; indeed, the reforms so
far have been arguably more painful for them then they
have been for the federation entity. I accept that we are
asking a lot. But they must be clear about what is at
stake, both for them and for the country as a whole.
Just as we are, at last, making progress on the hitherto
intractable issue of cooperation with the Hague
Tribunal, it would be foolish in the extreme to go
backwards on other key requirements on the reform
agenda.

Finally, there has been one other significant
development since I last spoke to the Council: the
switch from the NATO-led Stabilization Force to the
EU-led force; from SFOR to EUFOR. I am happy to
report that this ground-breaking change of
responsibility has passed off extremely well; that, I
guess, is the definition of a seamless transition. The
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have not noticed the
difference of command, profound though it has been.
Today EUFOR is operating effectively, as is the new
NATO headquarters, and the two are working well
together. So much, so good. I think real progress
continues to be made.

Before I finish my report, however, let me
identify one area which gives me immediate concern
for the future. We are now reaching a point where we
must address the financial sustainability of the
Government structures of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Both of the entities will face massive and unsustainable
deficits this year. It is absolutely essential that we now
look at the need for functional reform in order to
increase the efficiency of governance in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. At present, the State spends something
between 60 per cent and 70 per cent of the citizens'
taxes simply on governance, and only the remainder -
30 per cent or so - on services for the citizens. That is
why there are poor health services, inadequate pensions
and the lowest-paid police in Europe. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has to spend significantly less on
government, politicians and bureaucracy so that it can
spend significantly more on its citizens. Unless it does
that, it will be unable to build up loyalty to the State
among its citizens, which is an essential requirement of
Statehood.

In that context, let me say that the Federation
Government has failed to live up to undertakings and
promises it has given to the World Bank on cutting
back on veterans' benefits. Unless that is addressed
very quickly, then the whole country, grindingly poor,
will lose about 130 million marks of World Bank
programme aide. In that sense, while the Republika
Srpska has held the nation to ransom on cooperation
with the Hague Tribunal, the Federation is now going
to hold the nation to ransom, unless that is addressed,
in terms of the support given by the World Bank, and
subsequently by the International Monetary Fund in its
stand-by arrangements as well.

This will be my penultimate report to this
Council as High Representative and European Union
Special Representative. I will relinquish my post at the
end of the year, my wife says. But there are nine
months left between now and then, and we need to
make full use of every single day. Because this is a
crucial year for Bosnia and Herzegovina: the tenth
anniversary of Srebrenica; the tenth anniversary, later
in the year, of the Dayton Peace Agreement itself.
Like most people in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
want this to be a year, I hope this will be a year and I
think this can be a year in which Bosnia and
Herzegovina remembers its past, of course, but
increasingly concentrates on its future. More than that,
I want this to be a year in which Bosnia and
Herzegovina makes a decisive break with that past by
meeting the requirements for stabilization and
association for the European Union and membership in
the NATO Partnership for Peace, and so starts to
embed itself firmly into the Euro-Atlantic structures
which are its rightful home. Those structures are the
best guarantee of the long-term stability, security and
prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Once that
happens - once those two gates are passed, as I think
they can be in the immediate months ahead - then
Bosnia and Herzegovina will really be into a new era.
The era of stabilization under Dayton is drawing to a
close. The next phase - integration and Brussels - is
beginning.

The opportunity is now available to Bosnia and
Herzegovina: the chance to show that, a decade after
Dayton, it is a viable State, irreversibly on course for
European integration, with politicians at the helm who
accept the duties, obligations and standards expected of
high office.

If that happens, it should, I suggest, open the way
very soon for a new kind of engagement for us, the
international community, as well. Once Bosnia and
Herzegovina has passed through those two gates, I
think it is our job, as the international community, to
consider what steps we should take to make sure that
our engagement with Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a
sovereign State, is proper and, if necessary - and I
think that it should be necessary - conducted on a
basis that is less heavyweight, less interventionist, less
intrusive and more like the structures in other
international transitional democracies. But the next few
months will be decisive.

