Mr. Ruzieka (Slovakia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the first time in the history of your country.
I wish you every success in your hard work.

Slovakia is very much in agreement with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union, but there are some points we would like to
reiterate in this discussion. Among those points is the
acknowledgment of the unique role that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) plays as a court of last resort in
the absence of genuine action by national authorities.
The second principle is that of complementarit, which
is one of the core principles on which the Rome Statute
is based.

This year we commemorate 10 years since the
Rome Statute came into force, which is why we
commend the initiative to organize this important
debate in the Security Council. We firmly believe that
it will positively contribute to further developing the
cooperation between the Council and the International
Criminal Court.

The Court and the Council should be on the
same page and work on the same wave length. The
maintenance of international peace and security and the
fight against impunity are of the utmost importance for
both of them and for all ofus. The Court is dealing with
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community. It should therefore enjoy the highest
degree of confidence from the United Nations and its
Members, as well as the powers conferred upon it by
the Rome Statute.

We welcome the resolutions of the Security Council
referring the situations in the Sudan and Libya to the
ICC under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. Slovakia also supports the initiative taken
by Switzerland with regard to the situation in Syria.
However, simply referring a situation to the Court is
not enough. Adequate follow-up and enforcing full
compliance by the parties concerned with the Council's
resolutions, in particular with regard to cooperation
with the Court, are also necessary. We are seeing cases
where the lack of cooperation undermines not only the
Court's activities but also the fundamental principles of
the United Nations.

We believe that this meeting is only an initial step
towards further discussions. Constructive dialogue and
effective cooperation between the Security Council and
the International Criminal Court are essential to deal
with the most serious crimes under international law.

