Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Special
Envoy Prodi and the other speakers for their briefings.

We last gathered on the margins of the General
Assembly general debate to spur international action
on the deteriorating situation in the Sahel. Today,
the international community and the people of the
Sahel continue to face a complex set of interrelated
challenges that threaten the security of the region and
beyond. Serious tensions persist within and between
the countries of the region. Violent extremism is
flourishing. Terrorist and criminal organizations exploit
safe havens to plan and carry out attacks and to traffic
weapons and other illicit materials. The humanitarian
situation remains dire, as millions suffer from violence
and a lack of food.

Those problems are linked and require a
comprehensive solution with contributions from a range
of partners. The United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel and the actions of Special Envoy Prodi
are critical to mobilizing deeper cooperation among
international actors, including the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, to achieve our
common goal of a more democratic, stable, secure and
economically developing Sahel region.
While the acute crises in Mali, which we have
been addressing in separate meetings, are perhaps the
most conspicuous problems that we face in the Sahel,
as the Secretary-General notes in his recent report (see S/2012/894), they must be understood in the broader
context of a deeply strained region. Although Mali's
current predicament arises largely from specific internal
factors, the country's challenges are reinforced and
exacerbated by a range of transnational dynamics, such
as region-wide afflictions, adverse ecological changes,
underdevelopment, disaffected local populations and
organized criminal networks.

Given Mali's delicate situation, we must be
careful to address the crises in Mali without further
destabilizing the entire region. More than 210,000
Malian refugees have fled to neighbouring countries
and are living among communities already stressed
by drought. Any military intervention in Mali must
therefore be designed to minimize the operation's
humanitarian and human rights impact. That is best
achieved through humanitarian participation in the
military planning process. We welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendation in his most recent report on
Mali that United Nations human rights observers be
mandated to ensure that any intervention adheres to
international and human rights law.

The rise in violent extremism and organized crime
across the region has aggravated the situation in Mali.
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, the Movement for
Unity and Jihad in West Africa and other terrorist
groups have launched attacks and kidnappings from
northern Mali into neighbouring countries. Terrorists
and criminals are extending their reach. That threat
demands better coordination of existing efforts across
the Sahel to combat transnational crime and the
proliferation of terror networks. We can only tackle
those threats effectively if, as many speakers have said,
we work together.

The United States has expanded its counter-
terrorism partnerships in the region to help countries
tackle the growing threats to their own security. The
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, for example, is
working on good practices for preventing and denying
the benefits of kidnapping for ransom to terrorists.
We are also working to shut down safe havens, cut off
financing, and counter extremist ideology.

Considering the humanitarian situation across
the Sahel, there are immediate needs that demand our
urgent attention. However, international assistance that
builds long-term resilience ultimately saves more lives
and reduces the likelihood of repeated humanitarian
crises. So as we work to alleviate suffering now, we
must enable communities to mitigate and recover
from shocks and reduce food insecurity. The United
States has committed more than $445 million in 2012
to humanitarian assistance for drought-affected and
conflict-displaced communities in the Sahel. We intend
these resources to alleviate the dire situation at hand,
to reduce chronic vulnerability and, ultimately, to
promote more inclusive growth.

The multifaceted and overlapping challenges of the
Sahel mean that we face a long road ahead that must
include stemming the terrorist threat, fighting organized
crime, controlling the proliferation of weapons,
promoting reconciliation and mediation within and
between countries, and responding to humanitarian
needs - all while strengthening community resilience.
This is a complex but essential agenda that demands
deeper cooperation on the part of all of us on each of
these challenges to lay the foundation for long-term
solutions to the multidimensional issues that pose a
serious threat to the peace and stability of the region.

We urge continued progress towards developing a
comprehensive strategy for the Sahel that focuses the
international community and coordinates its action
to bring, peace, political stability and sustainable
development to the people of that region.

