The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Mauritania, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Tunisia and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Reuben
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 15 October
2010 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the

United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2010/533 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Monday, 18 October 2010, on the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, to whom I
now give the floor.


