Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
too, Mr. Minister, wish to begin by welcoming you to
this meeting of the Security Council, especially as we
are today addressing a subject of great significance to
your region. In that connection, let me say that we
appreciate the ongoing interest that Ambassador Tafrov
and the rest of his delegation have taken in matters
concerning the Balkans.

I also take this opportunity to thank Mr. Annabi
for the information he has provided. Although there
have been some moments of tension, on the whole we
are pleased at the positive developments we see in
Kosovo. Yet again, we reaffirm our support for and
recognition of the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner, and the
personnel of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

Let me comment on a few points raised by Mr.
Annabi. First, as others have consistently done today,
we reiterate that it is necessary to strengthen the rule of
law. The events of recent days relating to UNMIK's
arrest of members of the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA) and to the reactions to those arrests give cause
for concern. The appeal to the community by Assembly
President Daci and by Prime Minister Rexhepi to cease
demonstrations and comply with UNMIK decisions has
been very useful. It is all the more noteworthy
considering that their initial reaction had been
negative.
UNMIK and the new institutions must be able to
establish the machinery needed to take appropriate
measures to strengthen the rule of law, which can
guarantee the consolidation of democracy in Kosovo.
Here, we reaffirm that there can be no security without
justice and that, without security, there can be no
foundations for the building of a multi-ethnic society.
We therefore appeal to UNMIK to pursue its work in
that direction, and we call upon the leaders of the
Administration to support its activities without
politicizing justice.

Secondly, let me turn to the problem of refugees
and internally displaced persons. We are pleased to
learn that the number of returns has increased under the
UNMIK policy of encouraging individual rather than
mass returns; people must be able to return to their
homes in Kosovo with assurances of the safety,
security and freedom of movement they need to return
to a constructive life. In that regard, we call on the
Serb community to think hard about the idea of a
protest march to the Kosovo-Serbia border to exert
pressure in favour of a massive return of refugees. The
safety and security of refugees and displaced persons
must be taken into account, thus promoting a returns
policy guaranteeing personal safety, as UNMIK has
been doing.

Colombia has always attached great importance
to joint efforts at cooperation and dialogue between
UNMIK and Belgrade, and we call upon the Belgrade
leadership to continue working to find a final solution
for Mitrovica. It is necessary to put an end to parallel
structures in the region in order to guarantee the
establishment of democratic institutions that will
ensure the rule of law.

I wish finally to mention progress towards the
holding of municipal elections. We are pleased that the
number of candidates has grown, especially among
those representing minorities. We shall all look forward
to a transparent campaign leading to a positive result in
terms of the consolidation of democracy. Likewise, we
support the efforts of UNMIK to facilitate participation
by Kosovo Serbs in the elections to be held in
Yugoslavia.

