Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative Tanin for his substantive and
comprehensive briefing. We thank all of the briefers for
their updates on recent developments.

My delegation would like to offer some
observations. The developments of the past months
highlight the need for the increased engagement of both
sides so as to facilitate constructive dialogue, as set
forth in the First Agreement ofPrinciples Governing the
Normalization ofRelations. The parties need to focus on
confidence-building measures and political, military,
economic, environmental and human dimensions, in
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) and under the
auspices of the United Nations, with the involvement
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and other relevant regional organizations in
order to maintain comprehensive and durable security
and stability in Kosovo.

At the same time, no initiative should cause further
tensions and instability. The situation in Kosovo still
needs the continued attention of the Council as a matter
on its current agenda. There are yet a number of difficult
issues, such as the lack of intercommunal trust and
cooperation, increased hatred, missing persons and the
right of each - the Serbs in Kosovo and the Albanians
in Serbia - to use its native language. The full
implementation of language laws, with the protection
of minority communities, is critical to ensuring equal
rights for all and preserving the cultural diversity of
Kosovo and Serbia.

Both sides should take measures to implement
language laws and show full respect for each other's
cultural heritage. The protection of religious and cultural
heritage should be a priority policy, so as to build trust
and confidence among communities in Kosovo and
Serbia. We commend the additional measures and
initiatives of civil society to foster dialogue between
Serbia and Kosovo. All interested parties must boost
and encourage steps that promote the liberation of the
people of Serbia and Kosovo, and convince the local
population in Kosovo to accept their outcome.

It is critical to communicate extensively and
accurately, with both parties and communities, the
kinds of social and economic benefits gained by the
local population in Kosovo. Residents need to know
that dialogue is the only means to bring about good
governance and the rule of law, and to tackle the issues
of unemployment, education, health care, pensions and
other entitlements. All of those activities will assist in
gaining the much-needed support.

On the topic of human rights, we need to focus
on implementing resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, and subsequent resolutions
for enhancing gender equality and empowerment.
Furthermore, social stability is achievable only with
the full engagement of the United Nations country
team, regional and subregional organizations and civil
society groups working to achieve sustaining peace and,
thus, further peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
mediation in Kosovo. Progress and the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia remains of crucial
importance for regional and international security. We
call on both sides to exert great political will to overcome
differences through genuine political dialogue, so as to
ensure peace and security in the region.
