At the outset, allow me to thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Sudan. South Africa continues to support the full implementation of resolution 1593 (2005), pursuant to which the situation in Darfur was referred to the Prosecutor of the ICC to investigate war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. We are encouraged by the progress made in terms of the ongoing efforts to ensure justice for the victims of the Darfur conflict, particularly the developments in the ICC case against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, including the opening of the confirmation of charges hearing in February 2021. The questioning of Mr. Al-Bashir, Mr. Harun and Mr. Hussein by the International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur regarding crimes committed in Darfur is also promising. The Sudan's commitment to full and unlimited cooperation with the ICC and the emphasis on the commitment to resolution 1593 (2005), as set out in the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, are commendable. Such commitments were already initiated during the first visit by the Prosecutor to the Sudan in mid-October and further cooperation between the Sudan and the Court is welcomed. South Africa ardently supports the principle of complementarity and encourages all States to develop their legal systems to ensure accountability for the most serious crimes. South Africa therefore welcomes the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission in relation to Darfur and a special court for Darfur crimes. An essential component of justice is that it be carried out and witnessed. The establishment of the truth and reconciliation commission and special court will not only ensure accountability for crimes committed but also that justice is witnessed by the victims in the Sudan. While South Africa is encouraged by the significant progress that the Sudan has made, we remain concerned at ongoing reports of continued deaths and violence, as well as reports by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur of human rights violations related to children. We urge all stakeholders in the Sudan to engage in constructive dialogue in order to restore peace and stability in the country. In that regard, the support of all stakeholders within the international community remains vital for both national and regional stability.
