The Secretary-General: War is becoming
increasingly complex, and so is mediating peace. Today,
internal conflicts frequently take on regional and
transnational dimensions. Many feature a deadly mix of
fragmented armed groups and political interests funded
by criminal activities. Conflicts around the world drag
on for years and decades, holding back development
and stunting opportunities. Comprehensive peace
agreements are becoming more elusive and short-lived.
Political will wanes; international attention drifts. The
Central African Republic, for example, has suffered
overlapping national and local conflicts for decades,
yet some 15 peace agreements have been signed there
since 1997.

As bad as the situation is in many parts of the world,
I am convinced that it is within our power to tackle and
reverse these trends. That is why, since the beginning
of my tenure, one of my key priorities has been a surge
in diplomacy for peace. As I have consistently stressed,
we must make prevention our priority. But prevention
also includes investment in mediation, peacebuilding
and sustainable development. We must be bold and
creative in bringing together the avenues and capacities
that are available for mediation.

The United Nations has a number of mediation
resources that we deploy in various ways. My Special
Envoys and Representatives pursue consultations,
good offices and formal talks, often alongside envoys
and mediators from regional organizations or Member
States. They may lead a political process, as in Libya
or Yemen. They may head a complex peacekeeping
operation, as in Mali, or they may focus on prevention
from a regional office, as in West Africa.

Collaboration with other mediation actors is
key. Allow me to mention two recent examples. In
Madagascar, my Special Adviser has coordinated
closely with the special envoys of the African Union,
the Southern Africa Development Community, the
European Union and the International Organization of
la Francophonie to facilitate Malagasy-led negotiations
to hold peaceful and inclusive negotiations aimed
at ensuring free and fair elections. In the Gambia,
coordinated action by the Economic Community of
West African States, the African Union, the United
Nations and neighbouring countries succeeded in
preventing a major political crisis and supporting a
democratic transition.

Members of the United Nations Standby Team of
Senior Mediation Advisers are providing advice in the
Central African Republic on transitional justice issues,
as part of the peace process there. In Yemen, they are
assisting with the design of the mediation process
led by my Special Envoy. In South Sudan, they have
provided support to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, which is leading the mediation process.
The decisive engagement of the region, particularly
the neighbouring countries - backed by the Security
Council - was a critical element in the agreement
recently reached by the South Sudanese leaders to end
the conflict.

Discreet engagement also plays a role. Continuing
talks with the Taliban, despite years of war and
continued fighting, and away from the glare of
publicity, allows position to be clarified. Renewed
engagement with the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea has also benefited from this approach. The
United Nations also works with private mediation
actors, including non-governmental organizations,
which may have greater freedom to establish contacts
and foster dialogue with armed groups, militias and
others. Meanwhile, from Afghanistan to Zimbabwe, an
enormous range of other actors - national bodies and
civil society groups, including women's organizations,
religious leaders and young activists - play a part in
mediation at the local and community level.

Mediating an end to today's complex conflicts
means that we must bring all these tracks together in
a coordinated way. We must also find new ways to
pursue the more inclusive approaches that are critical
to successful mediation. That is what we in the United
Nations are trying to do. I continue to offer my good
offices and personal engagement wherever they can add
value, alongside my envoys and special representatives,
drawing on the expertise of the entire United Nations
and those in the broader mediation community.

To complement my efforts and those of my envoys,
I have established the High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation. I am pleased to have the Archbishop
of Canterbury with us today, and look forward to
working with him on several concrete initiatives in the
coming months. I am also grateful to former Nigerian
President Olusegun Obasanjo, a member of the Board,
who travelled to Liberia on my behalf to support the
peaceful transfer of power after the 2017 elections.
That is just one example of how we can deploy Board
members in the cause of conflict prevention. The
Board's members have experience and networks across
the entire spectrum of mediation. I look to them to
provide tailored advice, to find new entry points and to
help train and build capacity among our partners.

Successful mediation and the peaceful settlement
of disputes requires a deep understanding of leaders
and their constituencies and strong political will. The
Joint Declaration of Peace and Friendship signed by
the leaders of Ethiopia and Eritrea last month, after
20 years of conflict and stalemate, is an example of
political courage that is already having a positive effect
throughout the region, but we must also continue and
strengthen our efforts to move beyond negotiations
with political and military elites. That means working
at the subnational and local levels to help build peace
from the ground up. Local authorities, civil society and
traditional and religious leaders all have critical roles
to play. The national conference process in Libya, for
example, is a bottom-up, inclusive process that has
provided valuable insights into the aspirations of the
Libyan people. My envoys are supporting local efforts
to address communal conflicts in South Sudan and
engaging with a women's advisory board and the Civil
Society Support Room on the Syrian process. In the
Central African Republic, we are engaging at the local
level with national authorities and religious leaders in
support of the African Union initiative.

We are also investing in women's meaningful
participation and leadership in peace processes,
ensuring that women always have a seat at the table
and that their voices are heard. I have emphasized the
importance of inclusive processes to my own special
envoys, and have appointed three women to senior
mediation roles in recent months. The emergence of
regional networks of women mediators is another
important development. The Nordic Women Mediators
network and FemWise, the African Union's network of
women mediators, are notable in that regard. Members
of my High-level Advisory Board are already in contact
with those groups.

Inclusive mediation requires paying greater
attention to the gender dimensions of conflict, including
conflict-related sexual violence and the gendered
impact of decisions around post-war reconstruction.
For example, the design ofa post-conflict constitutional
committee or a federal system will have a significant
impact on women and their participation.

We also need to do much more to engage with
young people, who are critical agents of change and
advocates for peace. It is encouraging that six young
refugees took part as observers in the South Sudan
High-Level Revitalization Forum. We must encourage
and support the participation of young men and women
in peace processes. We will hold the first international
conference on that subject in Helsinki early next year.

Finally, we should invest in the mediation and
conciliation opportunities offered by information
technology. We all are aware of the role that social
media can play in exacerbating divisions and provoking
hostility. However, social platforms can also be a tool to
bring communities together, stimulate dialogue, share
information and heal historic wrongs.

Parties to conflict are highly attuned to and play on
divisions in the international community. The Security
Council plays a central role in conflict resolution,
particularly when it signals to warring parties that
they must settle their disputes peacefully. When the
Council is united, we all are more effective, including
in our mediation efforts. When the Council cannot find
unity, our mediation efforts suffer. Council members,
and Member States more broadly, can also support
mediation efforts by ensuring that regions speak with
one voice. Consistent messaging by regional and
subregional organizations, which have the expertise,
experience and capacity to find innovative responses
to the most testing challenges, can be a great support to
the work of the Council.

As the conflict landscape has changed, so has our
understanding of what constitutes an effective mediation
process, Innovative thinking on mediation is no longer
an option; it is a necessity. I urge representatives to
commit to a more effective use of mediation as a tool
to save and to improve the lives of millions of people
around the world.

