Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me
to first welcome His Excellency Mr. Djibrill Bassole,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation
of Burkina Faso and to thank him for the information
he has kindly given us here on behalf of His
Excellency Mr. Blaise Compaore, current Chairman of
the Conference of Heads of State or Government of the
Economic Community of West African States and

Facilitator of the direct inter-Ivorian dialogue. My
delegation once again congratulates Burkina Faso on
its election as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council for 2008-2010.

We would also like to welcome Mr. Jean-Marie
Bockel, Secretary of State for Cooperation and
Francophony of France. We followed with great
interest the briefing by Mr. Abou Moussa, to whom we
are most grateful for the quality of his work as
Principal Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and we have duly noted his
presentation of the fourteenth report of the Secretary-
General on Cote d'Ivoire (S/2007/593).

The report indicates that the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire is improving, and we welcome that fact. The
President and Prime Minister of the Republic of Cote
d'Ivoire maintain good working relations. The
Ouagadougou Agreement has the overall support of the
entire Ivorian political class. The security situation has
remained fairly stable in Cote d'Ivoire since the
signing of that Agreement. All of that is good news,
and it reassures us.

However, it should be noted that the security
situation in the country nonetheless remains fragile, as
shown by the attempt on the life of Prime Minister
Guillaume Soro in Bouake on 29 June 2007. We
consider that the Ivorian political class should
endeavour to ensure that such incidents are not
repeated. My delegation also notes that the
implementation of the Ouagadougou Agreement has
slowed somewhat, owing to lack of respect for
timelines and to the limited capacity of Ivorian national
institutions mandated to carry out essential tasks such
as the dismantling of the militias, the disarmament of
former combatants, redeployment of State authority
throughout the country and identification of the
population.

As previously noted, implementation of the
Agreement has also encountered difficulties related to
the financing of certain operations. In that respect, my
delegation welcomes the pledges, totalling
approximately $388 million, made by bilateral and
multilateral partners of Cote d'Ivoire in support of the
Government's post-conflict recovery programme.
The ongoing regularization of relations between
the Ivorian Government and the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) is also an
encouraging sign. Indeed, in early August the IMF
disbursed the first segment of the Fund's emergency
post-conflict assistance programme, $60 million, and
the World Bank has adopted a $120-million post-
conflict assistance programme aimed at supporting the
Government's emergency recovery programme. It is
now incumbent upon the Ivorian Government to meet
certain requirements, including by taking the necessary
steps to set timelines and benchmarks for the
implementation of the Ouagadougou Agreement, so
that those funds can be disbursed.

The appointment of Mr. Boureima Badini as
Special Representative of the Facilitator in Cote
d'Ivoire and his 12 September arrival in Abidjan show
the willingness and determination of the President of
the Republic of Burkina Faso, His Excellency
Mr. Blaise Compaore, to work tirelessly towards the
implementation of the Ouagadougou Agreement; we
encourage him in that endeavour.

My delegation unreservedly supports the request
made by the Secretary-General to Member States to
provide the support necessary for the Facilitator's
activities - as noted earlier in the statement of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso - and to
support the Office of the Special Representative of the
Facilitator in Abidjan.

My delegation reaffirms its full support for the
Ouagadougou political Agreement. We encourage the
coordination of the simultaneous patrols which the
United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
and the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) continue to carry out in the border areas
in order to prevent the illegal cross-border movement
of arms and combatants.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the current mandate and troop
levels of UNOCI be maintained and that a review of
the question be considered once we get closer to the
key objectives, namely, the dismantling of the militias,
the disarmament and demobilization of former
combatants, the identification of the population and the
restoration of State authority throughout the territory.

My delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate
its gratitude to UNOCI and the French forces
supporting it, to the Economic Community of West
African States, to the relevant United Nations entities,
and to humanitarian organizations and
non-governmental organizations for their major
contributions to the peace process in cote d'Ivoire.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Choi
Young-jin as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and we assure him of our full
cooperation in the discharge of his mission.

Finally, my delegation supports the draft
statement to the press proposed by the French
delegation.

