Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We are
convinced that you will conduct the business of the
Council in a wise manner. We also thank you for
having convened this urgent meeting at the request of
the Arab Group in order to discuss the deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories.

We have learned from the news that, as a result of
the siege declared against certain Palestinian villages
and towns and because of the curfew that has been
imposed, Palestinian students are using underground
corridors and storehouses for classrooms. Imagine what
kind of lessons they receive under these conditions. We
know that a healthy teaching environment means that
there will be properly ventilated classrooms, with good
natural or artificial light and proper teaching material.
This means that even if the lessons are excellent, and
however devoted the teacher is, the benefits derived
from the lesson will be deficient if the setting is
inappropriate.

If this siege goes on, Palestinian youth will
develop hatred towards the perpetrators of a siege that
they have known since their birth. This hatred could
turn into violence, or could be the cause of violence.
Furthermore, the Palestinians are witnessing something
worse than the first situation. This is the treatment of
their President, the symbol of their resistance to the
Israeli occupation, around whom the noose is
tightening every day, while his offices, where he
resides, are being razed by bulldozers. One wing after
another is being attacked, as water, electricity and all
means of communication are cut off one by one.

Thus, these are two negative aspects of the
problem, one pertaining to teaching, the other to
politics and security. The two seriously threaten the
collapse of the Palestinian Authority's control over its
territories in the West Bank and Gaza. Given this
situation, talks for a peaceful settlement become an
absolute necessity, even if this settlement proves
difficult at first. However, we need first to lift the state
of siege, to be followed by the withdrawal of the Israeli
security forces so that real peace negotiations get under
way.

It seems that the current Israeli Government
wants no peace. One thing proves this lack of
motivation. The Israeli army was supposed to withdraw
from Gaza at first, as was announced. However, the
plan was not applied, despite the fact that violence had
stopped for six weeks.

Numerous experiments have proved that peace
comes only through negotiations. It cannot be imposed
by force; otherwise it would be an unjust peace.
Unfortunately, peace will be possible only if preceded
by necessary preliminary steps, such as lifting the
siege, withdrawing of the Israeli forces and ending the
Israeli occupation. All of this seems out of our grasp
right now because of Israeli intransigence.

Israel did not implement any of the resolutions
adopted by the United Nations. This in defiance of the
will of the international community, whose inability to
act has led to Israeli imperialism over the Palestinian
people. Israel believes that the use of its military force
is part of a war against what is called terrorism, thus
exploiting the world's struggle against this
phenomenon since the events of 11 September 2001.
However, there is a difference between resisting
occupation and resisting terrorism.

The Arab countries together want to bring about a
just and comprehensive peace in the region, based on
international law. This is a strategic option. This policy
was made clear in the Arab peace initiative adopted in
the Beirut Summit in March of this year. The initiative
received broad-based international support. It consists
of having Israel withdraw from the occupied Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem,
and giving the Palestinian refugees the right to return
to their homeland in return for the recognition by the
Arab countries of the State of Israel living in peace,
side by side with an independent Palestinian State,
within internationally recognized borders. However,
thus far this initiative has not met a favourable
response from Israel. Indeed, the events that the
Palestinians are witnessing on the ground do not show
any desire for peace on the part of Israel.

In conclusion, once again, we appeal to the
Security Council, the guarantor of peace and security,
to carry out the tasks entrusted to it, in order to ensure
the implementation of its resolutions, at the forefront of
which we find 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002). Furthermore, we urge the Council members to
vote in favour of the Arab draft resolution which is
now before them.

