Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe): At the outset, let
me associate myself with the congratulations already
expressed to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
Security Council presidency for the month of March.
Allow me also to recognize your predecessor, under
whose presidency Council proceedings - as they
pertain to the issue of Iraqi disarmament - have
become more open and transparent.

I have requested the floor for two reasons. First, I
want to associate my delegation with the official
position of the African Union that unilateral military
action against Iraq would not only be accompanied by
disastrous consequences, but would also negate
Africa's stability and development. For that reason,
Africa is against a military solution to the Iraqi crisis.

This observation is also expressed in the Non-
Aligned Movement Kuala Lumpur Declaration, in
which the heads of State and Government of the Non-
Aligned Movement declared:

"We are fully cognizant of the concerns
expressed by millions in our countries, as well as
in other parts of the world, who reject war and
believe, like we do, that war against Iraq will be a
destabilizing factor for the whole region, and that
it would have far- reaching political, economic
and humanitarian consequences for all countries
of the world, particularly the States in the region.
We reiterate our commitment to the fundamental
principles of the non-use of force and respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and security of all Member States
of the United Nations."

This bold statement for peace by the 116 member
States that constitute the Non-Aligned Movement is a
reaffirmation of one of the Movement's cardinal
principles - the settlement of all international disputes
by peaceful means. Today there is no higher imperative
for the international community than that of fighting to
guarantee and consolidate peace.

Allow me, secondly, to remind this body that the
war against Iraq over its invasion and subsequent
annexation of Kuwait was sanctioned by the Security
Council under the presidency of Zimbabwe in 1991. It
is certainly not because of nostalgia that I am bringing
this to memory.

During Zimbabwe's presidency that year, the
United States demonstrated before the Security Council
that Iraq's invasion of Kuwait was a violation of
international law which could not be allowed to stand
and won support for a binding embargo against Iraq oil
sales as an incentive for Baghdad's withdrawal from
Kuwait. When Iraq failed to withdraw, the Security
Council then called for the use of all necessary means
to eject Iraq from Kuwait. I must reiterate that force
was used only as a last resort.

Following in those footprints made in the sands
of time, we have before us the road map for the
peaceful disarmament of Iraq, clearly laid out by
resolution 1441 (2002). It is the bounden duty of the
Security Council to support the inspectors, whose
mandate, by the way, is not fault-finding, but verifying
Iraq's disarmament.

United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) status reports have not
found Iraq in material breach of resolution 1441
(2002). With both Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei in
agreement that Baghdad is proactively supporting the
inspectors by encouraging its scientists to accept
private interviews, allowing reconnaissance flights and
destroying the Al Samoud 2 missiles, we find it mind-
boggling that some States have the audacity to request
the Council to abandon the tried and tested diplomatic
road map for war.

The United Nations was founded in 1945 to
advance, among other things, our shared interest in
peace and security, human rights and economic
development. Over the years, the United Nations has,
with unwavering resolve and passion, pursued these
goals. Sobered by the devastation and loss of life
caused by the Second World War, the founding fathers
accepted the resolution of disputes through peaceful
means as the cornerstone of a new world order, and in
this regard the forum for diplomatic consultations
provided by the United Nations represents the essence
of this new order.
It is for this reason that my delegation urges the
Security Council never to allow itself to be hijacked or
put to use by a few individual States that, in order to
settle their private and parochial national interests,
want to convince us that a war against Iraq is in the
interest of international peace.

Let the inspectors pursue their mandate to its
logical conclusion; only then can we review the
situation in the light of their findings. Resolution 1441
(2002) is about the disarmament of Iraq, not regime
change in Baghdad. There are other serious threats to
international peace that demand the urgent attention of
this Council. These include the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and the HIV/AIDS pandemic in sub-Saharan
Africa, where, in some cases, we are losing 3,000
people a week. Is it not disturbing that, while the
coffers of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria - established to address this pandemic -
are empty, there are some Members in our midst that
can afford tens of billions of dollars to deploy forces of
300,000 in the region?

In conclusion, let me also associate myself with
the observation that war against Iraq would be the
ultimate failure of the United Nations. An immediate
declaration of war would be interpreted to mean that
the United Nations cannot function as a diplomatic
body capable of problem- solving, much less of
upholding international law. It is therefore incumbent
upon us to exhaust all the untried options for
diplomacy.

