Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for convening this
debate, the objective of which we, like the Ambassador
of Indonesia, understand is to assess the situation in the
Gaza Strip and the humanitarian situation there in
particular.

My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representatives of the United
Kingdom and Costa Rica.

The information we received today on the
situation in the Gaza Strip is frankly alarming. The
actions of the Israeli Government have brought the
humanitarian situation in Gaza to the brink of
catastrophe and cannot from any point of view be
justified. Although the attacks by Palestinian armed
groups from Gaza against Israel do not contribute to
the peace process and, on the contrary, work against
the peace process, the Government of Israel must not
allow the full weight of its retribution to fall upon an
innocent civilian population.

We understand and accept that the State of Israel
has the right to defend itself, however measures for
self-defence should be carried out in a restrained
manner that is proportionate to the threat. Even during
outright war, a civilian population cannot be deprived
of the basic means for its survival, which endangers the
lives of hundreds of innocent people. The actions of
the Government of Israel violate all humanitarian
standards, including the most basic rules of
international law. These actions are not those of a
liberal democracy that wishes to be a fair partner in the
peace process and can only serve to intensify the
conflict.

Panama takes note of Israel's decision to partially
lift the blockade of Gaza that it began four days ago.
However, we are far from being in a position to state
that the situation has improved. This Council must call
for the cessation of all acts of violence and demand
that the Government of Israel immediately lift the
humanitarian blockade of Gaza. Only in that manner
can we hope that the peace process in the Middle East
will continue to progress in line with the expectations
of the international community.

