Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. We have every confidence in your
wisdom and wish you success in your tasks. I should
also like to take this opportunity to express our thanks
to the Ambassador of Spain for his skilful and wise
guidance of the Security Council.

The grave and deteriorating situation in the
occupied Gaza Strip, the result of Israel's escalating
military operations and pursuit of a policy of deliberate
and systematic extrajudicial killing of Palestinian
citizens, is threatening international peace and security
and calls for urgent action by the Security Council.
Israel's crimes against the Palestinian people, which
continue as we speak, can only lead to further
bloodshed and instability in the region. Events have
already shown that the policy of military escalation
against civilians will not cow the Arab and Palestinian
will into accepting a settlement based on the Israeli
point of view.

Israeli violations of international humanitarian
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention have become
daily and commonplace. The murder of women and
children, the demolition of homes, the expulsion of
populations, the collective punishment of civilians and
the construction of the separation wall, in
contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, all continue as if they
are nobody's business. How can the Security Council,
which is entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security, remain a silent
observer in the face of the daily war crimes perpetrated
by Israel's occupation forces against the Palestinian
people?

We also call upon the members of the Quartet to
refrain from remaining silent with regard to Israel's
crimes in the Gaza Strip.

Fifty years of war and violence have not yet
convinced Israel that the policy of war and military
might will not settle the Arab-Israeli conflict, nor the
fact that negotiations and the implementation of
resolutions of international legitimacy continue to be
the only way to guarantee that all the countries of the
region, including the States of Israel and Palestine, will
be able to live in peace and security. The Security
Council is called upon to intervene promptly to put an
end to Israeli military operations and to provide the
necessary international protection to the Palestinian
people, in accordance with the Geneva Convention and
international law.

The core of the Arab-Israeli conflict is the
ongoing Israeli occupation of Arab and Palestinian
territories. Attempts by Israel to divert attention from
that fact by placing the conflict in the context of
fighting terrorism is a failed and naive attempt that
does not deceive anyone. Occupation breeds legitimate
resistance. Israeli occupation is the cause of the Arab-
Israeli conflict. The military option and policy of
creating faits accompli being pursued by the current
Israeli Government in order to settle the Arab-Israeli
conflict have proven to be totally useless, and serve
only to bring about further deterioration of the
situation in the region, further civilian deaths and more
destruction. Israel's choice of the logic of force and
violence over negotiation and dialogue has failed. Such
a policy only brings killing and destruction to the
Palestinian people, without bringing peace and security
to the Israeli people.

The Security Council is called upon today to
adopt the necessary measures to prevail upon Israel to
renounce its policy of occupation, settlement-building,
killings and destruction. The Council must also compel
Israel to return to the negotiating table, which is the
only way of guaranteeing lasting and comprehensive
justice and security for all the peoples of the region, in
accordance with resolutions of international legitimacy
and the peace initiative of Arab States.

