Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
organizing this very timely debate, and for Ms. Michelle
Bachelet's personal participation as President. We also
appreciate the briefings by, and the presence here this
morning of, the Secretary-General, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Ms. Leymah Gbowee,
President of the Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa.

Guatemala considers today's open debate very
timely, which, it is worth mentioning, coincides with
the start of negotiations on the post-2015 development
agenda. We are pleased that both the Security
Council and the General Assembly, within their
respective mandates, are placing greater emphasis
on the importance of inclusive development for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
our view, over the years the complex links between
security and development have been codified and
clarified in numerous internal reports and resolutions
of this Organization, starting with Boutros Boutros-
Ghali's 1992 An Agenda for Peace (S/24111), through
the Outcome document of the 2005 World Summit in
2005 (General Assembly resolution 60/1) to the current
Secretary-General's recent synthesis report on the
post-2015 sustainable development agenda (A/69/700).
Despite that, we continue to derive lessons for every
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operation and mission.
The challenges we are seeing increasingly emphasize
the interdependence between security, justice and
development in the promotion of lasting and sustainable
peace. There is much to be said on this topic, but I will
limit my remarks to five points.

First, we must understand that poverty and social
injustice per se do not necessarily lead to violence
and conflict. What we must address, therefore,
are the underlying circumstances and other, more
complex factors that can lead to conflict. When high
unemployment, especially among young people,
and widespread poverty prevail at the same time as
a minority enjoys a quality of life known only in the
first world, there is at least some risk of conflict. Those
factors must be alleviated, not only for intrinsic ethical
reasons, but, in broader terms, as a means of conflict
prevention. Peace and development must be addressed
in a comprehensive and coordinated way at all levels
throughout the United Nations system. We therefore
welcome the fact that the draft sustainable development
goals include a stand-alone objective on promoting
peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, which would facilitate access to justice
for all and create effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels.

Secondly, Guatemala sees the Peacebuilding
Commission as an important institutional interface
between the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council, the General Assembly and the Bretton
Woods institutions. We therefore believe that its work
is important in terms of the institutional development
of the United Nations. We trust that this year's review
of the peacebuilding architecture will strengthen it
and provide for better coordination among the bodies
I just mentioned. Similarly, we believe that the high-
level panel review of the various general aspects of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
will help in using these tools more efficiently. All of
this will contribute to settling conflicts definitively and
preventing relapse into violence, which, in most cases,
undermines the gains made.

Thirdly, we are convinced that women have a
central role to play in preventing and settling conflicts,
promoting justice and reconciliation, supporting
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and in
rebuilding national institutions, which are all integral
pillars for building lasting peace. The review to be
carried out by the high-level panel on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, is very timely. Broad-based sustainable
development can help tackle the root causes of conflict.
By definition, this means including women, who can
play a key role in negotiations and peace processes,
and young people, who have immense potential to
contribute to the development of their societies.

Fourthly, I would like briefly to mention the wide
range of preventive diplomacy tools our disposal. We
recall that the Secretary-General's five-year action
agenda include advancing the responsibility to protect
agenda. My delegation fully supports that priority,
which in turn contributes to the progress on the topic
of today's debate. The responsibility to protect implies
that all members of the international community must
uphold a code of conduct regarding the treatment of
their own people. States that do not respect this basic
commitment must understand that they will face
consequences. It was our own Heads of State who
jointly accepted this concept in 2005. The least we
can do now, 10 years on, is to ensure that this agenda
continues to evolve in its practical application.

Finally, to achieve inclusive development we
must also promote the rule of law. This provides the
necessary environment for sustainable development,
inclusiveness and economic growth. As we know, the
rule of law has a special place in the agenda of the
United Nations. Upholding and promoting the rule of
law and justice must guide all of its activities, thereby
conferring predictability and legitimacy on its work.

We believe that the Security Council must continue
to work in support of inclusive political dialogue and
must continue to cooperate with all the relevant actors
to implement the lessons learned and knowledge gained
to promote peace and human well-being.

