Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Abou Moussa for his briefing.

We agree with the concerns expressed today with
regard to the negative impacts of the armed conflict
in the Central African Republic on the situation in
the subregion. While it is true that the crisis in that
country stems, inter alia, from illegal flows of foreign
fighters and weapons through the porous borders of the
Sahel, we also see in it the clear impact of the Libyan
crisis. Undoubtedly, the normalization of the military,
political and humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic is essential for peace, security and
stability in the subregion as a whole.

We welcome the intensification of cooperation by
interested countries and organizations in combating
piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. We
attach great importance to the practical implementation
of the decisions taken at the anti-piracy summit of
States of Central and Western Africa held in June.

Since the beginning of this year, we have noted
a general reduction in the activities of the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). Under pressure from the
African Union (AU) Regional Task Force, LRA fighters
are keeping a low profile and have split into small
groups and staged essentially minor robberies. Among
the forms of progress we have seen, we would note a
drop from 440,000 to 350,000 refugees and internally
displaced persons that have resulted from the activities
of criminals in the region.

Nevertheless, bandits have once again reappeared,
taking advantage of the absence of State authority in
the neighbouring regions of South Sudan and a power
vacuum in the Central African Republic. The successful
combating of gangs depends first and foremost on
coordinated efforts by regional players themselves.
Along those lines, we welcome the deployment of the
more than 3,000 of the planned 5,000 troops for the AU
Regional Task Force.

However, settling this issue through military means
alone is impossible. There is a need for a comprehensive
approach, including measures to bolster the security
services of the countries of the subregion, to disarm,
demobilize and reintegrate fighters, to resolve pressing
social and economic issues, to provide humanitarian
assistance and to strengthen State authority.

In conclusion, we would like to note the contribution
of United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
in collective efforts to ensure peace and security in
the subregion. We welcome growing cooperation
between the Office and regional partners in such areas
as preventive diplomacy, mediation, the provision of
good offices, peacebuilding and combating terrorism,
piracy and armed robbery on the high seas, as well as
the illegal spread of weapons.

