Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Ging
for their briefings. The United States presidency has
formulated the topic of today's meeting in a curious
way. It has been convened at the initiative of some
Council members of the Security Council to consider
the situation in the Middle East, with an emphasis on
the situation in Idlib. It would appear that Idlib is some
kind of separate State entity. We would like to remind
the Council that it is an integral part of the Syrian Arab
Republic, whose sovereignty and territorial integrity
we hope no one questions.

In that connection, Mr. De Mistura's statement
to the effect that the Syrian authorities have every
right to fight for the restoration of control throughout
their territory is very apposite. Furthermore, it is an
obligation of the Syrian Government towards its
people. We should remember that in eastern Aleppo,
Ghouta, the southern suburbs of Damascus, Qalamoun,
Dara'a, Quneitra and other difficult areas, it was not
peaceful civilians who were evacuated, but rather full-
on fighters who had refused to lay down their weapons
and return to a normal life as law-abiding citizens.

Nobody disputes the fact that in the Idlib
de-escalation zone there is a large number of Jabhat
Al-Nusra terrorists who pose a threat to international
peace and security. It is that large, militarily capable
terrorist group's operations that is determining the
current situation in that part of Syria, and its members
are striving to keep the area under their control, and the
fact that the situation is at a standstill is unacceptable.
The de-escalation agreements stipulate that they
are temporary, and the relevant Security Council
resolutions clearly state that none of the cessation-of-
hostilities regimes apply to terrorist organizations. The
fight against them must go on, and in that regard we
have consistently called on the international community
to act decisively, according to the same rules and on
a basis of cooperation. It is self-evident that it is not
acceptable to preserve terrorist potential for political
aims, whatever they may be. It is not acceptable to make
all kinds of efforts to create obstacles to the return of
Syrian refugees to a country that has largely been rid
of terrorists. It is not acceptable to make every effort
to obstruct the process of rebuilding Syria and subject
it to political conditions. That only attests to the fact
that, in reality, our Western partners have absolutely
no interest in the fate and plight of ordinary civilians.

The terrorists in Idlib are taking aggressive
action. They have taken millions of civilians hostage
and are conducting raids on surrounding areas and
shelling nearby towns and villages. The cessation-of-
hostilities regime is being violated dozens of times
every day. Russian troops have destroyed 55 unmanned
aerial vehicles armed with explosives flown out of the
de-escalation zone. On 4 September, Russian aircraft
carried out strikes on confirmed Al-Nusra targets, far
from residential areas, in Idlib province. They were
caches where drones and their munitions were stored
and kept. A storage site for man-portable air defence
systems was also destroyed with high-precision
weapons. Where did the terrorists get hold of such
large quantities of foreign military equipment? Was
it directly from the manufacturers? Or was it from
the so-called moderate opposition, which has had no
problems getting external support? That is an issue that
the relevant United Nations bodies should investigate
without delay.

Al-Nusra is focusing its efforts on consolidating
radically minded illegal armed groups around it. The
terrorist leaders are have been making fierce efforts to
block the desire of commanders in the field and leaders
of local governing bodies to get out of these groups,
going as far as eliminating them physically. A typical
example of that approach has been the destruction of
groups from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant that
refused to join Jabhat Al-Nusra and whose remnants, as
many as 500 people, had lost control over regions they
had previously held and gone underground.

Here are a few statistics. In the Idlib de-escalation
zone there are altogether 40 to 45 armed groups whose
members total about 50,000. The greatest resistance
comes from Jabhat Al-Nusra, with 16,000 members,
and other unreconciled groups, totalling 11,300, whose
core consists of foreign fighters and Syrians who have
the blood of supporters of Damascus on their hands.
They include Hizb Al-Islami Al-Turkistani, with some
700 members; Jaysh Al-Izza, with as many as 1,000
members; the radical ranks of Ahrar Al-Sham, with as
many as 800 members; Faylak Al-Rahman, with about
5,500 members; Haras Al-Din, about 1,500 members;
Nusrat Al-Islam, about 1,900 members; and Jabhat
Al-Wataniya lil-Tahrir, with as many as 800 members.
A few armed groups - Jabhat Al-Wataniya lil-
Tahrir and the radical ranks of Ahrar Al-Sham - are
completely dependent on Al-Nusra. Furthermore, many
adherents of those groups are unreconciled because
they are forced to be, remaining loyal to the extremists
out of fear for their lives and the safety of their families.

However, there are still some groups, whose
numbers total around 13,300, that are operating in the
zone and are willing to reconcile. They include about
2,300 from the Free Syrian Army, 4,000 from Nusrat
Al-Islam, 5,000 from Ahrar Al-Sham, 2,000 from
Nour Al-Din Al-Zenki, and others. Besides that, most
villages are held by local self-defence units of between
30 and 50 people, about 10,000 altogether, who are also
disposed to make peace. As many as 80 per cent of the
inhabitants of Idlib are sick of the extremists' tyranny
and support reverting to the embrace of the State as
soon as possible, a mood shared by some fighters who
realize the futility of armed resistance. That has been
encouraged by the success of reconciliation in other
de-escalation zones, security guarantees provided
by Russia and work that is being done to ensure
refugees' return. I want to point out that schools and
medical facilities financed by the Government are still
functioning in Idlib and funds from the budget are
being earmarked for supporting vital infrastructure and
paying civil servants' salaries.

The Russian Federation is making major efforts
to resolve the Idlib situation through negotiations. To
that end, intense consultations are being held with the
Astana process partners and with those on the ground
who are actually controlling the situation. A top-level
meeting of the guarantor countries is being held in
Tehran today.

One effective solution would be to separate the
armed opposition groups that want to participate in
the political process from the terrorists, who remain a
legitimate target for elimination. Many speakers today
have called on the Astana process guarantors. We have
also frequently turned to our Western partners, but they
have not heeded our calls. Unfortunately, the Western
capitals led by Washington that are trying to prevent
the fall of their extremism-inclined clients' regime
have not used their influence or helped to encourage
a separation. Instead, they are hatching another round
of aggressive plans around high-profile chemical
provocations. We are under the distinct impression that
in fomenting hysteria over Idlib, our Western partners
are trying to prevent the fall of the last major terrorist
stronghold in Syria in any way they can, and this is
far more about geopolitics than about the humanitarian
concern for the protection of civilians that they claim.

The possibility of joining in the initiatives for
reconciliation and thereby strengthening the positive
trends in Syria is still there. Staffan dc Mistura, who is
in active contact with the Syrian opposition within the
framework of his political mandate, could also send it
the same message. We affirm our full commitment to
a Syrian-led political process on the basis of resolution
2254 (2015). I will not list everything we have
undertaken to advance the political process. We call on
other partners to make a real contribution to it.

The propaganda campaign currently being
fomented by Damascus's opponents around Idlib
follows the scripts for the scenarios that were predicted
when Aleppo and eastern Ghouta were being liberated,
but neither ofthose apocalyptic prognoses materialized,
unlike in Raqqa, which has been bombed into the
ground by the so-called coalition. The subject of the
military occupation by Western countries of areas
of Syria, including its humanitarian aspects, clearly
warrants special discussion in the Security Council.

