Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): In
addition to your comment, Mr. President, we also have
time limits. But I would like first of all to highlight
your commitment to making this a more open Council,
which was achieved, and your great capacity for work,
your leadership of the Mission to Kosovo and also of
the process of selecting the Secretary-General.

As for our working methods, I see that much
progress was achieved. The drafting of the lists, while
still mysterious, has improved. As regards the subjects
covered, it was a very busy, very varied, but also a very
balanced month. There was also much controversy. I
am thinking of yesterday, when the representative of
Iraq was quite aggressive with some of us that are not
the main actors.

Now I would like to make a few comments in the
form of suggestions, addressing myself to you,
Mr. President, the other members and all others
present. As regards the agenda for consultations, it
seemed to me that this month the "other matters" were
not being taken up at the end of each meeting. In other
words, it was asked if anyone wanted to raise other
matters - they were mentioned and then they were put
aside. I think it is more interesting - no, in fact,
indispensable-that we continue to deal with other
matters at the end of the meeting, even if items are
mentioned at the beginning, because sometimes we do
not have time to call in our experts in time. So let us
have the agenda continue to be an agenda.

The other suggestion I have relates to a general
omission, of which all of us members were guilty,
when we did not decide that the private meeting during
which the Secretary-General was selected could have
been a meeting that other Members could have
attended. I think that we have to leave this suggestion
open so that five years hence it can perhaps be taken
up. In other words, it could have been a private
meeting, but non-members of the Council could have
attended without the right to speak.

Finally, I think that it is important to increase the
opportunities for the Council to have relationships with
other United Nations bodies. During this month, we
missed an opportunity to assess the interesting
discussion of the Working Group on Security Council
reform, where three Members of the Council did
participate and found it very interesting. It was quite a
striking meeting and reaffirmed our belief that we have
to keep channels open.

I would just like to emphasize one of the topics
covered there: to whom should the Council be
accountable? Accountability is a term that has no
precise translation in Spanish. But I was struck by the
fact that there have been many requests, demands and
claims emanating from Member States that are not
members of the Council. What was discussed was the
need to change both the content and the form of the
report of the Security Council.

So this month we missed an opportunity to
explore this topic, and I think that it is something we
can cover in the next few months.
