Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation duly appreciates the initiative to hold this
debate, at a time when improving the working methods
of the Security Council is increasingly necessary owing
to the challenges facing international peace and security.
Gabon welcomes the ongoing crucial role played by
your country Japan, Mr. President, to promote greater
transparency and efficiency in the Council's work. The
concept paper that you have prepared for our
consideration (see S/2010/l65) sheds light on the issue
that is on the agenda of today's debate.

We believe it timely, based on the
recommendations contained in the annex to the note
contained in document S/2006/507, approved by the
Council in July 2006, to look into the functioning of
this principal organ of the United Nations. My
statement will focus on the two aspects of the issue at
the centre of today's debate: the working methods that
structure the Council's meetings and its relations with
the Secretariat; and relations between the Council, non-
member States and other United Nations bodies. While
we ought to welcome the progress that the Council has
already made in improving its working methods, it is
nevertheless the case that many practices continue to
have an impact on transparency and the Council's
effectiveness in carrying out its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

With regard to my first point, my delegation
would like to speak of certain practices that to a great
degree have an impact on the Council's productivity.
First of all, there is sometimes a delay in the
publication of Council documents in the six official
languages of the United Nations. Unfortunately, in
spite of some progress made in this area, we continue
to see that many documents are published just a few
days before the holding of Council meetings. This
situation does not give Council members the time they
need to consider the documents or to consult their
capitals for instructions.

We also regret the failure to implement
paragraphs 8 and 9 of the annex to the note contained
in document S/2006/507, which called on the
Secretariat to circulate briefing texts and to provide

members with printed fact sheets on issues considered
by the Council prior to the holding of informal
consultations.

In addition to those necessary improvements, it
also seems crucial to strengthen the equitable
distribution of information between the Secretariat and
members of the Council, so as to strengthen collective
responsibility in the face of threats to international
peace and security. It would also be advisable if, before
they brief the Council, Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General could, to the extent possible, hold
consultations not only with the President of the
Council but also with the other members of the
Council, including the non-permanent members.

With regard to newly elected members, I
welcome the opportunity provided to them to join
private consultations several months prior to the actual
commencement of their membership on the Council.
Nevertheless, it would be desirable for countries
presiding over the Council during the transition period
to take the initiative, with the support of the
Secretariat, of holding informational meetings for
incoming members in order to consider practical
examples relating to substantive issues and working
methods of the Council.

With regard to the management of crises and
conflicts, my delegation thinks it would be useful for
the Council to strengthen the tools at its disposal to
effectively follow the development of crisis situations
at the regional and subregional levels. The excellent
work done by the United Nations Office for West
Africa made it possible for the Organization to quickly
and effectively respond to the crisis in Guinea. We are
certain that the future establishment of a United
Nations office in Central Africa will strengthen the
capacity of the Council to prevent and manage
conflicts in that subregion, which continues to face
numerous challenges in the areas of peace and security.

We continue to believe that the effective
operationalization of regional offices will help to
strengthen the Council's preventive capacities. The
Council would of course benefit from further relying
on such offices, not merely to increase the number of
meetings it holds on emerging conflicts - as the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom aptly
pointed out - but also to make those meetings more
useful and effective.
Adopting resolutions is a major Council activity.
In that regard, my delegation urges the authors of
resolutions to undertake a greater number of inclusive
consultations within the Council, so as to confer
greater legitimacy on the resolutions that are adopted.

1 should now like to turn to the second point of
my statement, namely, relations between the Council
and non-members. My delegation is pleased to note
that, over the years, the Council has endeavoured to
improve its interaction and dialogue with non-member
States. For instance, we welcome the regular
consultations between the Council and troop-
contributing countries, including those that are not
members of the Security Council. The same goes for
the President's ongoing consultations with the President
of the General Assembly and with non-members of the
Council on issues having an impact on international
peace and security.

We also welcome the efforts made to make the
report of the Security Council to the General Assembly
more substantive and analytical.

These exchanges are all the more important in
that they illustrate the need for the United Nations to
deliver as one.

Regarding the participation of non-member States
in Council meetings, we welcome the increasing
frequency of open meetings. That enables non-member
States to be involved and in that way to contribute to
the search for solutions to collective security issues.
The goal would be to make it possible to exchange up-
to-date information and gather the views of those
States, while respecting the principle of the
confidentiality of information as set out in the
Council's provisional rules of procedure. This practice
can also ensure greater transparency and improved
interaction between the Council and non-member
States.

Improving the Council's working methods is a
long-term endeavour that calls for tireless effort on our
part. We must proceed in stages, with a firm
determination to achieve concrete results. We continue
to believe that a more open, more transparent and more
inclusive Security Council would respond to modern-
day demands. It is certainly the surest way to enhance
the Council's legitimacy and effectiveness.

