Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
convene this debate, which allows us to evaluate
maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, based on the
report of the United Nations assessment mission (see S/2012/45). I would also naturally like to thank
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing, as well as the
representatives of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission.

Piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea
are a recent source of concern for our Council.
However, African States and maritime shippers have
been suffering the consequences of this situation for
several years. As opposed to the situation in Somalia,
acts of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea are usually
conducted in areas near the coast and appear to be
more opportunistic than planned operations.
Nevertheless, their impact on the coastal States'
economies is substantial, as it increases the costs of
maritime trade and extractive activities. The
assessment mission's report demonstrates this very
clearly in the case of Benin.

Our political objective must clearly be to
support the Gulf of Guinea States, which bear the
primary responsibility for ensuring the security of the
maritime spaces within their jurisdictions. In this

context, it is up to those same States, concerned regional
organizations - ECOWAS, the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) and Commission of
the Gulf of Guinea - to identify a regional strategy that
the United Nations can support.

In its resolution 2018 (2011) of 31 October 2011,
the Council welcomed the intention of Gulf of Guinea
States to convene a regional conference. In this regard,
we reiterate our encouragement for that initiative. We
also welcome the measures undertaken by regional
organizations, in particular ECCAS and its maritime
security strategy and its Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in Central Africa in Pointe-Noire, the Congo.
Such good practices deserve to be reviewed at the
ECOWAS level. We also call on the various regional
organizations to better coordinate their action and their
resources so that the maritime zone of the Gulf of
Guinea can be monitored in its entirety and not in a
piecemeal fashion.

France is acting against maritime insecurity in the
Gulf of Guinea. French naval vessels make use of their
stops in the region to conduct educational and training
activities. In October 2011, the authorities of Equatorial
Guinea inaugurated in Bata a new regional naval school
that is supported by French cooperation. France is also
behind several initiatives aimed at strengthening
regional cooperation in the Gulf of Guinea. It organized
a regional seminar last November in Cotonou to take
stock of the needs of States members of ECOWAS and
ECCAS. Its recommendations will be implemented
through a $1.6-million programme to reform the
maritime security sector in Togo, Benin and Ghana. The
first steps have been to underwrite an ECOWAS mission
of maritime experts to Libreville and Douala last week
to give them the benefit of the maritime structures put in
place by ECCAS in recent years, which will facilitate
cooperation between those two organizations in the
future.

In its capacity as chair of the Group of Eight
peacekeeping/peacebuilding experts, in 2011 France
also proposed instituting a coordination mechanism
among its members - including the United Nations
and the European Union - to strengthen maritime
security capacities so as to avoid duplication of efforts
and to address a lack of training in certain areas.
The European Union is currently looking into
financing the establishment of regional mechanisms for
training, information-sharing and strengthening the

coastguards of the Gulf of Guinea States. The
European initiative SEACOP also aims to strengthen
the fight against illicit maritime trafficking and to
secure ports. Those efforts, however, will be effective
in the long term only if they are part of a regional
strategy of cooperation among the States of the Gulf of
Guinea and of national policies opposing maritime
crime, including corruption, as the report of the
assessment mission makes clear. The Security Council,
the coastal States and the international donors each
have a role to play.

We hope that the Secretary-General will continue
to keep us informed on the situation in the Gulf of
Guinea. We will read with great attention forthcoming
reports from the United Nations regional offices in
Dakar and Libreville.

We thank Togo for the draft resolution it has
distributed and which is currently under discussion. We
give it our full support and hope for a prompt adoption.

