Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to welcome Baroness Ashton, High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union, and thank her for her
invaluable statement.

Over 50 years ago, those who drafted the United
Nations Charter dedicated an entire Chapter of that
document, namely, Chapter VIII, to regional
organizations because they believed in the
complementary role played by such organizations
alongside the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security.

Today, the international environment is especially
dynamic, particularly in the light of multilateral
diplomacy, the great openness of States, the emergence
of geographic blocs, and new, complex and diverse
challenges. In this environment, some regional
organizations, including the European Union, have
been able to consolidate their positions as active
partners in the many activities of the United Nations,
the most important of which is the maintenance of
international peace. This success is due to the fact that
these organizations' principles are in line with those of
the United Nations and its objectives to promote peace
and security, ensure respect for human rights, and
establish the rule of law.

Lebanon welcomes the ongoing efforts, both past
and current, of the European Union to preserve and
build peace. We also commend its operational work
and its achievements in the civilian sphere, including
its overt cooperation aimed at resolving a great number
of conflicts around the world. The European Union
provides the United Nations with the means to
accomplish its work, in particular in Africa and Haiti.

Lebanon urges the European Union, which has
enhanced its role on the international scene following
the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon, to
prioritize its foreign policy in order to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
and to put an end to violations of international law and
international humanitarian law. This is all the more
important given the European Union's key position in
the international Quartet.

Lebanon believes that the mere occasional
condemnation of certain Israeli practices is
insufficient. Indeed, such condemnation has not
prevented Israel from ignoring the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, as well as
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice. We recall here that Israeli practices contravene
the very principles of the European Union, such as the
rejection of violence and racism, the establishment of
the rule of law, and respect for basic human rights and
international humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention. That Convention prohibits
collective punishment, such as that meted out in Gaza,
and the transfer of settlers to occupied territories, such
as continues to occur in the West Bank today.

It is high time for all parties that seek a two-State
solution to recognize the Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and to support it in bringing an
end to the occupation of all Palestinian territories. The
new Palestinian State should be a Member of the
United Nations, and could be before the next session of
the General Assembly begins in September.

Lebanon also encourages the promotion of
cooperation between the European Union and other
regional organizations in the exchange of expertise,
information and lessons learned in terms of human
resources, training and capacity-building, in particular
with the League of Arab States and the African Union.
That could help to maintain peace and security in the
Arab world and Africa. Regional organizations can
play an effective role in preventing conflicts and
facilitating post-conflict reconciliation and
reconstruction.

In conclusion, Lebanon encourages greater
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations in order to achieve a safer and more
stable world.

