Mr. Wane: I am grateful forthis opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the Secretary-General's 30-
day report and on the overall situation in South Sudan.

The deployment of the Regional Protection Force
(RPF) is under way and, since the submission of the
report a week ago, there have been no significant
updates on the deployment process. The United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) continues
to engage the Government on a regular basis in order to
expedite the deployment. Enhanced cooperation with
the Government will be critical for the RPF to complete
the process and fully implement its mandate.

As has been reported, some misunderstandings
arose with the Government surrounding the
accommodation of the advance party of the Rwandan
contingent of the RPF to Juba. I am pleased to confirm
that, following the active engagement of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. David
Shearer, and his team with Government officials over
the past two weeks, those misunderstandings have
been cleared.

In commemoration of the second anniversary of
the signing, on 25 August 2015, of the South Sudan
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, the Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, former
President Mr. Festus Mogae, declared yesterday that
little meaningful progress had been achieved in its
implementation. President Mogae will shortly explain
the challenges he faces and his efforts to revitalize
the process, which Special Envoy Haysom actively
supports. Let me say that the Secretariat could not agree
more with his assessment and the calls on the Security
Council to express itself strongly, unanimously and
unreservedly in support of his efforts and those of the
region as a whole, including the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD)-led Revitalization
Forum. More than ever before, there is a need for
continued and close coordination among IGAD, the
African Union, the United Nations and the broader
international community to ensure that we leverage our
collective influence to bring an end to the suffering of
the civilian population and help put South Sudan on a
more positive trajectory.

The security situation in the country is a cause for
serious concern, as it has been over the past few years.
Unfortunately, the expected ceasefire remains elusive,
as military operations continued during the reporting
period, mostly in the Upper Nile part of the country.
While efforts by the Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA) to take Pagak, the de facto headquarters of the
Sudan People's Liberation Army-In Opposition (SPLA- IO), initially succeeded, fighting around Pagak and
along the corridor to Majang continues, while civilians
in the area remain displaced, including refugees
heading to Ethiopia. Further north, clashes resumed
between the SPLA and the SPLA-IO in Kaka, on the
west bank of the Nile. Insecurity also continued in the
Equatorias, including long main roads. UNMISS has
enhanced its presence in Torit and continues intensive
patrolling to and around Yei in response to persistent
threats to civilians.

Those incidents directly affect humanitarian
operations, which consequently have an impact on
the most vulnerable of the population in dire need of
assistance. In the month of July, 136 access incidents
were reported by the humanitarian community. That is
the highest number recorded in any one month since
December 2013. Of those 136 incidents, 49 involved
violence against personnel and assets, once again
illustrating the increasingly dangerous and risky
environment in which humanitarian actors operate. In a
persistent trend, letters threatening violence against aid
workers from different ethnicities have also continued.
Incidents of looting also spiked during the month of
July, with 15 incidents reported across the country. Of
particular concern were the six major looting incidents
of warehouses and trucks in transit, leading to the
loss of 670 metric tons of food meant for vulnerable
communities in Eastern Equatoria, Lakes, Upper Nile
and Wau. Humanitarian actors were also denied access,
both by Government and non-State armed actors, to
several critical areas.

The Under-Secretary-General of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Lacroix, visited
South Sudan from 1 to 3 August. During his visit, be
met with President Salva Kiir and key Government
officials. He reiterated to all his interlocutors that there
was no military solution to the conflict in South Sudan
and that inclusive and credible political processes were
the only way forward. Although President Kiir and
his Cabinet members expressed reservation about the
inclusion of some people in the dialogue process, in
particular Riek Machar, there was an acknowledgment
that sizable communities cannot be left out of the
process just because they were led by, or supported, a
particular individual.

Political attention in Juba appeared squarely
focused on the national dialogue process and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement reunification, on
which Special Envoy Haysom will report. While the
national dialogue has made some progress, achieving
key enablers for a credible process, such as inclusivity
and a free and secure environment, remain a challenge.
Following the national dialogue secretariat's request for
technical assistance, UNMISS has been coordinating
with other United Nations entities and institutional
partners to assist with needs and the support
required. In that regard, support was provided to a
steering committee inception seminar, during which
participants acknowledged a better understanding of
the challenges associated with ensuring inclusivity,
confidence-building and the actual implementation of
the process in the prevailing environment. However,
the national dialogue continued to be criticized for its
lack of inclusivity.

The national dialogue steering committee's
outreach to key opposition figures outside the country,
including Mr. Machar, Thomas Cirilo and Lam Akol,
yielded little, as those actors either refused to receive
visiting national dialogue delegations or objected to
the viability of a national dialogue as a vehicle for
achieving an inclusive political settlement. We have
been informed that their opposition is not directed
against the need for such a nation-building exercise,
but against the conduct of the dialogue in advance of,
or as an alternative to, an inclusive peace process. On
the other hand, the participation of some civil society
and faith-based groups, both in the steering committee
proceedings and in the seminar I mentioned, is a
positive development.

Meanwhile, some progress can be reported in the
negotiations related to the establishment of the hybrid
court for South Sudan. Two weeks ago, the Government
of South Sudan and the African Union Commission
agreed, at the technical level, on the text of the legal
instruments for the establishment of the court. They
will now submit the legal instruments to the Ministers
of Justice and to the senior management of the African
Union Commission for their consideration and approval.
The United Nations Office of Legal Affairs continues
to support that process.

The national dialogue could make a significant
contribution to improving the political environment
through an open discussion of critical national issues.
Participants and observers attest to open debate even
within the steering committee. However, it cannot be
a substitute for a negotiated peace agreement, which,
ifimplemented in good faith, can silence the guns, end
the conflict and enhance the potential for the national
dialogue to play a part in consolidating long-term
sustainable peace and ensuring true ownership by all
South Sudanese stakeholders.

As has been repeated many times here in the
Chamber, the conflict in South Sudan is a man-
made one for which the leaders of the country bear a
direct responsibility. The dire economic situation and
continued conflict there have combined to generate a
dangerous and precarious situation for its citizens, but
the same leaders can also bring the country back from
the brink of the abyss. All that is needed is genuine
political will to halt military operations, peaceably
negotiate and make the compromises necessary to
achieve sustainable peace in the country. I would
also urge the Security Council to pronounce itself in
that regard. It is critical that the leaders and all other
stakeholders in South Sudan hear the international
community's unified demand of what is expected of
them in the interests of their own people.

