Mr. Kushneruk (Ukraine): First of all, let me join
previous speakers in thanking the Lithuanian delegation
for organizing today's open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts through United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant activities. We find it
to be timely and topical.

While taking note of the few positive developments
outlined in the Secretary-General's latest report on the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2013/689), the delegation of Ukraine remains
concerned with the fact that civilians continue to
account for the vast majority of casualties in current
conflicts. They are regularly targeted and subjected to
indiscriminate attacks and other violations by parties
to conflict.

The protection of civilians is a mandated task
that requires coordinated actions in all spheres of
peacekeeping operations activities, including the United
Nations police component. While such protection is a
core element of international policing, it also requires
close alignment with the work of peacekeeping
operations in the strategy for protecting civilians.

United Nations police provide operational support
to host-State police on the protection of civilians
under imminent threat. In addition, United Nations
police assist in planning and conducting operations
and investigations and in training the host-State police
forces to perform crucial protection functions, which,
inter alia, include maintaining a secure environment in
camps of internally displaced persons.

The ongoing conflict in South Sudan has led to the
need for accommodations for thousands of civilians
in United Nations shelters. Police officers of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan were directly
involved in the protection of civilians in those camps
by maintaining public order and conducting physical
checks. With the third largest contingent of individual
police officers there, Ukraine reaffirms its commitment
to further support the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and is considering the possibility of increasing
the number of its police officers.

Ukraine strongly believes that host-State police
can also contribute to the protection of civilians by
preventing and overcoming direct physical violence,
in particular sexual abuse. The police of the host State
should receive special training to be able to perform
such duties.

I would like to emphasize that special attention
needs to be given to vulnerable groups in society,
including children, women and elder persons; national,
ethnic, religious and other minorities; and displaced
populations, when defining and implementing the
relevant activities in peacekeeping operations and when
identifying security needs.

Ukraine has always been an active supporter of
United Nations efforts aimed at protecting women and
girls in armed conflicts. Our Government strongly
supports all Security Council resolutions on women.
We welcome the commitments of the Group of Eight
on enhancing efforts to address impunity for sexual
violence in conflicts, including its endorsement of
the development of an international protocol on the
investigation and documentation of sexual violence
in conflict. In September 2013, Ukraine signed the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict.

We consider demining operations to be another
important area related to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. Ukraine has extensive experience in
demining and possesses modern technologies in that
area. Our advanced logistics bases allow the training
of highly skilled specialists within a short period of
time. Ukrainian mine-clearance engineers are widely
recognized in the world, including in the Balkan region,
Africa and the Middle East. Our units operate under
the standards and operational procedures of the United
Nations, and we are ready to provide technical support
and to share our experience within United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

Turning again to South Sudan, I would like to draw
the Council's attention to recent developments that have
revealed the absence of the means required to carry out
quick-response rescue operations of civilians in cases
of emergency. That proves that there is a pressing need
to take decisions on the rapid concentration of rescue
units, especially military and civil helicopters, in a
particular place to fulfil rescue operations.

Last December, three of our helicopters received
gunfire while rescuing civilians and United Nations
employees in South Sudan. Thanks to the pilots'
professionalism, there were no human casualties.
However, it had become evident that, in order to avoid,
or at least to significantly decrease, possible casualties
in the future, the United Nations must equip rescue
helicopters with additional protective features, such
as bulletproof bottoms, antiballistic and antimissile
protection, reinforced rescue hoists and on-board
fixtures for medical equipment. Night-vision goggles
should be available for night operations. For example,
we believe that the rescue helicopters mentioned could
have avoided gunfire if the team had performed their
operation at night using night-vision goggles.

We think that United Nations helicopters should be
versatile, multifunctional and rapidly convertible into
any version suitable to the flight task - passenger or
cargo transportation, medical or casualty evacuation
or search and rescue operations. A professional team
of rescuers and medical staff should be included in
the crew; plus an ambulance should be available to
transport injured people to the nearest medical facility.

We believe that such modifications to helicopters
would assist United Nations peacekeeping missions in
providing protection to civilians in armed conflicts in
a more efficient and safe manner. In November 2013,
Ukraine held a special briefing with a presentation
on the functionality of United Nations helicopters. In
March, we are planning to convene another presentation
focused on a United Nations multitask and convertible
helicopter capable of protecting civilians in armed
conflicts.

