Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his briefing, which was pertinent to the
topic under discussion.

The protection of civilians must be the highest
priority for Governments involved in conflicts. We
emphasize that all parties to armed conflict bear
responsibility for ensuring the security of civilians. We
vigorously condemn both deliberate attacks on
civilians and their deaths resulting from indiscriminate
or excessive use of force, which is a violation of
international humanitarian law. There can be no
justification for armed groups that make use of suicide
terrorists and take hostages.

Once again we would like to draw attention to the
alarming data cited in the most recent report of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI)
with regard to the situation of human rights in that
country. Armed groups continue to carry out deliberate
attacks and terrorist acts directed against the civilian
population. Another source of considerable concern is
the activity of private guard enterprises, which often
grossly violate the rights of civilians. First and
foremost, we are speaking here of the behaviour of
such companies in Iraq that have caused injuries to and
deaths of civilians, including women and children. It
should be emphasized that under international law the
responsibility for the actions of such groups in many
cases is borne by the States that hire them.

The use of children in conflict is inadmissible, as
is inhuman treatment of them. In that context I wish to
flag the problem of the detention of minors in military
prisons of the multinational forces in Iraq, which
contravenes international standards. According to the
data in the UNAMI report, those prisons now hold
about 900 children who are accused of terrorism and
who have had no access to the civilian court system.
We support the appeal of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
Mrs. Coomaraswamy, regarding the need for a speedy
solution to this problem. It is well know that minors
are also being held at the military base in Bagram, near
Kabul, and in Guantanamo.

Conflicts remain the major reason for the high
level of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) throughout the world. Once again Iraq,
unfortunately, is in the lead in that respect, with more
than 2.5 million refugees and approximately 2 million
IDPs, most of whom have been deprived of basic and
fundamental vital human needs. Their problems require
an immediate solution. In addition to purely
humanitarian factors, they are a difficult burden on the
host countries.

The problem of displaced persons is a serious
concern with regard to the situation in the Sudanese
province of Darfur. Here, we rest our hopes for an
improvement of the situation first on the proper
functioning of the political negotiating process and the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

Serious threats to civilians continue to exist in a
number of other conflicts, especially in the Middle East
and in Africa.

With regard to the protection of civilians, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former fighters is of great significance. Those
programmes require proper support from the United
Nations peacekeeping missions.

We favour the interpretation of the concept of the
responsibility to protect in accordance with the final
document of the 2005 summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1), as a responsibility of each State to
protect those individuals under its jurisdiction -
protection from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. Moreover, it is the United
Nations and the Security Council that bear the task of
supporting those national efforts.

The prevention of violence is an objective that is
strategic in nature, reaffirming the need to combat
impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Here, assistance to those States
involved in restoring or establishing independent
national judicial systems and institutions should be
stressed.

With regard to the idea of creating in the Security
Council an expert working group on the protection of
civilians, the advisability of such a step seems dubious.
Before raising that question, in our view there should
be an assessment of the effectiveness and experience of
the operations of the first such body, the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflicts.

The United Nations must rapidly and effectively
respond to incidents of violence against civilians and to
the destruction of civilian facilities during armed
conflict. That task requires systematic coordination of
measures at the international, regional and national
levels. It is important to achieve unswerving
compliance by all sides with the norms of international
humanitarian law and the relevant decisions of the
Security Council. The implementation of documents
already adopted by the Council on, inter alia, children
and armed conflict and on women, peace and security
must be insisted on. They have great potential, and the
Council could focus on the assessment of the
implementation of its decisions in that sphere and on
identifying and eliminating the obstacles.

