Mr. Szijjarto (Hungary) (spoke in Russian): Allow
me to express my sincere condolences on the death of
the Permanent Representative of Russia to the United
Nations. Ambassador Churkin was an outstanding
diplomat who gained great respect through his work
both here in New York and throughout the world.

(spoke in English)

I thank you very much, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting and organizing this open debate. It is very
timely, since currently Europe is experiencing a period
when we are facing the most numerous simultaneous
and serious security challenges and armed conflicts
since the conclusion of the Cold War. The European
Union, which once was the most successful political
and economic integration in the world, has never had to
face so many challenges and threats.
But the conflicts and the challenges are not only
European ones. All of the conflicts we have been
experiencing in Europe have global components,
global factors, sometimes global reasons, and all are
part of global political developments. We Europeans
speak a lot about these conflicts. We are looking for
solutions, but we have to admit that it is not really only
us Europeans who can resolve them. Whether these
conflicts will be resolved or not is not only up to us
Europeans. In our understanding, these conflicts will
have a realistic chance to be overcome and resolved ifin
the future there is a change in the United States-Russia
relationship toward pragmatism and improvement.

We have a very simple historical experience in
Central Europe: whenever there is a conflict between
East and West, Central Europe usually loses. And
whenever we lose, we usually lose big-time. That is
why we are crossing our fingers that the new American
Administration and the Administration of Russia will
be able to build a better relationship, to get along with
each other better, or - in the words of the new President
of the United States - to make a deal. Without closer
cooperation between the United States and Russia, we
see no realistic hope for sustainable solutions to our
threats and challenges. There are some clear truths in
recent history. I am fairly certain that no one doubts
that there would be no nuclear deal with Iran if Russia
and the United States had not sat on the same side of the
negotiating table.

That is why we are very happy with all initiatives
that bring us closer to a better United States-Russia
relationship. We consider absolutely harmful all
initiatives and decisions that bring us farther from
better cooperation. We usually hear, in various formats,
two expressions: "dialogue" and "deterrence". We
Hungarians, we Central Europeans, do hope that the
United States and Russia will put a lot of emphasis on
engaging in dialogue based on mutual trust and respect
for international law.

That enhanced cooperation will offer a better
chance to destroy the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
and to finally vanquish terror. Without that, tackling
the root causes of the mass illegal migratory flows,
which have very seriously impacted the European
Union in the past, will be impossible. Some bad
international political decisions and mismanaged crises
have seen systems destabilized, economies ruined and
dictatorships emerging among Europe's neighbours,
forcing people to flee their homes in massive numbers.
Resolving those problems and thereby creating peace
and stability in Europe's neighbourhood, which will
have a direct impact on Europe's own security, is such
a major task that it is simply impossible to accomplish
it without active cooperation between the United States
and Russia.

Since I come from Hungary, where we have some
major disturbances and tensions arising from time to
time around us, I would very briefly like to emphasize
two issues. The first is that we see full implementation
of the Minsk agreement as the only way to end the
conflict in Ukraine. We therefore hope to see it
implemented faster and in full, just as we hope for
long-lasting stability and predictability in the western
Balkans, to which end we support the path of European
integration for that historic region and hope that will
also be realized as soon as possible.

I would like to say that it is an honour to be
addressing the Security Council, and we hope that
in future the Council will continue to be a forum
for dialogue that can help overcome the enormous
challenges that Europe and the European Union have
been facing recently.

