Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): First of all, allow
me to introduce to the Security Council my colleague
Military Adviser Ruben Fajardo. He is the main
officer responsible for the increase in the number of
peacekeepers whom we deploy to various missions. We
thank him for his service.

Peacekeeping remains a flagship agenda of the
United Nations. More importantly, it is a core element
in sustaining peace. The Secretary-General's latest
report on the work ofthe Organization emphasizes that,

"Sustaining peace is relevant to all the United
Nations peace and security tools and entails an
emphasis on partnerships, national ownership
and recognition of the interlinkages of the United
Nations work." (A/73/1, para. 57)

We therefore commend China for convening today's open
debate on peacekeeping operations in Africa. We also
commend Secretary-General Antonio Guterres' strong
commitment to a culture of prevention and partnership
through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, which was endorsed by 150
Member States, including the Philippines.

For more than 50 years, the Philippines has
consistently played an important role in 19 United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Asia, the
Middle East, South America and Africa. Along with
North American F-86E Sabre jet fighter planes and
equipment, the first Philippine United Nations-formed
unit was composed of members of the Philippine Air
Force Limbas Squadron deployed to the United Nations
Operations in the Congo in 1963. I would like to
highlight three points.

First, as a troop- and police-contributing country,
the Philippines is committed to international efforts
for peacekeeping operations in Africa. In general, the
Philippines continues to support the Secretary-General's
initiatives to advocate for integrated approaches to
addressing security, development and humanitarian
challenges in the African region. Specifically with
regard to strengthening peacekeeping operations in
Africa, we believe that much could be accomplished
through capacity-building, training, or peer-learning
exercises, and through the exchange of best practices
and lessons learned. Voluntary contributions are also
very important, and the Philippines is a contributor to
the Peacebuilding Fund.

Secondly, the Philippines will continue its active
engagement with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in the deployment of Filipino peacekeepers.
Nationally, our deployment policy is guided by the
Philippine National Council for United Nations Peace
Operations and approved by the Office of the President.
We therefore strongly support the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
to further improve the safety and security of our
peacekeepers. To date, Philippine military, police
and civilian personnel are deployed to United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions in Darfur,
the Central African Republic, Somalia and South Sudan.

Thirdly, the integration of women in peacekeeping
operations is part of our effort under the women and
peace and security agenda, as we promote the important
contributions of women in peace negotiations and
peacebuilding and their roles in shaping the narratives
ofpeace. There are 17 female military, police or civilian
personnel serving in peacekeeping and special political
missions in Africa.

Philippine participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding missions in
Africa demonstrates my country's enduring commitment

to working with key actors and stakeholders to ensure
international peace, security and stability.

