My delegation congratulates Indonesia on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and for convening today's open debate on this important topic. I also thank the briefers for their insightful presentations this morning. The nexus between terrorism and organized crime is complex, and varies across different contexts. We know that since 9/11, criminal and terrorist outfits have cooperated to facilitate each other's activities, and have been found to coexist, cooperate and sometimes even converge. For example, the World Drug Report 2017 of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) underlines that terrorists and non-State armed groups profit from the drug trade and opium poppy cultivation in our neighbourhood, in Afghanistan. Similarly, the 2016 European Union Terrorism Situation and Trend Report highlights that investigations into the unfortunate Paris attacks of November 2015 found that some of the attackers may have actively participated in organized criminal networks, instead of just being their clients. Moreover, the widespread use of enslavement, rape and human trafficking by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is well-known and has been met with widespread international condemnation. These and many other instances clearly signal the existence of linkages between terrorism and organized crime. In our view, there are four major areas of confluence between organized crime and terrorism. First, there is ever-growing cooperation for the acquisition of arms, ammunition and explosive materials. Secondly, terrorist outfits are increasingly relying on organized crime as a financing tool. Thirdly, terrorist groups recruit criminals, in particular marginalized youth, to advance their agenda. Fourthly, organized crime flourishes in areas outside Government control and under the patronage of terrorist outfits. As one of the principal victims of terrorism, Pakistan is clearly and unwaveringly resolved to eliminating this scourge. Terrorist organizations such as Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan and Jamaat-ul-Ahrar attack Pakistan using bases outside our borders. These organizations do not have any ideological motivation. They are mercenary terrorist organizations and work with the State patronage of third countries in order to generate a profit. This nexus of mercenary terrorists and their patrons generates finances through proceeds from the narcotics trade, kidnapping for ransom, extortion and smuggling of such natural resources as timber. An example of this patronage was proven by the arrest of Commander Kulbhushan Jadhav, an Indian intelligence agent who was running a syndicate of criminals and terrorists to foment terrorism in Pakistan. Similarly, we submitted the names of four other terrorist facilitators to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). Such Indian terrorism facilitators, hiding in our neighbourhood in plain sight, continue to fuel terrorism inside Pakistan. The recent attack on the Pakistan Stock Exchange in Karachi, condemned by the Security Council, was the work of India-sponsored mercenary terrorists such as these. Pakistan will continue to make every effort to expose the ominous role being played by India, the fountainhead of terrorism in our region. Located next to the epicentre of the world drug problem, Pakistan also remains one of the most affected transit States for illicit drug trafficking. With limited resources, our law enforcement agencies continue to make record drug seizures year after year, which is a tangible manifestation of our consistent and dedicated efforts aimed at protecting not only our own country but also the rest of the world from this scourge. At the regional and global levels, Pakistan has remained constructively engaged with various counter-narcotics-related forums and initiatives. Pakistan is an active participant in the UNODC Regional Programme for Afghanistan and Neighbouring Countries. We are cooperating with Iran and Afghanistan under the UNODC-sponsored Triangular Initiative. Pursuant to the quartet initiative, we are collaborating with Russia, Turkmenistan and Afghanistan to combat drug trafficking. We have strengthened cooperation with the Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre, which is a useful forum for coordinating regional anti-drugs efforts at the operational level. My country believes that only through collective regional and international efforts can we choke off the various sources that support terrorist outfits through organized crime. We believe an effective strategy to achieve these goals must take into account the following five points. First, to ensure that our responses are evidence-based, the international community should allocate proper resources to better understand the correlation between the financing of terror and transnational organized crimes. Secondly, there are instances, including in our region, where there is a nexus between drug production, instability and lack of alternative economic opportunities. It is important to re-establish Government control over territories used for drug production and promote development to provide alternative livelihoods. Thirdly, in dealing with the world drug problem, it is important to focus on reducing both the supply and the demand of narcotic drugs through a well-integrated, comprehensive and balanced approach. Fourthly, effective border controls are a prerequisite to clamping down on transnational organized crime and terrorism. Finally, strategies must be tailored to specific challenges presented by particular regional dynamics and conditions. It is vital to build the capacities and capabilities of States facing these challenges. This is where the United Nations can play an effective role. Pakistan will continue to play its role to sever the vicious link between terrorism and organized crime in our region. This is critical for our own people as well as for our neighbourhood, and indeed the rest of the world.
