Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for following the usual practice of holding two
thematic debates annually on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Allow me also to thank Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
timely remarks at the beginning of this debate.

Despite the time that has passed since the 1899
and 1907 Hague Conventions - 100 years to date -
and the August 1949 Geneva Convention, we continue
to have to reiterate our concern at the scarce progress
made on the ground with regard to providing effective
protection for civilians in armed conflict and the urgent
need to provide better physical protection to displaced
populations and other vulnerable groups at greater
risk - such as women and children, humanitarian
workers, United Nations staff, journalists and those
whose work places them at risk.

In that connection, we regret the recent deaths in
Iraq, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sri Lanka,
Darfur and Lebanon. We reiterate our condemnation of
terrorist attacks against communities, in which no
distinction is made between the civilian population and
the warring factions. We also condemn all other attacks
that have forced the internal displacement of entire
communities or caused them to seek refuge in
neighbouring countries.

We believe that the holding of open debates on
this subject, the statements that are sometimes issued
following the debates and the adoption of resolutions,
such as resolutions 1674 (2006) and 1738 (2006),
among others, represent positive progress in our effort
to identify a common understanding as to the best way
to jointly confront the challenges repeatedly brought to
our attention in the reports of the Secretary-General,
reports, incidentally, which are useful tools for gaining
a better understanding of the complexities of this issue.

Over the decades, we have together, through the
United Nations, been able to address numerous
difficult and complex conflicts whose solution has
required the adoption of fundamentally important
decisions. However, there remains much for us to do
before we can achieve comprehensive approaches that
will help us to prevent conflicts or their recurrence -
approaches in which genuine coherence, coordination
and complementarity between the main bodies of the
Organization are evident. In that connection, we fully
agree with the Emergency Relief Coordinator as to the
need to make greater investments in the area of
prevention.

For as long as we fail to improve that
interaction - whenever a new armed conflict breaks
out or when we fail to protect civilians or to ensure the
deployment of humanitarian staff to lend assistance to
people trapped in a conflict - every life lost and every
case of genocide or ethnic cleansing will remind us that
we have yet to achieve the noble ideals upon which the
Organization was founded.

Our own experience in Guatemala teaches us that
this is no easy task. Despite the progress we have made
and the set of peace agreements aimed at establishing a
solid foundation for economic growth with fairness,
respect and protection for human rights and greater
participation for women and indigenous peoples, we
nevertheless continue to endeavour to establish,
broaden and strengthen institutions, opportunities and
guarantees that will bolster national reconciliation, the
rule of law and the end of a culture of impunity which
has especially affected women and girls.

This difficult experience has enabled us to
understand the importance of the just application of the
provisions of resolution 1674 (2006), particularly those
relevant to the incorporation of the protection of
identified vulnerable groups in the planning for
peacekeeping missions and other relevant United
Nations missions in order to minimize the inherent
traumatic impact of any conflict. To this end, we also
support the Coordinator's suggestion with regard to
assessing the various peacekeeping mandates that
already include the protection of civilians and to draw
the appropriate lessons from them.

Likewise, we feel that the aide-memoire on the
protection of civilians adopted by the Security Council
as an annex to presidential statement S/PRST/2002/6,
updated by OCHA in 2003 (see S/PRST/2003/27), has
been a useful diagnostic tool for assessing the priorities
that should be taken into account when establishing,
ending or changing mandates for peacekeeping
operations. We feel that it could benefit from periodic
review and updating in order to better reflect the
concerns, trends and measures that must be taken into
account for the protection of civilians and the
implementation of programmes related to this topic.

We await the Secretary-General's next report, to
be submitted in October. We are confident that it will
provide up-to-date information and describe recent
experiences in peacekeeping operations and in the
innovative work in the area of peacebuilding. We are
confident that its content will lead to an interesting
debate on new approaches to the implementation of
programmes on the ground, which will allow us to
meet fully our responsibility to protect.

Finally, we would like to end our statement by
congratulating the Special Court for Sierra Leone on
the conviction of three leaders of the Revolutionary
Armed Forces, who were found guilty of 11 crimes
considered crimes against humanity, including the
recruitment and use of child soldiers. This is the first
time that an international tribunal has handed down a
verdict on the recruitment of children; it also
constitutes a strong message in the struggle against
impunity and for the defence of the civilian population.

