The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Rwanda.

I would like to thank Ambassador Vladimir
Drobnjak, Permanent Representative of Croatia and
former Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
presenting the report (S/2014/67) of the Commission
on its seventh session. We join others in noting with
appreciation the quality of the report, which provides
a comprehensive analysis of the progress made thus far
in implementation of the recommendations of the 2010
review as well as the challenges that the Commission
continues to face ahead of the 2015 review. I also thank
Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent
Representative of Brazil and current Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his statement and
for his demonstrated leadership at the helm of the
Commission. I also take this opportunity, through him,
to commend the Chairs of the five configurations for
their dynamism and advocacy on behalf of the countries
on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I cannot forget to pay tribute to our friend and dear
colleague Judy Cheng Hopkins, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacebuilding Support, for her outstanding
achievements over the past five years, as well as for
her passion for our continent of Africa, along with her
valuable team.

During our previous briefing on post-conflict
peacebuilding, held in March under the presidency
of Luxembourg (see S/PV.7143), Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson recalled that the PBC was a
subsidiary organ of the Security Council and could be
of optimal use only if the Council empowered it and
utilized its potential. In that regard, Rwanda believes
that the Security Council can benefit more from the
advisory function of the PBC, not only because of its
unique membership structure but also because of its
broader post-conflict perspective. The Council may
recall that, during our first presidency of the Security
Council, in April 2013, Rwanda organized a briefing
on post-conflict peacebuilding (see S/PV.6954), which
was followed by an informal interactive dialogue with
the Chairs of the PBC configuration and countries
on the Commission's agenda. The objective of the
dialogue was to exchange views on how to strengthen
the PBC's advisory role, engagement from the Council
and the modality of interaction between the two
bodies. As mentioned in the report of the PBC on its
seventh session, Rwanda was designated by the PBC
Organizational Committee as coordinator of a process
aimed at engaging the joint membership of the Council
and the Commission in informally monitoring and
taking stock of the progress and challenges in managing
the interactions between the both bodies. We have
held quarterly stock-taking meetings since June 2013.
This afternoon, we will organize the second informal
interactive dialogue to reflect on the progress in our
interaction and to address one of the critical issues
in peacebuilding, as we have been reminded by the
situations in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan, namely, the relapse into conflict.

Rwanda fully endorses the three elements
presented by the Chair of the PBC aimed at reinforcing
our collective efforts to prevent a relapse into conflict.
We are particularly convinced that the three ingredients
for durable peace, as the PBC Chair named them, are
intertwined. Without a national political commitment,
there can be no national leadership; and without national
leadership there can be no national ownership. In that
respect, therefore, we believe that relapse into conflict
on the African continent is mainly a direct consequence
of a lack of leadership, institution-building, inclusive
dialogue and genuine reconciliation and good
governance.

Furthermore, Rwanda is of the view that the
fight against impunity for the most serious crimes is
indispensable in every post-conflict society willing
to consolidate peace and avoid a relapse into conflict.
Impunity trivializes violence and lays the ground for
mass atrocities.

Nonetheless, to be effective, the fight against
impunity must be adapted to the historical and cultural
reality of the country concerned. Indeed, in many post-
conflict societies, traditional justice may in some cases
not be appropriate, as it sets aside the reconciliation
component ofjustice. That is why Rwanda believes that
in countries emerging from conflict, transitionaljustice
and truth and reconciliation mechanisms would be
better tools to render individual justice while ensuring
collective reconciliation.

Rwanda welcomes the holding of the first annual
session of the PBC on Peacebuilding Day, on 23 June
2014, which considered, inter alia, the mobilization
of domestic resources and revenue generation. This
is indeed a critical issue for countries emerging from
conflict, as we have always believed that Africa and
other developing countries need to take control of
their own destiny by graduating from international
aid. However, as we own our destiny, we need to earn
it and work for it. In this regard, we hope that action
will be taken on the recommendations proposed during
the first annual session of the PBC, particularly those
related to transparency and accountability as well as
to illicit financial flows. Furthermore, we believe that
the PBC, in supporting the countries on its agenda,
also has a role to play in fostering regional engagement
and commitment. In that respect, the PBC's advisory
function should also aim at forging greater regional
coherence through links with the countries of the
region, regional economic communities and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. Here I particularly
thank the Chairs ofthe country-specific configurations,
who have integrated the regional dimension into their
efforts.

To conclude, I wish to remind my colleagues
once again that this afternoon I will be convening an
informal interactive dialogue between the members of
the Council, the members of the PBC Chairs Group and
the countries on the Commission's agenda to reflect
on the developments that have taken place since the
dialogue held on 26 April 2013, in order to draw on
the full potential of the PBC's advisory role to the
Council in a variety of country contexts as well as in
policy-related areas. I count on the participation of all
members.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.
