Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I would like to thank the delegation of Mauritius
for arranging this important meeting. We would also
like to express our regret that the Ambassador of
Mexico, Mr. Navarrete, will be leaving us soon. He
was once his country's Ambassador to China, and he
was highly respected in our country. He is also highly
respected at the United Nations, and we wish him every
success in his future endeavours.

In response to the terrorist attacks on 11
September, the United Nations, including the Security
Council, acted promptly. At present, the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee has yielded preliminary
results. Most countries have submitted their national
reports on the implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001), which reflects fully the firm
resolve and determination of the international
community to combat terrorism.

Here, I must express particular gratitude to
Ambassador Greenstock and the Committee's Vice-
Chairmen for their prodigious work. I particularly
appreciate Ambassador Greenstock's excellent working
methods.

The success of the global fight against terrorism
requires more effective action at the national level. In
that regard, all countries should support, and
coordinate with, each other. At the same time, the fight
against terrorism should also give a full role to the
efforts of the world's regions and subregions. I want to
mention the meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, whose members include Kazakhstan,
China, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan
and Uzbekistan. The Foreign Ministers of the members
of the organization issued a joint statement in which
they decided that they would soon establish their
counter-terrorism mechanism at Bishkek. We believe
this will add new force to the international endeavour
against terrorism. The Security Council should support
regional efforts to combat terrorism. We therefore hope
that the Counter-Terrorism Committee will also make
relevant efforts in this regard.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee will soon
begin to examine national reports. Today's Security
Council meeting is very necessary. The views and
suggestions of a majority of Member States of the
United Nations will help make the Committee's work
in its next phase more positive and effective. We also
believe that the consideration of national reports is a
very important process that will entail an enormous
amount of work in the Committee and require very
detailed analysis. We believe that particular attention
should be paid in that process to the handling of the
following issues.

First, the Counter-Terrorism Committee should
base its work on resolution 1373 (2001) and the
guidelines it has itself adopted. It should also treat all
Member States equally and avoid double standards.

Secondly, the United Nations, and in particular
the Security Council, should play a leading role in the
international fight against terrorism. In that regard, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee is the only body
mandated by Member States to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to make
decisive judgements on the status of its implementation
on the basis of national reports. In that connection, we
favour the idea that the Committee should strengthen
its cooperation and coordination with other organs and
organizations. We believe that relevant international
financial agencies and organizations should also
provide the Committee with assistance and technical
support. We should gradually find effective ways to
cooperate.

Thirdly, we support the early establishment
within the United Nations framework of an assistance
fund to support and aid Member States so they can
fully and effectively implement resolution 1373 (2001).

Fourthly, we endorse the statement just made by
Ambassador Greenstock on behalf of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We believe that the work of the
Committee should be focused. The urgent task before it
is to complete its examination of national reports,
rather than be involved in questions beyond its
mandate.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize one point. The
international community should step up its efforts to
solve development-related questions and the causes of
regional conflicts, promote international peace and
social progress and try to reduce elements of insecurity
at their source so as to strengthen the international
fight against terrorism.

