Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the United Kingdom
presidency for organizing this important informative
meeting. We would also like to thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres for his briefing and take
this opportunity to reiterate our strongest support for
the conflict prevention agenda he is implementing.
Finally, we thank The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for their inspiring briefings.

The alarming number of armed conflicts affecting
the world, the number of victims, forcibly displaced
persons and the threats of famine due to those conflicts
are sufficient reasons for the international community to
join forces to find solutions to those situations. Bolivia,
in its commitment to respecting international law and
as a State that promotes a culture of peace, always
favours the pacific settlement of disputes, including
through negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement and resort to regional
agencies or arrangements, in accordance with Chapter
VI, Article 33, of the Charter of the United Nations.

In that regard, we appreciate and highlight the
efforts and determination of the Secretary-General
to prioritize conflict prevention as a guide for the
work of the entire United Nations system and to place
emphasis on mediation as a key tool for that purpose.
The Secretary-General's report on United Nations
activities to promote mediation is an important element
for understanding the progress made by the Secretariat,
its activities and, above all, its challenges in the task
of supporting mediation as a tool for both conflict
prevention and resolution.

Mediation must be a process that promotes
commitment and knowledge of the historical, cultural
and political specificities ofa conflict and ofthe parties
to the conflict. For such a process to be successful and
sustainable over time, the participation and political
will of the parties to the conflict is essential. The
participation of all segments of society, especially
women and young people, is also essential to the
success of any mediation process. In that regard, we
support the Secretary-General's efforts to increase
the participation of women mediators as his special or
personal envoys.

Only mediation that does not resort to the threat
or use of force or to the imposition of conditions, but
rather harmonizes the positions of the parties and seeks
common ground and mutually acceptable solutions has
a chance of success. That is why the role of mediators
must be one of total neutrality and impartiality.
Likewise, national ownership and the generation of
confidence-building measures between the parties are
elements that strengthen mediation processes.

To be effective, mediation efforts require a
stable and consistent operational, logistical, security,
administrative and financial environment. We are
convinced that the various United Nations entities can
support mediation efforts, each according to its thematic
strengths and expertise or its regional location. In that
sense, such efforts need to be coordinated in order to
avoid duplication of work.

The United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations and the international community, in
general, should focus their efforts on building and
strengthening the capacities and mediation initiatives
of Member States, including through the training of
local mediators and the establishment of networks of
mediators and local infrastructure for mediation.

Furthermore, the Security Council should
promote, within the framework of the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, cooperation
between our Organization and regional and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention and resolution
through mediation.

It is important to recall the essential role that
regional and subregional organizations play in
facilitating mediation mechanisms through their
specific approaches derived from their geographical,
cultural and historical proximity to particular local
conflict situations, as well as through the information
they can provide on them within their mandates. It is
critical to include those entities in the prevention and
resolution of such conflicts before opting for unilateral
actions by actors outside the region that, instead of
facilitating the resolution of disputes, only undermine
or adversely affect efforts to reach a peaceful solution.
In that regard, we welcome regional initiatives for
the establishment of so-called groups of friends that,
being familiar with the reality of the conflict and the
parties concerned, enable dialogue and create windows
of opportunity to prevent the escalation of conflicts
or to promote the easing of violence through their
good offices.

Finally, we encourage the Secretary-General to
continue his work on mediation and good offices, in
accordance with the Charter and the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations. His active participation in
mediation processes, as well as in the appointment of
United Nations envoys and special representatives,
should always be seen as an opportunity to bring the
parties to the negotiating table and to dialogue. In that
regard, we welcome the establishment of the High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation. We believe that space
should be representative of the Organization and should
incorporate a gender perspective.

