Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. Minister, I would like
to congratulate you and Ambassador Verbeke, as well
as the Belgian delegation, on your skilful guidance of
the Council's work during this month. Let me also
express our appreciation to Ambassador Khalilzad and
the United States delegation for a successful
presidency of the Council last month.

We welcome Belgium's initiative in organizing
this open debate on natural resources and conflict. The
presidency's paper (S/2007/334, annex) offers an
excellent analysis of the link between natural resources
and conflict. This is an issue of special significance for
developing countries, many of which have suffered
from the exploitation of their natural resources during

and after the colonial era. The exploitation of natural
resources is, at times, the cause of conflict; indeed, it is
often the very objective of war. The profits of
exploitation also fuel and sustain conflicts.

The creation of the United Nations coincided
with and contributed to the era of decolonization and
independence for many of its present Member States. It
soon became apparent to these nascent States that their
political independence would not be complete without
the exercise of full sovereignty and control over their
natural resources. Yet illegal and externally
orchestrated exploitation of natural resources in the
developing world continues in old and new forms,
especially in Africa. It has been said that Africa is rich,
but its people are poor. It is no accident, therefore, that
so many conflicts continue to afflict that great
continent.

The Security Council has expressed its concern
about this issue in the past. The report of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - Kassem report
(S/2003/1027) - presented an excellent analysis of the
continuing exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security
Council's presidential statement of 19 November 2003
(S/PRST/2003/21) condemned that exploitation. In
varying degrees, the analysis of the Kassem report
could be applied to past and current events in several
other resource-rich African and other developing
countries. More specific initiatives have been
undertaken - significantly outside the United Nations -
including the Kimberley Process and the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises. Absence of
specific United Nations action signals perhaps the
difficulty encountered in the past in reaching
agreement on meaningful measures within the Security
Council and other United Nations bodies.

This reluctance was manifest in November 2003,
when the Pakistan delegation in the Security Council
circulated a draft resolution on the illegal exploitation
of natural resources and arms trafficking in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The eventual
decisions of the Council did not act on some central
recommendations of the Kassem Panel, which was
discontinued. The current debate in the Council offers
an opportunity to initiate a broader and more
comprehensive approach to the issue, covering the
whole range of conflicts and the different actions
required at three stages - before, during and after a

conflict. While the Security Council should undertake
action within its competence and relating to the issues
on its agenda, comprehensive action by the other
competent organs - the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission - will also be needed.

The Pakistan delegation would strongly
recommend that the Security Council establish a new
task force of experts to study the exploitation of natural
resources in the context of the numerous conflict
situations on its agenda, especially the complex crises
in Africa. The Security Council's approach of utilizing
sanctions to control arms trafficking and natural
resource exploitation has proved, unfortunately, to be
too narrow and, at times, inappropriate in responding
to various situations. More extensive measures,
including border controls and wider monitoring, are
required. Peacekeeping forces could be provided with
the mandate and capacity for the monitoring and
interdiction of illegal exploitation, transportation and
trade in natural resources.

However, it is vital to address not only the supply
but also the demand for natural resources. It is the
demand for resources, mostly from the advanced
countries, and the financing provided for exploitation
and marketing of natural resources which make
possible the vicious circle of commerce and conflict.

The Security Council or, if this is not possible,
the General Assembly could adopt certain norms and
recommendations for national laws and regulations that
would help to prevent the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and its contribution to conflicts. The Pakistan
delegation would suggest the following, among other
elements: an undertaking by all States to prevent the
financing, directly or indirectly, of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources; the adoption by
States of national laws that would criminalize the
wilful provision or collection, by any means, directly
or indirectly, of funds by their nationals, or in their
territories, for the illegal exploitation of natural
resources; action by States to freeze funds and other
financial assets or economic resources of persons or
entities which are identified as having participated in
the illegal exploitation of such resources; the
establishment and maintenance of lists by the United
Nations of individuals, entities and enterprises
designated as being associated with the illegal
exploitation of natural resources; and an undertaking
by Governments to take effective action against all
those individuals, groups, entities and enterprises
involved in the illegal exploitation of natural resources.

Beyond action by the Security Council, the
United Nations and the international community can
contribute to ending illegal exploitation by promoting
national processing of natural resources and national
control over the various stages of the value-addition
and commercial process. For example, it is worth
examining to what extent the diamond trade in Sierra
Leone brings benefits to the Government and the
people of the country. Their share of the proceeds from
diamond exploitation and trade should be just and
equitable. Specific mechanisms should be developed
for each specific natural resource, or group of
resources - gold, diamonds, minerals, forests and
oil - to enhance the national share in the legitimate
exploitation and trade of such resources.

The Peacebuilding Commission can play a vital
role in capacity-building in the post-conflict situations
that are referred to it. The Economic and Social
Council and the General Assembly should promote
similar measures to prevent the outbreak of conflicts
by maximizing the benefits of natural resource
exploitation for the countries that own them.

It is natural that the Security Council should be
focused on the conflict situations in Africa. Yet the
international community will, very soon, need to focus
on the equitable exploitation and use of two other vital
resources: oil and water.

Energy resources already are part of the strategic
calculations of the major Powers, almost all of whom
are major importers of fossil fuels. Oil in particular has
been the object and the cause of major conflicts.
Energy security is most desirable, not the least for
developing countries. The United Nations needs to play
a more active role to advance this objective in ways
that are equitable for all consumers and producers. But
energy security should not emerge as a new casus belli
for the use of force or external aggression or
intervention.

Similarly, in a world with an expanding
population, spreading deserts and melting glaciers,
access to water - which is often shared - is likely to
emerge as an existential issue for many nations and
peoples. It could become the cause of a host of
disputes and conflicts. It is time for the international

community to construct an international regime that
ensures equitable access to and availability of water for
all peoples and all States.

