The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
March, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Wang Guangya, Permanent Representative of China to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of February 2004. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Wang
Guangya for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Letter dated 19 February 2004 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2004/ 126)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Ireland, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to the Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Lord Paddy Ashdown,
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Lord Ashdown to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/ 126, containing a letter dated 19
February 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
twenty-fifth report of the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Secretary-General.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Lord Paddy Ashdown, High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I now give the floor to Lord Ashdown.


