Ms. Agladze (Georgia) Let me express our gratitude
to the French presidency for convening today's open
debate on children and and armed conflict.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. Let me add a few
remarks in my national capacity.

Protecting children in armed conflict is our common
responsibility, yet children continue to be abducted in
situations ofarmed conflict and recruited as combatants.
They fall victim to acts of violence, murder, maiming
and arbitrary detention across the globe. Despite the
broad understanding of the nature of the problem, we
have yet to see more tangible progress on the ground. As
stated in the Secretary-General's report on children and
armed conflicts (S/2017/821), there were at least 4,000
verified violations against children by Government
forces and more than 11,500 verified violations by the
range of non-State armed groups in 2016. Asymmetric
attacks have had a particularly severe impact on
children in areas controlled by non-State armed actors
and terrorist groups.

Among the troubling trends presented in the report
are the abhorrent use of war tactics by a number of
parties to conflicts, including the denial of humanitarian
access to children. We have all witnessed children
trapped in besieged areas or deprived of access to food,
water and medical assistance, including vaccines. In
2016, more than 750 attacks on schools and hospitals
were verified by the Organization. With more than
245 million children estimated to be living in conflict
zones, the issue of children missing out on education
owing to the effects of conflict is particularly alarming.

At the same time, there has been tangible progress
in protecting children through the United Nations
Children, Not Soldiers campaign. With the assistance of
UNICEF and other United Nations partners, thousands
of children have been released from captivity and
reintegrated in their communities. Effective tools have
been developed and important initiatives generated
through the mandate of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, providing a strong framework for addressing
grave violations against children all over the world.

As we commemorate the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Paris Commitments, we reiterate our
pledge to put an end to and prevent the recruitment
of children into armed forces, to implement sanctions
against people having unlawfully recruited children,
to reintegrate child soldiers into their communities and
to make every effort to have the Paris Commitments
observed and applied through political, humanitarian
and technical assistance of Member States. It is vital that
all parties to a conflict unconditionally and immediately
release children incorporated in armed forces.

We, the States Members of the United Nations,
together with humanitarian and development partners,
need to take concrete steps to alleviate the consequences
of armed hostilities on younger generations. Georgia
has given priority to the protection of the rights of
children in all aspects of life by ratifying the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child as well
as its Optional Protocols. Our Government spares no
effort in assisting children affected by conflict and
forced displacement from both the Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, and in guaranteeing
adequate living conditions for them through extending
welfare programmes and the implementation of
relevant strategies.

We are extremely concerned that the fundamental
human rights of children continue to be violated on
a daily basis in both occupied regions of Georgia.
Since 2015, the Georgian language has been banned
as a language of instruction in the early grades
at the remaining Georgian schools in the Gali
district, gradually resulting in the total restriction of
native-language instruction in the Abkhazia region. In
the academic years from 2015 to 2017, approximately
4,000 pupils were deprived of their right to get an
education in their native Georgian language. A similar
process was initiated in Tskhinvali region. Since
September 2017, native-language instruction has been
banned in Georgian schools of Akhalgori, Znauri and
Sinaguri, as part of Russia's far-reaching strategy aimed
at erasing Georgian identity in the occupied regions.

Against this backdrop, while reaffirming our
commitment to the protection of the fundamental rights
of the child, we call on the international community to
increase its efforts aimed at protecting children's rights
in the occupied regions of Georgia and other conflict-
affected areas of the world.
