Ms. Koning AbuZayd: At the outset, I should
like to thank members for their kind invitation to
address them today on the humanitarian situation in
Gaza. I am honoured to be the first Commissioner-
General of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) to have been given that privilege. I also
want to express my appreciation for the amount of
attention that the Council has devoted to the Gaza
conflict and its aftermath. The strong expressions of
support heard from many members for the work of the
United Nations on the ground have been very
gratifying to all of us there.

I come to the Council from UNRWA headquarters
in Gaza, where I spent the first week of the recent war
and the first week after the ceasefire. I bring with me
perspectives from our 60-year-old humanitarian and
human development agency, whose mandate is to assist
and protect a population of 4.6 million Palestine
refugees in Jordan, Syria, Lebanon and the occupied
Palestinian territory. I come to share with members
what UNRWA and the refugees whom we serve are
thinking and feeling at this time of distress. I hope I
09-22116
can convey compellingly our - and their - messages
to the Council this afternoon.

In my tours around Gaza since the ceasefire of
18 January, I have been deeply saddened to see what
appears to have been systematic destruction to schools,
universities, residential buildings, factories, shops and
farms. I have observed the atmosphere of shock and
sorrow among the people of Gaza. Every Gazan
projects a sense of having stared death in the face.

Every Gazan has a tale of profound grief to tell.
There is rage against the attackers for often failing to
distinguish between military targets and civilians, and
there is also resentment against the international
community for having allowed first the siege and then
the war to go on for so long.

Yet, my interaction with Palestinians in Gaza has
also evinced their fortitude, their determination to
overcome the pain of loss and their belief in the
possibilities of rebuilding their lives. I hope that the
international community will respond with urgency and
resolve to take advantage of the opportunities to
generate recovery and renewal in Gaza.

To seize those opportunities, political action is
needed to create the conditions that will allow
humanitarian and human development activities to
have maximum impact on Palestinian lives. The
priority for early recovery is to attend to basic human
needs and basic rights such as education, health care
and the right to work. In the simplest terms, the way
forward is to help restore normal life to Gaza.

UNRWA's early-recovery activities are already
under way. Two hundred thousand refugee children
were assisted to return to school last Saturday, while
the 50,000 displaced Palestinians who took refuge in
UNRWA classrooms are being helped to rebuild their
lives at home or in alternative accommodations. We
have prepared a quick-response plan whose main
components include restoring and strengthening
primary education and primary health care;
establishing emergency food aid, cash assistance and
job creation programmes; repairing civilian homes and
UNRWA facilities; supporting community-based
organizations; providing environmental health services
in alliance with municipal authorities; and offering
psycho-social support to the most traumatized Gazans,
including children in UNRWA schools. Surveys have
shown that the majority of Gazans suffer from shock
and are clinically depressed.
All of this work is made possible by the
extraordinarily generous donor response to our flash
appeal, including substantial pledges from the Arab
world. Given UNRWA's recurrent financial shortfalls,
particularly in its General Fund, those strong levels of
support are most appreciated.

Beyond UNRWA's focus on refugees, a
coordinated inter-agency response is central to the
success of the recovery process. This will harness the
varied capabilities of the United Nations system,
working in partnership with the Palestinian Authority,
the World Bank and donor countries. UNRWA's own
approach to recovery and reconstruction is incremental,
service-driven and designed to build on the substantial
human development investments that the international
community has made in Gaza over the years. We
consider that approach the most effective route to
making normal life possible for Palestinians in Gaza.
The surest path to calm and stability is the creation of
social and economic conditions in which Palestinians
can sustain themselves and their families in dignity.

There are challenges, however, that go well
beyond the humanitarian realm; they lie in the province
of political action. For that reason, it is on the Security
Council and its members that part of the burden of
restoring normalcy to Gaza rests. That burden is a
heavy one, but it is far from insurmountable if we act
in concert in the following well-known areas.

First, law and order needs to be re-established in
Gaza. That will permit the identification of reliable
local interlocutors to ensure security for humanitarian
personnel and operations and an environment that
safeguards the protection of civilians.

Secondly, all of Gaza's borders - including
those at Karni, Sofa, Nahal Oz, Kerem Shalom, Erez
and Rafah - must be opened and kept open

continuously to allow two-way freedom of movement
for people, goods and cash.

Thirdly, negotiations to end the occupation and
peacefully resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are
now more vital than ever - negotiations that are
inclusive and balanced, allow for refugee
representation and address, along with other final
status matters, the question of Palestine refugees in a
manner consistent with their rights.

Fourthly, moves to investigate apparent
contraventions of international law, including direct
attacks on United Nations personnel and facilities ~
such as UNRWA's own headquarters, five of its schools
and the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process - and
accountability under law where breaches are
established, must be pursued.

And finally, none of these is achievable without
reconciliation among Palestinians and restoration of
the integrity of the occupied Palestinian territory.

From UNRWA's operational vantage point,
addressing these issues is fundamental to the success of
early recovery and human development work.
Recovery requires the free flow of humanitarian and
commercial supplies. Reconstruction demands open
borders that permit the importation of construction
materials and the export of products and goods from
Gaza. Job creation programmes will be fruitless
without a self-sustaining employment market. And our
plans to strengthen primary education will be
undermined if we fail to offer the children of Gaza a
horizon of hope for a future free from fear, free from
poverty and full of promise.

Throughout these days of violence, the
humanitarian work of the United Nations persevered,
illustrating in concrete and often heroic ways
commitment to the principles of humanity on which the
United Nations Charter is based. UNRWA staff ran the
gauntlet of shelling, aerial bombardments and small-
arms fire to attend to the injured and to deliver food
and fuel to hospitals, municipalities and the people of
Gaza. It is a matter of deep regret that four UNRWA
staff - two of them while on duty - lost their lives in
this conflict. The United Nations can be proud, as I am
proud, that during the conflict, courage and dedication
to service - hallmarks of UNRWA staff performance
for six decades - were very much in evidence.

As to the broader implications of the recent
experience in Gaza, it is worth recalling that for more
than 60 years the Security Council has wrestled with
the issues of Palestinians and Palestine refugees as
classic questions of international peace and security.
What we witnessed in Gaza scared the global
conscience with harrowing images of broken bodies
and shattered homes, of thousands of Palestinian and
tens of Israeli civilians - men, women and children -
wounded, dying and fleeing from indiscriminate
violence. The guns have fallen silent, but the images
linger, reminding us of the futility of seeking military
solutions to political problems and the perils of
political inaction.
Those images and the human suffering they
represent are a result of our failure to protect those
who have no part and no stake in armed conflict. And I
am afraid that this war will be remembered for the
absence of restraint among the combatants and for the
disregard for principles of humanity and the sanctity of
human life.

Equally disturbing is that, besides the devastating
impact on civilian lives and infrastructure, the conflict
has placed in further jeopardy the authority of
international law in the Middle East. It has raised hard
questions about the ability of the community of States
to be effective in its role as the custodian of
international legality in this particular regional context.

Finally, there are the ultimate challenges
highlighted by this conflict, namely, the need to tackle
the long-unfinished business of ensuring a just and
lasting solution to the plight of Palestine refugees and
to redouble efforts to establish a viable Palestinian
State, living in peace and security with Israel.

We in UNRWA will persist in our devotion to the
service of Palestine refugees. We will continue to
discharge our mandate in a manner that promotes the
inherent dignity and worth of the Palestinians we serve.

Yet that dignity and worth are not ours alone to
promote. Palestinians and Palestine refugees are
assured of UNRWA's help, but their greater need is to
have the demonstrated support of the international
community, as represented by the Security Council. In
the months to come, as we build on the fragile
ceasefire achieved following the passage of resolution
1860 (2009), continued engagement by the Security
Council will be of utmost importance.

UNRWA appeals to the Council as the body that
sits at the pinnacle of multilateral power, to exercise its
authority in ways that transform into reality the shared
dream of both Israelis and Palestinians for a secure,
peaceful and prosperous tomorrow.

