Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to convey to you, Sir, my delegation's
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and to assure you of our full
support. Allow me likewise to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Lavrov, and his team for their outstanding
work during the Russian presidency.

Allow me also to thank Mr. Michael Steiner for
his statement and to pay him a well-deserved tribute
for the results he achieved at the head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).

In the light of the report before us, my delegation
notes with satisfaction the progress that has been
achieved in the functioning of democratic institutions,
particularly in the context of the transfer of
responsibilities from UNMIK to the Provisional
Institutions, the creation of the Transfer Council and
the work done by the Assembly of Kosovo.

We welcome the cooperation among the
Provisional Institutions, on the one hand, and between
the Provisional Institutions and UNMIK, on the other.
We urge them to contribute further to reconciliation by
avoiding any action likely to deepen divisions. We
encourage the Council of Europe in its development of
the plan for local self-government reform and appeal to
the Kosovo authorities to implement the Community
Proportional Representation plan.

While taking note of the efforts under way to
establish the rule of law, of which the falling crime rate
is an example, we believe that the enhancement of
security and justice capacities must continue. In this
respect, we welcome the building of working
relationships between the UNMIK Police and its
Serbian counterparts pursuant to the Protocol on Police
Cooperation signed on 31 May 2002. We also welcome
the cooperation with the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Albania in the fight against terrorism
and extremism.

With regard to freedom of movement, my
delegation appreciates the initiatives already
undertaken and wishes to underscore the need to foster
a psychology of mutual acceptance among the various
communities. My delegation notes with satisfaction the
ever-growing returns of minorities - the number of
which, at this point in the year, is higher than the total
registered in 2002 - and we remain convinced of the
importance of expanding and coordinating this process.
The appeal made yesterday by the non-Serb Kosovo
leaders, as indicated earlier by Mr. Steiner, is a source
of hope. To that end, the greater involvement of key
leaders with a view to consolidating this trend is
essential.

Moreover, we are pleased to note the adoption of
encouraging economic measures, which, however, must
be pursued taking into account the interests of all
Kosovars and the goal of stabilizing the region.

With regard to property rights, we are of the view
that vigorous action must be taken to put an end to
illegal occupations.

My delegation has always urged the
establishment of direct dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina and welcomes the opening of contacts at the
operational level. We hope that the establishment of the
United Nations Office in Belgrade will contribute to
promoting that dialogue at the highest level.

With regard to the grave suspicions weighing
upon certain members of the Kosovo Protection Corps
said to be involved in terrorist, illegal and criminal
activities, my delegation looks forward with interest to
the results of the current investigations. Moreover, we
support the process of integrating minorities into the
Corps.

The downsizing strategy being considered by
UNMIK also deserves our attention.

In conclusion, my delegation, while supporting
the Secretary-General's observations, wishes to stress
that the building of a better Kosovo, while relying on
the support of the international community, ultimately
depends on the determination and commitment of the
Kosovars themselves.

