Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Like my colleagues
before me, I would like to thank Ambassador Kairat
Umarov warmly for his thorough briefing today and
congratulate him on his assumption of the chairship of
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea.
I do not need to elaborate here on why that Committee
has so much importance for my country.

Today's briefing is taking place at a critical time for
the stability of the whole of North Africa. The regional
scenario is making progress, while Somalia and Eritrea
remain key actors in its balance. The Security Council
is called on to help realize its potential by promoting
the factors that can lead to peace and stability in the
region. On the fifteenth anniversary of the Eritrea-
Ethiopia Boundary Commission's decision on the
border delimitation between the two countries, we
would like to note today's declaration by the European
Union on the subject.

Starting with their very first statements, President
Farmajo and Prime Minister Khaire have established
Somalia's political priorities, all of which are relevant to
the sanctions regime: national reconciliation; fighting
Al-Shabaab; strengthening the capacity of the country's
security forces, including the police; implementing
a national plan for security strategies for preventing
violent extremism; improving the management of arms
and ammunition; and combating corruption.

Somalia is at a decisive crossroads on its path to
reconstruction. Italy supports its legitimate aspiration
to guide that reconstruction and shore up its ownership
of the process, which is the cornerstone of the principle
of sustaining peace endorsed by the Council last year.
The Secretary-General's review of the future presence
of the United Nations in the country, the joint United
Nations and African Union review of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the upcoming
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia represent an important opportunity
for the Council to consolidate its path in the region.

When we look at the chief concerns of the Federal
Government of Somalia about the current sanctions
regime, we realize that they are largely triggered
by external factors - the threat of Al-Shabaab and
the related obstacles to humanitarian access in order
to fight drought and famine; the presence of Da'esh;
the alleged violations of the arms embargo by third
States; and the alleged illegal exploitation of Somalia's
fisheries and charcoal resources. On the other hand, the
Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group has recognized
that the Federal Government of Somalia has cooperated
fully in the implementation of the sanctions regime
and that the Somali regional authorities are improving
their cooperation with the Monitoring Group and
AMISOM, as was apparent in the case of the interim
Juba administration in January. The Security Council
can now combine Mogadishu's effort to beef up reliable
security forces with benchmarks as the sanctions
burden is gradually lifted. Any further progress by the
Somali leadership in controlling and managing arms
and ammunition should be taken into account in relation
to any possible reconfiguration of the sanctions regime.

Turning to Eritrea, our position is equally clear. The
Security Council will be making a holistic assessment
based on the Monitoring Group's recent reports and
progress updates, as required by the relevant Council
resolutions. Over the past three years, the Monitoring
Group has said that it has not found any evidence of
Eritrea's support to Al-Shabaab. At the same time,
however, the information alleging that Eritrea has
supported other armed groups in the region is cause for
concern. In the dispute about prisoners of war between
Eritrea and Djibouti, mediated by Qatar, we saw
conflicting claims about the fate ofmissing combatants.
It is our hope that the Monitoring Group will be able to
help to clarify their effective status so that the Council
can reach well-grounded conclusions.

Lastly, pending the report on recommendations for
a possible review of the sanctions regime on Eritrea,
we expect the Monitoring Group's observations to be
fair, impartial and evidence-based. To that end, we
encourage Eritrea to cooperate with the Monitoring
Group in order to help the Security Council make an
unbiased decision on a basis of established facts.

