Mr. Guehenno: As Council members are aware,
the most serious crisis between Israel and Lebanon
since the withdrawal of the Israeli forces from south
Lebanon in 2000 has broken out, with rising numbers
of casualties on both sides.

The crisis started on 12 July, when, at about
9 o'clock local time, Hizbollah launched several
rockets from Lebanese territory across the Blue Line
towards Israel Defense Forces (IDF) positions near the
coast and in the area of the Israeli town of Zarit.
Shortly afterwards, Hizbollah fighters crossed the Blue
Line into Israel and attacked an IDF patrol. Hizbollah
captured two IDF soldiers, killed three others and
wounded two more. The captured soldiers were taken
into Lebanon.

Subsequent to the attack on the patrol, a heavy
exchange of fire ensued across the Blue Line between
Hizbollah and the IDF. While the exchange of fire
stretched over the entire length of the Line, it was
heaviest in the areas west of Bint Jubeil and in the
Sheba'a farms area. Hizbollah targeted IDF positions
and Israeli towns south of the Blue Line. Israel
retaliated with ground, air and sea attacks. In addition
to air strikes on Hizbollah positions, the IDF also
targeted numerous roads and bridges in southern
Lebanon. The IDF has stated that those attacks were to
"prevent Hizbollah from transferring the abducted
soldiers".

At least one IDF tank and an IDF platoon crossed
into Lebanon in the area of the Hizbollah attack in an
06-42993
attempt to rescue the captured soldiers. An explosive
device detonated under the tank, killing four more IDF
soldiers. An eighth IDF soldier was reportedly killed in
the fighting that ensued during an attempt to retrieve
the four bodies. It appears that the incursion was
localized; the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) has no reports at this point of additional IDF
incursions into Lebanese territory.

In the afternoon of 12 July local time, the
Government of Lebanon requested UNIFIL to broker a
ceasefire. Israel responded that a ceasefire would be
contingent upon the return of the captured soldiers.

The Secretary-General has condemned
Hizbollah's attack, which resulted in the capture of two
IDF soldiers, and has called for the soldiers' immediate
and unconditional release. He has called on all parties
to exercise maximum restraint and to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law.

In the morning of 13 July, Hizbollah launched
numerous rocket attacks on Nahariya, 10 kilometres
south of the Blue Line, reportedly killing one Israeli
civilian and wounding scores more. Later in the day,
two rockets struck the city of Haifa causing some
damage to buildings and injuries to several persons.
The IDF responded with the bombing of Hizbollah
positions, attacks on the Beirut international airport,
the Hizbollah-affiliated Al-Manar television station and
two air bases. The attacks have forced the closure of
the Beirut airport. It has further been reported that, late
on Thursday, Israel attacked the Beirut airport for a
second time, setting the fuel depots on fire, as well a
southern suburb of Beirut. Israeli planes also dropped
leaflets across Lebanon warning the population to
avoid areas known for Hizbollah's presence.

Intermittent exchanges of fire from both sides
continue along the Blue Line. The number of those
killed and wounded on both sides is disturbingly high,
although it cannot be reliably confirmed at this time.
Based on available information, eight IDF soldiers
have been killed and several wounded and two Israeli
civilians have been killed and dozens more wounded.
One Lebanese army soldier has been reported killed in
the attack on an air base, in addition to the more than
50 civilians who have been reported killed and scores
more wounded.

The Personal Representative of the Secretary-
General for Lebanon, Mr. Pedersen, has expressed his
alarm at Israel's heavy attacks and the escalation that

has taken place across the Blue Line. He has also
voiced deepest concern that the Israeli military is
enforcing an air and sea blockade, which will increase
the hardship of the civilian population in Lebanon.

UNIFIL has reported several instances of firing
close to its positions, including an ammunitions depot
near Naqoura, by the IDF. The mission also reported
one instance of Hizbollah firing close from one of
UNIFIL's positions towards Israel. No United Nations
personnel have been injured and no equipment has
been damaged.

Since the beginning of hostilities on 12 July,
UNIFIL military personnel have remained confined to
their positions, and during the heaviest exchanges of
fire they have had to take shelter in bunkers. On
12 July, the IDF warned UNIFIL that any person -
including United Nations personnel - moving close to
the Blue Line would be shot at. Due to the continued
firing, UNIFIL has not been able to carry out its
regular vehicle and helicopter patrols along the Blue
Line. UNIFIL's ability to monitor developments in the
area of operation, and especially along the Blue Line,
has consequently been very limited. Today, UNIFIL
has tried to carry out one patrol in the rear of its area of
operation, away from the Blue Line, between
Marjayoun and Naqoura, but has not been able to
complete the patrol so far. It is the Mission's intention
to increase patrolling as and where possible.

UNIFIL is in contact with the parties, urging
them to exercise restraint. In order to strengthen its
efforts to restore calm and to provide basic
humanitarian and medical assistance to the civilian
population, it is important that UNIFIL be able to
resume full operations in the area of operations without
danger to its personnel. Some Lebanese civilians,
displaced from their homes in the south, have tried to
move north and cross the Litani, but have been stopped
from doing so by the destruction of the bridges. Some
Lebanese civilians are approaching UNIFIL with
requests for shelter and other assistance.

