Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important
debate and for the clarity ofpurpose in the concept note
(S/2016/306, annex). I thank the Secretary-General for
sharing with us the growing concerns on the increasing
terrorist acts in may trouble spots and the capacity of
terrorism to lurk unsuspectedly in many parts of the
world. We look forward to the upcoming review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
our discussions today are useful in articulating our
common concern on why we need to act together to face
this scourge of humankind.

We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Since 1972, the United Nations has invested many
resources in and devoted much attention to addressing
the challenges to international peace and security posed
by terrorism and the perpetrators of terrorist acts. We
have witnessed the many faces ofinternational terrorism
and their perverted cost. Our response over the years,
whether by the Council, the General Assembly or other
organs has resulted in a solid and meaningful corpus of
international law, norms and standards. Those include
the many legal and other instruments ranging from
declarations, conventions, resolutions, strategies and
plans of action, not to mention the establishment of and
ongoing work undertaken by institutions and structures,
such as the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive

Directorate, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre and the Committees established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and
the Taliban and associated individuals and entities,
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
and resolution 1540 (2004), among others.

The efforts at the international level are increasingly
mirrored at the regional level. Particularly in South-
East Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
saw the necessity for the region to act collectively as
one and has in place its own convention on counter-
terrorism, which is an integral part of the region's
legal and normative framework. Despite all the focus
and attention that we have given and the positive
momentum we have created to provide the framework
for international and regional cooperation, terrorist
attacks and instances of violent extremism have
unfortunately risen in recent years. It is increasingly
disturbing that many recent attacks indicate evidence
of a greater degree of sophistication, complexity and
coordination in the planning and execution of attacks,
but also with regard to recruitment and radicalization
activities by the terrorists. Terror has become a
horrifying enterprise.

We do not need to be reminded of the horrifying
barbarity perpetuated by known terrorists, such as
Al-Qaida, Da'esh and Boko Haram and their affiliates
and supporters in parts of Africa, the Middle East,
Europe and even in South-East Asia. We saw their
capacity for destruction of our common heritage.
We saw their abuse of human dignity and rights. We
saw their heretical belief and apocalyptic visions and
we have seen enough. Our focus on combating and
eradicating this menace must be on our collective
resolve to share responsibility and join coordinated
efforts at all levels. We must deconstruct their narrative
and we must not help them to provide air time for terror.
Our response must be robust. It must be targeted and we
must not be lured onto their ideological turf or provide
reasons for them to win more recruits. Our response
must be premised on the full respect of international
law, including human rights and international human
rights law. We must also deny them the sources through
which they fund their activities.

Although it is not my intention to delve into a
theological debate, it is unfortunate for the majority
of Muslims that we are unjustly and wrongly
misrepresented by these heretics who claim that their
actions are sanctioned by Islam, a faith of peace and
compassion, which ironically they purport to profess.
It is gratifying to note that the world is not persuaded
by their outrageous misrepresentations of the faith that
many peaceloving Muslims profess. It is therefore of
utmost importance that peace-loving Muslims and
moderates from the Muslim world begin to work in
earnest to provide the right narrative to the vulnerable
and disenchanted youth and address the root causes
in order to stem terror groups recruitment drives for
both local and foreign terrorist fighters. The path to
salvation is through righteous deeds and not through
harnessing miseries and self-annihilation.

Malaysia's fight on terror began during its
formative years as a nation. In the early pages of its
modern history, Malaysia had some experience to share
particularly encountering the political or ideological
aspects of terrorism. From 1947 to 1989 during the
insurgency, Malaysia was embroiled in an ideologically
driven conflict perpetuated by unspeakably brutal
terrorists seeking to impose their unacceptable
political construct on the peaceloving multi-ethnic and
multiracial Malaysians. Against that threat, Malaysians
of all races and creeds had to learn hard lessons in
resilience and unity in order to triumph over terror.
In the early years of the conflict, the Government was
especially mindful and sensitive to the needs of the
populations, who, through no fault of their own, were
caught in the middle of an essentially political conflict
characterized by violent extremism, not unlike what we
are seeing in parts of the Middle East and Africa today.

In Malaysia's experience, peace was ultimately won
through the Government's approach of seizing the moral
high ground from the terrorists primarily by providing
safety and security and opportunity for socioeconomic
development. Additionally no effort or resources,
including through international assistance, were
spared in supporting the Government's commitment
to ensure a better future for all nations and a common
space for all under the Malaysian sun. Moreover, any
claim to legitimacy or popular support by the terrorists
was ultimately denied due to their own brutality and
despicable actions.

I am justifiably proud that Malaysia stands out as
an example where the strategy of winning hearts and
minds was scrupulously pursued and successfully
implemented. Clearly, in order to provide an effective
response and enjoy wide support and legitimacy among
those we seek to protect, utmost care must be taken so
as not to play into the terrorists hands. That will require
political wisdom and dexterity.

In conclusion, Malaysia remains committed in
its final fight against global terror and international
terrorism and will continue to play a constructive role
in preventing terrorist groups from becoming a menace
to society. We shall spare no efforts in this collective
endeavour to challenge, expose and unmask terrorists
for the vile criminals and violent extremists that they
are. God willing, together we shall prevail.

