The President: I should like to take this
opportunity, on behalf of the Security Council, to
pay tribute to His Excellency Mr. Vassily Nebenzia,
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Council for the month of June. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Nebenzia and his team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Children and armed conflict

Protecting children today prevents
conflicts tomorrow

Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2018/465)

Letter dated 21 June 2018 from the Charge
d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Sweden to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/625)

The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other representatives present in the
Security Council Chamber. Their presence underscores
the importance of the subject matter we will discuss
today. Before each member is a list of speakers who
have requested to take the floor in accordance with
rules 37 and 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure and the previous practice of the Council
in this regard. We propose that they be invited to
participate in today's meeting.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in today's meeting: Ms. Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Henrietta
Fore, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund; and Ms. Yenny Londofio, civil society
representative.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/465, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/625, which contains a letter dated
21 June 2018 from the Charge' d'affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Sweden to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2018/667, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by 95 Member States. The full list
of sponsors of the draft resolution will be reflected in
the official record of today's meeting.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, C6te
d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America


The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2427 (2018).

I now give the floor to Ms. Gamba.


