I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Germany's assumption of the presidency of the Council and to wish you every success in presiding over the Council's work for this month, against the backdrop of the security and health crises and challenges ravaging our world today. The Security Council is meeting today, for the first time in its history, not to discuss an issue, conflict or clash that poses a threat to international peace and security, but instead to discuss one of the most important health challenges facing our world today, namely, the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The pandemic has ravaged our world, claiming hundreds of thousands of lives in under seven months, and more than 10 million people around world have been infected by the virus. The pandemic has also endangered global health security and inflicted grave harm on national economies. With all aspects of life grinding to a halt as a result, people the world over have been forced into isolation and painful loneliness for fear of contracting this pernicious foe, which does not distinguish between men and women or between the elderly and infants. Therefore, allow me to extend my condolences and sympathy to human beings worldwide, to all people everywhere who have lost loved ones. I wish healing to all those afflicted, whose suffering is being alleviated by health-care workers, the heroes of our struggle with this epidemic. I also wish to express our deep appreciation and full support for those on the front lines for their great and singularly courageous efforts in combating the COVID-19 pandemic, with which people of all sects, religions and ethnicities are contending. Despite technological advances and global innovation that have yielded cutting-edge destructive weapons, the pandemic has shown us how fragile the world order is as it confronts a virus that cannot be seen with the naked eye. It is an ominous alarm that reminds us of the importance of cooperation and solidarity in overcoming our differences and narrow interests. We must promote a transparent, strong, coordinated, broad and knowledge-based global response in a spirit of solidarity. From the very start of the pandemic, Saudi Arabia appreciated the grave danger it posed and took all precautionary and preventive measures necessary to counter the spread of the disease in order to protect its citizens and residents from it. Saudi Arabia, the current president of the Group of 20, is a firm believer in the importance of collective global action and is keenly aware of the need for an international response and international cooperation to address the pandemic. Thanks to the Kingdom's efforts at the international level, the Group of 20, chaired by King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, held an extraordinary virtual summit on 26 March, at which participating States and organizations were called upon to make every effort possible to address the pandemic; the Group of 20 has taken unprecedented measures and decisions in support of the global economy, including an infusion of $7 trillion into the global economy; international cooperation has been strengthened as a result of the Kingdom's work with international organizations, namely, the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank Group and multilateral and regional development banks; and a donation in the amount of $10 million was made by the Kingdom to the WHO fund in order to help countries with fragile health-care systems. My country also supported the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire amid the novel coronavirus disease epidemic. On 26 April, the Kingdom announced that it would contribute $500 million to support international efforts to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, specifically allocating $150 million to the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, $150 million to Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, and $200 million to support WHO in its global fight against the epidemic. At the regional level, my country has made great efforts to support and assist fraternal and friendly countries in fighting the spread of the epidemic, providing WHO with $25 million in support of its efforts to combat the COVID-19 pandemic in Yemen. Saudi Arabia has also provided $4 million in in-kind support to the State of Palestine and $3 million in financial support to Somalia and is preparing to extend support to many other countries. At a time when our world is witnessing an unprecedented challenge that knows no international borders, and in view of the danger that challenge poses to societies and peoples, especially those that are under the yoke of occupation and settlement-building, the occupying Israeli authorities continue to pursue their settlement-building policy in the occupied Palestinian territory. They do so with total disdain for all international covenants, the four Geneva Conventions and the relevant internationally recognized resolutions, compounding the oppression of the Palestinian people as it strives to exercise its legitimate rights. Saudi Arabia condemns all Israeli attempts to annex more occupied Palestinian territories in the West Bank and the Jordan Valley. Those attempts by the occupying authorities constitute a serious violation of international law and relevant Security Council resolutions and would eliminate all chances of a lasting and comprehensive peace. Finally, the Council meets today because the world has now grasped the limits of individual efforts to contain a pandemic of this magnitude, which poses a threat no less formidable than the security challenges that imperil international peace and security. We therefore stress the need to intensify multilateral efforts to address epidemics and diseases, as well as to take urgent steps to support global efforts to combat pandemics and ensure that their social, humanitarian and economic repercussions are addressed. Only by showing solidarity and cooperating will we be able to overcome this health crisis, enable our homelands to flourish and achieve prosperity and well-being for our peoples. We are certain that we will be able to overcome this crisis and come back stronger than before.
