I thank Indonesia for taking the initiative to convene today's very timely meeting. I also thank the briefers for their briefings. The recent adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, facilitated by Tunisia and France, was a crucial step forward. It highlighted our collective responsibility and unity in the face of this unprecedented crisis. The Security Council sent a clear signal in support of the Secretary-General's appeal and renewed demand for multilateral collective action. The call of the Secretary-General for a leap forward in multilateralism and international solidarity has shown the way. Seventy-five years after the adoption of the Charter of the United Nations, there is an urgent need to revive the spirit of San Francisco. We must now move from words to deeds. Accordingly, together with Tunisia, France calls for the collective, integrated and coordinated implementation of resolution 2532 (2020), which is the responsibility of not only of the members of the Security Council, but also of the United Nations as a whole, particularly in terms of their commitment to conflict prevention, mediation and humanitarian activities. The Peacebuilding Commission also has an important role to play in this, and the Peacebuilding Fund is a tool that has proved its relevance and its effectiveness. We fully support that. Furthermore, I would like to refer to our responsibility with regard to fragile and crisis-stricken countries. Whether in conflict or post-conflict situations, those countries are particularly at risk in the context of the pandemic. COVID-19 and the measures taken to contain it may have fuelled tensions, hate speech and even violence. They have generated false rumours, anxiety-provoking stories and misinformation, and some have been tempted to take advantage of the pandemic to restrict civil liberties. The pandemic has also undermined confidence in institutions and the economic resilience of the most vulnerable. It is incumbent upon us to think collectively about how to address these threats. A key element of stability in these countries is the resilience of their health systems. In that regard, we must support the efforts undertaken by the United Nations and the World Health Organization (WHO). The WHO must be strengthened in its normative, warning and coordination roles. That does not exclude, when the time comes, drawing lessons from the management of the current crisis and undertaking the necessary reforms. Together with the United Nations, France is committed to supporting vulnerable populations affected by COVID-19. France has committed €500 million to the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator project, which it initiated, to accelerate the development of and access to treatment, diagnostics and vaccines to fight COVID-19. Finally, I wish to reiterate the importance of integrating a gender perspective into the response to the crisis we are experiencing and to give special attention to women and youth. We must take their specific needs into account in the response to the pandemic and guarantee their full, active and effective participation at all levels of decision-making in order to rebuild in a sustainable and egalitarian manner. France will actively contribute to this reflection, in particular through organizing in the coming months the Paris Peace Forum in November 2020, and then, in partnership with UN-Women and Mexico, the Generation Equality Forum. As we and the Secretary-General know, the solution to this crisis and, in the longer term, the construction of lasting peace, lie not in turning inward, but in increased cooperation and in the revitalization of the multilateral system. He can count on France's support and determination to these ends.
