We welcome the Prime Minister of Somalia to this meeting. We wish to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. James Swan, and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia, Mr. Francisco Madeira, for their briefings. Since the Security Council's deliberations on Somalia in August (see S/PV.8755), important progress has been made regarding the peaceful reconstruction of Somalia. The new Prime Minister and his Cabinet have taken office, the preparations for elections have been carried out in an orderly manner and continuous updates have been made to the transition plan. At the same time, the security and humanitarian situation remains fragile, and there is a long way to go to achieve peace and stability in the country. I would like to emphasize the following three points. First, it is important that progress be made on the political track. China welcomes the consensus reached on the election model by the leaders of the Somali Federal Government and federal member states. We encourage all parties to implement the relevant decisions in earnest and to hold the elections as scheduled. China calls on all parties in Somalia to put the interests of the country and its people first, maintain the momentum of dialogue, enhance mutual political trust, establish federal mechanisms and actively promote national priorities, including the constitutional review. The international community should provide technical and logistical support for the elections on the basis of Somali-led and Somali-owned solutions, with a view to helping the Somali Government improve its national governance capabilities. Secondly, it is essential to maintain security and stability in Somalia. There are frequent violent and terrorist activities in Somalia, and the security environment is worrisome. China appreciates the significant efforts being made by the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to stabilize the situation. The Security Council has a mandate to carry out an independent assessment of AMISOM, and it is essential that we take into account the views of the African Union and AMISOM. We hope that the United Nations and the African Union can make proper arrangements to ensure that the outcomes of the assessment fully reflect the concerns of all parties and provide a comprehensive and objective basis for the Security Council to take subsequent actions. China notes that the Somali Government is taking a leading role in updating the transition plan and promoting security sector reform. AMISOM is also formulating a phased reconfiguration plan to prepare for the transfer of security responsibilities to Somalia. The international community should help Somalia to strengthen its capacity-building and continue to provide continuous and stable funding guarantees for AMISOM so that it can continue to carry out its duties. Thirdly, it is important to increase the levels of investment in development and humanitarian aid. Somalia is deeply scarred by wars, its economic development is lagging and it faces long-term humanitarian challenges. Development is an important basis for solving all problems, and that is also the aspiration of the Somali Government and people. The international community should help Somalia to implement its national development plan in order to help Somalia develop its economy, improve people's livelihoods, release resource endowments and labour potential, eliminate the root causes of violent conflicts and humanitarian crises and provide strong support for independent development and sustainable peace in Somalia. China welcomes the signing of a sustainable development cooperation framework between the United Nations and the Somali Government with a view to comprehensively advancing the humanitarian, development and peace processes. We call on the international community to continue to increase its levels of investment in order to close the humanitarian aid gap. China has always firmly supported Somalia's efforts to safeguard its national sovereignty, dignity and territorial integrity. We support Somalia in embarking upon the road to peace, stability and development at an early date. Since the outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease pandemic, China has provided Somalia with a quantity of emergency supplies to tackle the pandemic and help the country overcome the difficulties being faced by its people. China will work with the international community to contribute to Somalia's economic and social reconstruction by engaging in concrete cooperation projects.
