Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Let me start by joining
other speakers in welcoming High Representative
Valentin Inzko. I would also like to express our
appreciation for his briefing and for his comprehensive
report (S/2016/395, annex), as well as for his hard work
and dedication in carrying out his important mandate.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union (EU).
I would like to make several remarks in my national
capacity.

Croatia regularly participates in the Security
Council's semi-annual debates on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We do so not only for the obvious and
self-explanatory reasons i that we are a neighbouring
country and a friend of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Equally important reasons for our engagement include
the fact that Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina are one
of the three constituent peoples and that Croatia, as a
signatory to the Dayton Peace Agreement, has a special
responsibility towards Bosnia and Herzegovina. For
all those reasons, the importance Croatia attaches to
the territorial integrity, stability and functionality of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the highest degree.

We have stated on many occasions, and we shall
repeat it today: Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important
European country that deserves a secure and prosperous
future, and, Croatia, being the only member State that
directly borders Bosnia and Herzegovina, stands ready
to render it our full support and assistance.

The new Croatian Government is fully committed
to continuing to provide Croatia's strong support to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is clearly demonstrated
by the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina was the first
country that the new Croatian Minister for Foreign
and European Affairs, Mr. Miro Kovae, visited after
coming into office in January. Also, a joint session
of the Government of the Republic of Croatia and
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
is planned to take place in the near future in order to
further strengthen our cooperation and relations.

As we discuss today developments in the reporting
period, I wish to address three points that are of
particular importance to us: European integration;
the territorial integrity, stability and functionality of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and united
country; and accountability and reconciliation.

On the first point, Croatia has been a strong
supporter of the Euro-Atlantic integration of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Therefore, we welcome fully and strongly
support Bosnia and Herzegovina's submission of its EU
membership application in February. There is no doubt
that the European integration process is creating an
atmosphere conducive to the internal consolidation and
modernization of the country.

The new EU approach has so far proven effective
and is yielding results. It has helped inject new energy
into the country's reform process and EU path. The focus
on the reform agenda, in particular positive efforts to
advance economic and social reforms, has enabled the
country to emerge from its deep stagnation. Croatia will
continue to advocate for a strong and permanent focus
on Bosnia and Herzegovina at the EU level and beyond.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an important crossroads
now and its political leadership should spare no effort
to seize this positive momentum to move forward and
implement much-needed reforms aimed at improving
the socioeconomic situation and ensuring the overall
prosperity of all its citizens.

Secondly, the territorial integrity, stability and
functionality of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign
and unified country are of paramount importance to
Croatia. This is also a fundamental prerequisite for the
stability and prosperity of all of South-East Europe and
the entire European continent. The specific and complex
political system rooted in the Dayton Peace Agreement
is in many aspects based on ethnic representation,
which should rest on genuine equality among the three
constituent peoples. This equality is the key element for
achieving the stability and functionality of the country.
We are therefore deeply concerned about continued
secessionist rhetoric, ideas and actions coming from
Republika Srpska. This is unacceptable and highly
disruptive for the reform agenda and the overall stability
and progress of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country's
future must not be held hostage by a single entity.

We note that decision of the members of the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska to call a referendum
on the authority of the High Representative, the Court
and the Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina
was not acted upon, but we regret that this decision of
June 2015 has not yet been repealed. We are afraid that
the Republika Srpska's political leadership may once
again pursue divisive agendas in the context of the
October municipal elections. This highly controversial
decision has had a detrimental effect to the sovereignty
and integrity of the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
violates the Dayton Peace Agreement and has a strong
potential to undermine the stability of the country and
the wider region. We must not be silent about it; on the
contrary, such conduct should be condemned in clear
and definite terms.

Thirdly, with regard to accountability and
reconciliation, in late March the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia delivered the long-awaited
verdict in the case against Radovan KaradZic'. The
Tribunal found him guilty of genocide, crimes against
humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war
committed by the Serb forces during the armed conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The verdict came 20 years
after the war, during which unspeakable atrocities,
such as the genocide in Srebrenica, were committed.
Although Karadzie was sentenced to 40 years of
imprisonment, for the victims and their families it
will take much more than this verdict to heal the
wounds. Much more will be needed to achieve genuine
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and beyond.
For that, not only the criminal has to be put behind the
bars, but also his genocidal and criminal policy.
We sincerely hope that more than 20 years after the
war and its horrors, Bosnia and Herzegovina is firmly
on the path towards a better, more prosperous, secure
and stable future. We firmly believe that this future for
Bosnia and Herzegovina lies within the community of
the European Union and NATO States. We are looking
towards the days when the biggest stories coming
from Bosnia and Herzegovina will not be about war
crimes and suffering, or about irresponsible politicians
threatening the very existence of the country they are
supposed to serve, but stories like the one I would
like to conclude my statement with - a story about a
bike trail.

Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina have launched
a joint project, funded by the EU, on the revitalization
of an old railway route - a 200-kilometre railway track
linking Dubrovnik, on the Croatian coastline, with the
mountainous hinterland of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This historic route, which navigates through a very
beautiful landscape, will be turned into a long-distance
cycling track, thereby earning tourist income for the
local populations on both sides of the border. This is
where our joint future lies - in things and endeavours
that connect us, together with our j oint European destiny.

