Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this ministerial meeting of the Security
Council. I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his introductory remarks and to
acknowledge the presence of the Deputy Secretary-
General.

At the outset, I wish to express my Government's
support for the draft resolution prepared by the United
States of America and the Russian Federation.
The Israeli-Palestinian negotiations are now
entering a delicate phase. We respect the will of both
sides to keep them confidential, and we support their
resolve, as shown during their meeting with the Quartet
in Sharm el-Sheikh, to continue responsibly, despite

the existing difficulties. It is absolutely essential that a
comprehensive agreement be reached in the form of a
peace treaty to be implemented without further
negotiation.

We are aware that there are still considerable
gaps between the parties' positions on a number of core
issues, but we believe that, now more than ever, the
Israelis and the Palestinians need clear and specific
solutions, not vague principles that can lead to future
disputes. The Road Map and the Annapolis conference
have given us the means to continue along the path we
have taken, and we are convinced that the ongoing
political process must become irreversible. It is
essential for the Quartet to play a more incisive role in
monitoring the implementation of the parties'
commitments on the ground.

Against that backdrop, Italy remains convinced
that the European Union, in reiterating the need to
leave the primary responsibility for the conduct of the
negotiations to the parties, will not hesitate to offer its
support for the implementation of a final peace
agreement at the appropriate time. At the same time,
we believe it fundamental to continue to contribute to
strengthening the Palestinian institutions and to
building their capacities through the promotion of
economic development and institutional and security
sector reform. Israel's security and a just conclusion of
the peace process based on the two-State solution can
be assured only by a future Palestinian State with
sound institutions that operate in accordance with the
rule of law and good governance.

We believe that the solution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict remains a high priority in the
fragile regional framework, but it is equally important
to support and promote a constructive approach by all
the States of the region to every track of the peace
process. We welcome and encourage the involvement
of the League of Arab States and its members in
support of the Palestinian Authority and of President
Abbas, both economically and politically. In that
context, the Arab League's Peace Initiative has great
potential, which should be exploited and developed in
coordination with all the stakeholders.
We are concerned by the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip and the
ongoing violence in the areas bordering Israel. It is
urgent that calm be restored and maintained and that
the border crossings be reopened to allow the people to
have access to goods and services. The acceleration in
the building of settlements and the episodes of settler
violence against Israeli officers and Palestinian
civilians in recent days are a cause of further concern.

We welcome the courageous decision of the
Israeli authorities to prevent further violence and to
evacuate the illegal settlements. We encourage Israel to
continue along that path in the shared awareness that
the expansion of settlements, particularly in East
Jerusalem, does not facilitate dialogue, but instead
undermines the credibility of Palestinian negotiators in
the eyes of public opinion.

