I would like to start by thanking all the essential workers, particularly the technicians who made this video-teleconference possible during this difficult time. I would also like to thank the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic for organizing this important meeting and wish them success in their presidency of the Security Council for this month. My thanks also go to the briefers who enriched our discussion today with their experiences and views. These young builders are our capital in the face of threats to peace and security. We are going through a very difficult unprecedented time that is affecting us all. The repercussions and implications of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have far reaching effects on our countries, our societies, our economies and our lives. These times are casting us into unclear circumstances, but two things remain very clear: the crucial role of youth in society and the importance of garnering their energy and potential. Jordan strongly believes in the important role of young people in building healthy and peaceful societies, in realizing the Sustainable Development Goals and in ensuring a better future. In 2015, Jordan introduced for the first time a resolution on youth, peace and security, which was adopted unanimously. We celebrate this year the fifth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015), which created a launchpad for working together towards empowering and enhancing the participation of youth around the world. In that regard, I would like to extend my country's support to the Secretary-General's first report on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167), published in March. The Secretary-General's report emphasizes the importance of collaboration among countries, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, the United Nations and civil society. In 2017, Jordan launched the Jordanian coalition on youth, peace and security, operating under the umbrella of the Ministry of Youth, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the Crown Prince Foundation. It is the world's first coalition of Government, non-governmental organizations and United Nations agencies to collaborate together on the implementation of resolution 2250 (2015) at local and national level. The coalition set up a voting body composed of youth representatives, which had an active role in developing a national youth strategy for the period 2019-2025. The strategy rests on several main pillars, including education and technology, the rule of law, active citizenship, entrepreneurship and economic empowerment, participation and active leadership, as well as health and physical activity. This year, UNFPA and Generations for Peace will collaborate to coordinate the coalition, particularly its efforts to reach out to youth from different communities in Jordan through small-scale projects designed following an in-depth context analysis and to develop outcomes. Youth unemployment is one of the most pressing issues the world is facing today and will be certainly be compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic. Job creation for young women is a challenge we all face. Low wages, lack of childcare provision, poor public transport infrastructure, along with cultural and societal constraints, are among the reasons that discourage or stop young women from achieving their economic potential and contributing to the economy. We need to encourage initiatives that nurture a culture of entrepreneurship and creativity and to support business incubators at universities and enterprises to provide sustainable employment opportunities and promote economic growth. The role of public-private partnerships in developing an environment that supports entrepreneurship and innovation is particularly key. We also need to mobilize every effort and encourage Governments, leaders and international donors to direct more resources to youth programs and policies that foster youth political inclusion, promote civic engagement and support young people in their transition from school to work. The Amman Youth Declaration on Youth, Peace and Security of 2015 was the culminating point of the first Global Forum on Youth, Peace and Security, hosted by Jordan. At the Forum, which brought together young people, youth-led organizations, non-governmental organizations, Governments and United Nations entities, participants agreed on a common vision and road map for partnering with young people to prevent conflict, counter violent extremism and build lasting peace, as well as promote gender equality. Youth play a critical role in conflict prevention and peacebuilding, but the spread of COVID-19 and the emergency measures undertaken to contain it will likely curtail the ability of young peacebuilders and human rights defenders to mobilize efficiently in their communities. We must continue to support young peacebuilders so that they can play an effective and meaningful role in implementing the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire. Social media platforms are playing an important role during this pandemic as young people use social media to raise awareness and share good practices during these difficult times. Promoting the positive role of those online platforms is crucial to combat misinformation and extreme narratives, both online and offline, to prevent young people from falling into the traps of misinformation, frustration, violence and despair. Social media can and must be used to promote the culture of peace and to encourage young people to be agents of peace and positive change. Now is the moment in history that we need, more than ever, to collectively seize in order to empower youth to create a better future and be resilient in confronting the many challenges facing them and the world.
