Mr. Melki (France) (Spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank the briefers for their very detailed
presentations. I will make three key points.

First, in the context of a fragile security and
humanitarian situation, we are concerned about the
delays in implementing the transition plan and the
commitments made in the security agreement signed
in London in May 2017, as well as in the integration of
regional forces into the national security architecture,
as highlighted in the report of the United Nations-
African Union (AU) joint review of the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

The resumption of a constructive dialogue between
the Somali Federal Government and the federal member
states is also necessary in order to bring to a successful
conclusion as soon as possible the work on federalism,
the constitutional review and the preparation of the
elections scheduled for 2020 to 2021. The economic
progress made by the Somali authorities shows that
when there is the political will, genuine progress is
possible. We would have liked that political will to
have been more clearly reflected at the recent Garowe
meeting in Puntland, which we nevertheless hope will
pave the way for the resumption of an effective dialogue.

Secondly, for the security transition to be
successful, we believe that AMISOM. must continue its
reconfiguration in support of the transition plan. I take
this opportunity to pay a warm tribute to the work of
AMISOM, whose staff are deployed in a particularly
difficult context. The ongoing Badbaado operation, in
which AMISOM. is supporting the Somali army in the
liberation of areas in southern Mogadishu, is an example
of good cooperation in support of the implementation
of the transition plan.

In that context, we believe that it is possible
and necessary to continue a moderate reduction in
the AMISOM. troop ceiling in order to continue to
encourage implementation of the security transition. It
is not a matter of withdrawing troops from particularly
sensitive areas or from Mogadishu but from more
stable areas. We also believe that it is essential that new
partners, in particular those identified in the report of
the United Nations and African Union Special Envoys
on the financing of AMISOM, commit themselves
and participate in the such financing. Given with the
number of requests for support from the African Union,
the European Union cannot continue to finance the
salaries of AMISOM. soldiers alone.

Finally, and this is my third and last point, I would
like to return to the issue ofthe cooperation ofthe Somali
authorities with the United Nations. If the international
community is to continue to support Somalia, that
support must be in the context of cooperation based
on shared commitments and mutual respect. That
is the approach adopted by the European Union and
its member States. We therefore look forward to a
resumption of the full cooperation of the Somali federal
authorities with the United Nations, as requested by
the Council in resolution 2461 (2019) on UNSOM, in
particular when the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is appointed, an appointment that
we hope will soon be made.

I would to conclude by asking our briefers a
question. Can they inform us of the prospects for
implementing the transition plan and for integrating
regional forces into the national security architecture?

