Mr. Lauber: On behalfofthe Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I would like
to thank you, Sir, for inviting me to brief the Security
Council today and for the excellent cooperation between
the Council and the configuration. As per established
practice, the following statement has been approved
by the members of the configuration, including the
country concerned, Burundi.

Since my previous briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.8109), the Burundi configuration of the
PBC convened on two occasions, on 8 November
2017 and 29 January 2018, with a focus on humanitarian,
socioeconomic and political questions. The
configuration heard briefings from Mr. Garry Conille,
United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burundi, and
from representatives of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the Peacebuilding Support Office.

At the briefing on 29 January, Ms. Ursula Muller,
Assistant Secretary-General of OCHA, reported that
in the past three years, the number of people in need
of humanitarian assistance in Burundi had tripled,
increasing from 1 million people to 3.6 million people.
She noted that 25 per cent ofthe population was estimated
to be food insecure. That is an increase of 7 per cent
as compared to 2016. In 2017, 500,000 people received
food and nutrition assistance. Currently, at least 60,000
children suffer from severe acute malnutrition. On a
more positive note, a malaria epidemic, which resulted
in approximately 9,400 deaths between 2015 and 2017,
has successfully been contained.

On 19 February, OCHA presented its report on the
humanitarian response plan for 2018 in Bujumbura.
On 21 February, the Government reported in a press
release that it rejected the content of the report as a
whole owing to a lack of cooperation, calling OCHA's
numbers exaggerated and referring to positive
developments regarding food security. The Government
invited OCHA to discuss cooperation on humanitarian
responses with the responsible ministries in order to
produce a consensual plan for both parties.

At the configuration meeting of 29 January,
Ms. Ninette Kelley, Director of the New York Office of
UNHCR, informed the configuration of the challenges
related to the return of refugees from Tanzania to
Burundi. On the basis of an agreement reached by
Burundi, Tanzania and UNHCR at the Tripartite
Commission meeting last August, 13,000 refugees
returned in 2017. The repatriation of another 60,000
persons is planned for 2018. The return of refugees
will increase pressure on the receiving communities,
requiring additional reintegration support to those who
return, as well as to those who did not leave the area.
UNHCR also reports an influx of more than 8,000
refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
into Burundi since the beginning of 2018.

The displaced persons inside Burundi are being
supported under the humanitarian response plan.
Besides that, a regional refugee response plan is in
place to support the 434,000 Burundian refugees living
in Tanzania, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda. On 29 January, the Permanent
Representative of Tanzania informed the configuration
that Tanzania had decided to withdraw from the
comprehensive refugee response framework.

In various interactions with the configuration,
Resident Coordinator Conille pointed to the challenging
socioeconomic situation. A negative trade balance,
inflation, which rose from 5.6 per cent in December
2016 to 18 per cent in December 2017, unemployment
and a shortage of foreign currency reserves are among
the most worrisome economic trends. The Resident
Coordinator outlined multidimensional challenges for
the United Nations. The United Nations country team is
trying to address the chronic vulnerability and a series
of shocks simultaneously. At the moment, strengthening
the resilience of the population is a priority of the
country team engagement in Burundi.

According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the
negotiations on a revised memorandum of understanding
between OHCHR and the Government of Burundi
have yet to be finalized, and the cooperation that was
suspended on 11 October 2016 has not yet resumed. I
encourage both parties to move forward and to finalize
the memorandum of understanding. Meanwhile, the
preparations for the deployment of three human rights
experts to Bujumbura, in line with Human Rights
Council resolution 36/2, of 28 September 2017, are
being finalized.

As mentioned in earlier briefings to the Council,
it is obvious that the activities of the configuration
must be complementary to the efforts to advance
the political reconciliation in Burundi undertaken
at the subregional, regional and international levels.
To that end, I have maintained regular contacts with
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, former President of the United
Republic of Tanzania, East African Community (EAC)
Facilitator for Burundi; Mr. Sma'i'l Chergui, African
Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and Security;
Mr. Basile Ikouebe, AU Special Representative for the
Great Lakes Region; and, of course, Michel Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
all of whom I had an opportunity to meet recently in
Addis Ababa or Geneva.

In both recent meetings of the PBC Burundi
configuration, Member States expressed overwhelming
support for the EAC-led dialogue process and gratitude
to President Mkapa for his personal engagement.
While the Government recognizes that progress
was made during the fourth session of the dialogue,
some delegations regretted the lack of progress in
the process. Some members of the configuration
expressed concern that the upcoming referendum on a
revised Constitution could reverse some of the gains
achieved through the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi. Other delegations expressed
the view that constitutional amendments came under
the sovereignty of the country and that the situation
was generally improving.

In the field of security, since my most recent visit
to Burundi and the region, I have received reports that
the security situation in the country has been generally
calm. I encourage all national stakeholders to contribute
to peace and stability in Burundi.

I am currently preparing my next trip to Burundi,
which is planned to take place from 27 to 30 March. In
view of the recent developments and after consultations
with the configuration, I intend to focus on the following
five topics during my visit.

First is the mediation efforts of the EAC. In my
contacts in Burundi, I will insist that the remaining
political divergences be addressed in the framework of
the EAC-led dialogue and in an inclusive manner.

Secondly, related to that, I plan to discuss the path
leading towards the 2020 elections. I will encourage my
interlocutors to reflect on how free, fair and democratic
elections in a pluralistic and peaceful environment
can be ensured in Burundi and how the international
community can support Burundi on that path.

Thirdly, I also plan to continue the socioeconomic
dialogue with the Government and its international
partners. That dialogue should seek both to address
the needs of the population and to overcome existing
obstacles to cooperation. I plan to involve additional
partners, such as regional actors, the private sector,
civil society and academia, in that conversation.

Fourthly, I will continue to focus on the humanitarian
situation and to engage with the humanitarian actors on
the ground in cooperation with the Government.

Fifthly, national reconciliation and dealing with the
past will remain high on my agenda. That is a subject to
which the President of the Republic of Burundi attaches
great importance.

The priorities are very similar to those defined
by the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) for its current
engagement. Since my briefing in November, the
Peacebuilding Fund has approved three new projects
in Burundi, worth a total of $6.5 million. The sum of
$3 million was approved for a project involving the
four communities in Burundi with the highest number
of expected returnees. The project seeks to increase
the protection of displaced persons in border areas,
specifically with regard to social and economic rights,
including access to basic services and livelihoods for
returnees and members of host communities, as well as
gender-based violence. The second new PBF initiative,
at about $1.75 million, supports capacity-building
among the youth wings of political parties. The third
project, in the same amount, supports intergenerational
networks of women leaders in their ability to launch
local peacebuilding initiatives.

Based on my recent contacts with Burundian
stakeholders and regional and international actors, I
wish to draw the following conclusions. The EAC-led
dialogue process remains an indispensable instrument
to address the current situation in Burundi. National,
regional and international interlocutors should continue
to lend their support to the efforts undertaken by
President Museveni and President Mkapa.

Secondly, the upcoming 2020 elections require
increased international attention. It would be a great
achievement if national, regional and international
actors could agree on some kind of road map so as to
create the necessary conditions for democratic, peaceful
and inclusive elections in 2020.

Thirdly, humanitarian needs must be addressed. I
call on Burundi's international partners to strengthen
the resilience of the population by addressing the current
humanitarian challenges on the ground in cooperation
with the Government. At the same time, I call on
the Government of Burundi to continue to cooperate
closely and constructively with its international
humanitarian partners to address the most urgent needs
of Burundi's population.

Fourthly, mid- and long-term socioeconomic
development must not be ignored. I invite the
Government of Burundi and its partners to engage in
dialogue on mutually beneficial, people-centred and
innovative forms of engagement.

Fifthly, I remain convinced that a swift signing
of the memorandums of understanding between the
Government and OHCHR, as well as between the
Government and the African Union, and the deployment
of the respective human rights observers will provide a
more comprehensive and accurate picture of the human
rights situation and help safeguard the space for civil
society in Burundi.

