Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation for your
initiative, Mr. President, to convene this open debate
on the situation in Somalia. It comes at a critical
moment in which the efforts of the Somali parties and
other regional and international efforts are mobilized to
restore peace and stability in Somalia. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his participation and
his valuable contributions to this debate, as well as his
Special Representative for Somalia, Mr. Mahiga, for
his tireless efforts and important briefing today.

Our meeting today comes just a few days after
the London high-level conference on Somalia, held
through an important initiative of the United Kingdom.
The conference enjoyed wide-scale regional and
international participation and crowned the relevant
efforts of the Somali people and the international
community, including the meeting of the International
Contact Group on Somalia, held in Djibouti; the Somali
National Consultative Constitutional Conferences, held
in Garowe; and the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2036 (2012). All of these efforts were
expressions of the determination of all parties
concerned to create a new reality in Somalia that will
lay a solid foundation for peace, stability, development
and the prospect of a better future for all Somalis.

Furthermore, the relocation of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia to Mogadishu demonstrated
the commitment of the United Nations, in cooperation
with relevant regional organizations, such as the African
Union, the League of Arab States and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, to intensify their work on the
ground and to work closely with all Somalis. It also
demonstrated the significant gains made in recent
months, particularly in the consolidation of security and
stability in Mogadishu. That could not have been
achieved without the huge sacrifices made by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Somali security forces, which had led to unprecedented
gains for Somalis and for the international community
and whose impact on resolving the situation in Somalia
should be maximized and put to use.

The adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) - which
extended the mandate of AMISOM, increased the
number of troops, including enablers and force
multipliers, improved the logistical support package
provided by the United Nations to AMISOM, and
supported the efforts to build the capacity of the
Somali forces - was an important step towards
consolidating the military gains on the ground in
Mogadishu and beyond. However, military action alone
cannot resolve the situation in Somalia unless it is
supported by a broader strategy to achieve peace and
stability that is based on strengthening the political
process and reconciliation efforts. In this regard, Egypt
reiterates the need to implement the tasks laid out in
the road map to end the transition in Somalia, including
the adoption of a new constitution and the reform of
the parliament, as well as the implementation of the
Garowe Principles, adopted in February, all of which
are key elements for promoting the political process.

Addressing the development and humanitarian
needs of Somalis is also closely linked to efforts to
achieve security and stability in Somalia. Therefore,
12-25146
the international community is required now more than
ever to redouble its efforts to support the endeavours of
the Transitional Federal Government, supported by
AMISOM, to extend State authority beyond Mogadishu,
enhance security and State authority, and provide basic
services to the Somali citizens. By the same token,
efforts should be redoubled to address the dire
humanitarian situation in Somalia. Despite the end of
the famine that hit a number of regions in Somalia,
more than 2 million Somalis are still in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance. All parties should commit
themselves to facilitating access of humanitarian relief
to all those in need.

Piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia are the results of chaos, the absence of State
authority and the lack of development that prevailed in
Somalia for two decades. Despite the success of the
international community's positive efforts to combat
acts of piracy at sea by reducing the number of attacks
and lowering the rate of successful attacks, efforts to
combat piracy at sea alone will not be able to eliminate
the threat it poses to regional and international peace
and security unless they are part of a broader strategy
that involves addressing the underlying causes of
piracy at sea, with all its political, security, economic
and humanitarian dimensions directly related to the
situation in Somalia.

In this context, Egypt, as a member of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and
the Board of the Group's Trust Fund, as well as
through its chairmanship of the Contact Group's
working group IV, has always emphasized and
reiterates again today the importance of the adoption
by the international community of a comprehensive
approach to addressing piracy off the coast of Somalia.
Such an approach must build on the progress achieved
on the security and political tracks through serious and
genuine development efforts to create a new reality in
Somalia that meets the needs and aspirations of Somali
youth for job opportunities and better standards of
living in order to prevent the risk of their involvement
in the ranks of armed groups or acts of piracy.

Finally, Egypt will continue to lend its support to
all efforts aimed at resolving the crisis in brotherly
Somalia in order to allow that country to restore its role
in the Arab, African and Islamic spheres. Egypt shall
spare no effort to support the Somali people and its
institutions, including the security forces and the Coast
Guard, particularly by organizing training courses for
12-25146
the Somali cadres, providing humanitarian and medical
assistance, and dispatching educational missions from
Al-Azhar Al-Sharif in order to contribute to creating a
better future for the state of Somalia and for all Somalis.

