I have the pleasure to submit this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden. We welcome today's opportunity to discuss how best to provide the Security Council with comprehensive and authoritative information on climate-related security risks, and would like to highlight the following points. First, we encourage the Security Council to continue mandating peacekeeping operations and special political missions to consider climate-related security risks. That should include integrating a climate lens into mediation efforts and preventive diplomacy. In addition, we see strong merit in mandating a regular comprehensive report by the Secretary-General on the climate-security nexus. This could serve as an important platform for dialogue between Member States and the Secretariat. It is important to leverage the scientific findings of other ongoing processes such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in this regard. We welcome the efforts undertaken by the Climate Security Mechanism to map existing United Nations analytical tools, data and approaches and encourage further action on mainstreaming climate-related security risks in all United Nations efforts, including peacebuilding. We also encourage the Security Council to further strengthen the advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission. In order to enable the United Nations to prevent the escalation of conflict, timely assessment of climate-related security risks is essential, and partnerships play a key role in this regard. First, it is essential that peace operations engage with local communities and authorities in an inclusive manner. Local knowledge and expertise are critical for effective policy analysis and to ensure that climate-change adaptation measures are designed in accordance with local needs and concerns, including those of marginalized groups, civil society, indigenous peoples, women and youth. Secondly, it is important that both the Security Council and peace operations engage with regional and subregional actors that can implement cross-border activities. Key partners include the African Union, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and subregional climate centres. Thirdly, it is essential that peace operations engage at the country level with both the security sector and non-traditional security actors in order to co-produce such risk assessments. This should include climate experts from the World Meteorological Organization and national meteorological and hydrological agencies. Building on the foregoing, the United Nations should develop multi-hazard early-warning systems that take into account both climate and security risks and allow for an integrated cross-pillar response. To that end, we propose including the assessment, reporting and management of climate-related security risks in leadership-evaluation frameworks and the reporting responsibilities of Resident Coordinators and mission leadership. We also propose building on existing early- warning mechanisms developed by the humanitarian community in United Nations peace operations planning. Climate-related security risks are closely tied to both the women and peace and security and the youth and peace and security agendas. Women are often disproportionately affected by climate-related security risks, but they also serve as key agents of change in climate-change adaptation and mitigation. Peacebuilding efforts should capitalize on these opportunities to strengthen the role of women in conflict prevention and resolution, as well as their economic empowerment. The youth of today will face the worst effects of climate change in future, and it is therefore critical to include youth in decision-making processes with regard to climate and security. In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that we are pleased to see the climate- security nexus receiving increased attention from the Security Council. We look forward to engaging further on this issue in order to ensure that the Council receives adequate and timely information on climate-related security risks.
