Ms. Honore (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
express my sincere thanks to the Republic ofArgentina,
in its capacity as President of the Security Council this
month, and to all members for organizing this meeting,
whose purpose is to present to the Council the most
recent report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2013/493).

I am also pleased to have an opportunity to share
with the Council, for the first time in my capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, an
assessment of the most recent developments in the
political and security situations in Haiti, as well as
an overview of MINUSTAH's activities in the past
few months in supporting peacebuilding and political
stability and in strengthening the rule of law.

(spoke in French)

I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the presence in the Chamber of the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Haiti.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would like to begin my report with special thanks
to all the countries that are contributing troops and
police units to MINUSTAH and to all those Member
States that have cooperated in the stabilization and
reconstruction process for their valuable support for the
consolidation of peace and democracy in Haiti.

(spoke in English)

Since my predecessor's most recent briefing to
the Security Council last March (see S/PV.6936),
the overall security situation in Haiti has remained
relatively stable, with a decrease in both civil unrest
and major crimes. Statistics show a downward trend in
homicides, kidnappings and incidents of Violent civil
unrest during the first half of the year, as compared
to the same period in 2012. However, we have recently
seen an increased occurrence of politically motivated
protests linking socioeconomic grievances with broader
anti-Government messages, including dissatisfaction
with the ongoing electoral stalemate.

With the support of the United Nations police,
the performance of the Haitian National Police has
improved as it has continued to assume increased
responsibility for the provision of internal security,
particularly in the 4 of the country's 10 regions vacated
by MINUSTAH's military component. Nevertheless,
MINUSTAH's military and police continue to play
an important role in supporting the National Police in
maintaining overall security and stability. The further
strengthening of the National Police remains a critical
stabilization benchmark, particularly as MINUSTAH
proceeds to consolidate.

Turning to the political situation, the continued
delay in the holding of long-overdue partial senatorial,
municipal and local elections is of increasing concern
and poses a series of risks to the stabilization process.
Yesterday's long-awaited submission to Parliament
by President Martelly of the draft electoral law that
is required to launch the electoral process is a most
welcome development. However, there have been
protracted delays caused, in part, by the eight months that
it took the three branches of Government to designate
the nine members of the Electoral Council, which was
eventually established in April 2013, followed by the
delayed submission of the draft electoral law by the
Electoral Council to the executive, and by the executive
to Parliament.

Despite the executive branch's repeated public
statements in favour of holding the elections as soon as
possible, those delays have led a number ofpolitical and
civil society actors to express skepticism concerning
the likelihood that elections will be held in 2013.

(spoke in French)

Ifthe provisions ofthe 2008 electoral law were to be
implemented and the Senate elections were not held by
January 2014, the Senate, and, as a logical consequence,
the Parliament, could become ineffective. That would
represent a genuine setback in the democratic process,
which Haiti does not have the luxury to afford. In such
a case, a possible mobilization of opposition forces
and civil society could not be excluded, which would
destabilize the political and security situation.

(spoke in English)

Delays in the submission of the draft electoral
law by the executive to Parliament fuelled speculation
among legislators that the executive had intentionally
delayed the process to ensure that Parliament would
become non-functional. That perception united a
grouping of main opposition parties that repeatedly
and publicly called on President Martelly to uphold
the constitutional requirement of timely elections, or
else to resign, thus popularizing the chant calling for
"elections or resignation".

Meanwhile, a controversy has erupted concerning
the sudden death, on 13 July, of a judge who had
subpoenaed the Prime Minister and other senior
Government officials in the context of an investigation
into allegations of corruption concerning members of
the first family. Observers have expressed concern about
the independence of the judiciary, following a series of
controversial arrest warrants issued against persons
related to the investigation of the alleged corruption
case. In the meantime, special commissions of the
Senate and Chamber of Deputies have investigated the
circumstances of the judge's death.

In that climate of polarization and heightened
mutual suspicion, I have been engaging Haiti's key
political actors on both sides of the divide to promote
dialogue aimed at reaching a minimum agreement
on the way forward, particularly concerning the
elections. I have also met regularly with members of the
diplomatic corps accredited in Haiti, including troop-
contributing countries, to ensure that every effort
is made to guarantee the continuity of the country's
institutions, most notably the continued functioning of
Parliament beyond January 2014. It is important that
we, as the international community, remain united in
our common message and speak with one voice.

With regard to MINUSTAH's conditions-based
consolidation, the military and police components
completed their mandated reduction of personnel
during the reporting period, in accordance with
resolution 2070 (2012). The Mission stands ready to
proceed with further adjustments in troop strength as
may be mandated by the Council in October.

Concerning cholera, as of 29 June, the epidemic
had caused the deaths of 8,173 persons and infected
more than 660,000. The budget of the national plan for
the elimination of cholera amounts to $443.7 million
for the period 2013 to 2015, of which roughly 47 per
cent has been pledged. The United Nations continues to
support the Government of Haiti with the various short-
and medium-term priorities that need to be addressed
to eliminate cholera transmission in the country.

My predecessor, as well as MINUSTAH's
Deputy Special Representative, and I have met on
several occasions with President Martelly and Prime
Minister Lamothe to explain the ongoing reduction
of MINUSTAH's footprint and the Mission's
consolidation plan with its four areas of stabilization
benchmarks. Both leaders have expressed support for
a phased withdrawal of the Mission as the capacity
of national institutions increases. In that regard, a
joint Government-MINUSTAH working group was
established in April to monitor the gradual and orderly
transfer of responsibilities to the Government. It is
vital that the Government, with MINUSTAH's support,
continue to work on multiple fronts to advance progress
towards the stabilization benchmarks.
The gains in stability and security need to be
sustained in order for Haiti to succeed in its ongoing
effort to forge economic partnerships, attract foreign
investment and foster socioeconomic development- the
cornerstone of enduring stability.

Concerning the police development benchmarks,
achieving the targets of the 2012-2016 police
development plan will require the continued
commitment of the Government and Member States to
ensure that the appropriate funding is made available to
support a professional, reliable and accountable police
force. Outstanding challenges include insufficient
regional coverage by the police force, due to staffing
shortages, and the need to continue strengthening the
institution's management and administrative capacity
and its Inspectorate General.

The delays in the establishment of the Electoral
Council and the lack of clarity on the electoral law
have so far impaired the electoral body's capacity to
significantly advance preparations for the electoral
process. Nevertheless, the Electoral Council has issued
a request for its operational costs to be included in the
2013-2014 national budget and the Council's Director
General and Council members have started their
electoral planning. MINUSTAH's objective is to create
the conditions that will allow the Government of Haiti
to progressively assume greater responsibility for the
management of the electoral process.

With regard to respect for the rule of law, although
the oversight and accountability mechanisms provided
for in the Constitution have been established, it is critical
that the Government and its international partners
continue to build the capacity of those institutions.
For example, without the establishment of a strong
inspectorate for the vetting of judicial appointments,
the Superior Council of the Judiciary will not be able
to effectively exercise oversight. Strengthening the rule
of law also entails allowing key oversight institutions to
operate independently.

With regard to the Mission's governance
benchmarks, MINUSTAH has concentrated its good
offices efforts on promoting dialogue among national
stakeholders to overcome the electoral stalemate.
During the reporting period, the strained relations
between the executive branch and Parliament impeded
the adoption of a consensual legislative agenda, another
key governance indicator. That situation impaired
progress on crucial legislative reform, such as the law
against money laundering, the law on the financing of
political parties and the revision of the criminal code
and the criminal procedure code.
(spoke in French)

In conclusion, Haiti is at a critical juncture. Indeed,
progress in the fields of security and stabilization, as
well as the concerted efforts of the Martelly/Lamothe
Government for socioeconomic development, could
be jeopardized by the instability resulting from
the polarization linked to the election stalemate.
MINUSTAH, in close consultation with its international
partners, continues to work to convince national
stakeholders that a minimum political consensus that
makes it possible to hold elections as soon as possible
and an agreement on the continuity of institutions are
in their best interest and that of the nation.

To that end, the interest shown by national
stakeholders for dialogue as a means of a means
of reaching an agreement is one reason to remain
optimistic and should be encouraged. A mediation
initiative, as well our intensified efforts to promote
dialogue among national actors, could form the basis of
an inter-Haitian process that would be able to overcome
the current stalemate and prevent a potential crisis that
could have an affect on the stability of Haiti.

(spoke in Spanish)

The search for avenues to facilitate dialogue and
consensus among Haitians is essential in building
a country able to stand on its own, with democratic
institutions that will give concrete answers to the
many challenges that lie ahead and take Haiti out of
the institutional cyclical crisis that has characterized it,
and very often paralyzed it.

