Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): Iwould
first like to thank all the Members of the United Nations
for the great support they have given us in enabling us
to serve on the Security Council. I am also grateful for
the congratulations we have received today. It will be a
great honour and pleasure to work with everyone on the
Security Council beginning in January 2016.

(spoke in English)

In order to save time, I will make only salient points
here and circulate my full text afterwards.
Improving the Security Council's working methods
has always been one of Japan's priorities. We therefore
welcome Spain's initiative in holding today's open
debate and are very grateful for its concept note
(S/2015/793, annex), which makes very valid points. I
am also grateful for the work of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, chaired by the Permanent Representative of
Angola. On that issue, I would like to mention that after
the presidential note S/2010/507 was issued in 2010 by
the Working Group under the Japanese chairship, the
Working Group issued a total of 10 more notes.

And yet what we have done to date is not enough.

Let me refer to a couple of concrete proposals.
There is a proposal on the participation of the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the chairs
of the Commission's country-specific configurations.
There are also proposals and a General Assembly
resolution concerning the process for selecting and
appointing the Secretary-General (General Assembly resolution 69/321). Many previous speakers addressed
this subject.

Concerning the issue of the veto, initiatives
put forward - most notably by France and by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group - on restraining its use in situations of mass
atrocities have received growing support. Japan
supports both these initiatives.

This is the twenty-second open debate that I have
had the honour to address since assuming the post of
Permanent Representative of Japan two years ago.
Open debates are in general a useful means for the
Council to learn more about the views of non-Council
members. However, most of the 22 open debates I have
attended were just statement after statement, with
little follow-up. Although non-Council members bring
valuable input, very rarely do they receive feedback
from the Council. The only exceptions that I remember
are France and New Zealand this year, when summaries
produced by the President were shared with us. Thus
I am afraid that open debates have not served their
intended purpose. I therefore welcome and support
your concept note (S/2015/793, annex), Mr. President,
which addresses this particular issue, and especially
your intention to adopt an outcome at a later stage. This
is indeed what note S/2012/922 recommends.

Japan has had the pleasure of serving as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions twice in the past. Once on
the Council, my delegation is determined to contribute
actively to the Working Group, in cooperation with
other members of the Council and also with the wider
United Nations membership.

