Mr. Perera: I would like to express our sincere
congratulations to the Polish presidency of the
Security Council for convening today's timely debate
on upholding international law within the context of
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
also want to express our profound appreciation for the
insightful briefings delivered earlier today by Judge
Hisashi Owada, Senior Judge and President Emeritus
of the International Court of Justice, and Judge
Theodor Meron, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

Today's debate takes place at a crucial time, when
strengthening and invigorating collective measures for
the maintenance of international peace and security
have become imperative. The fabric of the global order
is increasingly coming under threat with the rise in
flashpoints, conflicts and the spread of the spectre
of terrorism and violent extremism. It is therefore
vital that Member States forge new and innovative
partnerships in the context of preserving international
peace and security. In doing so, Governments must
act under the imprimatur of the law 4 the foundation
upon which a peaceful, equitable and prosperous
international community is built. It must therefore be
the common responsibility of all Member States to
strengthen the international order based on respect for
international law.

If we are to strengthen international law amid
such challenges, we must ensure that there is equality
before the law and a guarantee of the independence
of international judicial mechanisms, and that legal
remedies remain accessible to the most vulnerable
among us. It is vital that all States have an equal
opportunity to participate in the international law-
making process. That is the essence of the evolution
of modern international law from its classical origins
as a law that governed only a limited community of
States prior to decolonization. It is also a principle that
protects all States, especially developing countries,
from the harshness of an empirically unequal world.

Upholding international law within the context of
the maintenance of international peace and security
requires absolute adherence to Article 2 of the Charter
of the United Nations, namely, to the core principles of
the sovereign equality of States and non-interference,
the prohibition of the threat or use of force and the
obligation to settle international disputes through
recourse to peaceful methods of dispute settlement, as
prescribed in Article 33 of the Charter.

The efficacy of international law in preserving
international peace and security would require the
achievement ofa global consensus, which must factor in
the hopes and aspiration of all States and not just those
of a select few. Historically, the General Assembly and
its legal committee, the Sixth Committee, have provided
a platform for the effective and equitable participation
of all States in the international norm-creating process.

Earlier today Judge Owada drew our attention
to another vital aspect and clearly underlined the
importance of the organs of the United Nations acting
in concert within their respective areas of functions,
as stipulated in the Charter. Their synergies must
be harnessed in achieving our collective goal of
maintaining international peace and security.

In today's world, disputes that threaten the
international order have complex political and legal
dimensions. In addressing such issues, key organs
of the United Nations 4 the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the International Court of
Justice 4 can make a collective contribution and
strengthen international peace and security.

The contribution that the International Court
of Justice has made over the years in the field of the
maintenance of international peace and security
has been invaluable. I want to refer particularly to
the advisory opinion of the Court on the question of
the Legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons
(A/51/218, annex). Greater recourse to the advisory
jurisdiction of the Court in addressing critical
and complex issues with both political and legal
ramifications is an option that could be usefully
pursued in matters relating to international peace and
security. As Judge Owada pertinently observed during
today's debate, in exercising its advisory jurisdiction,
the Court is expressing "an authentic legal opinion"
in order to clarify legal issues to the other organs of
the Organization.

Let me also take this opportunity to appeal to
Member States to recognize the invaluable work
of the main legal organ of the United Nations, the
International Law Commission, as it celebrates its
seventieth anniversary here in New York, and to pay
tribute to its invaluable contribution over the years
in the codification and progressive development of
international law. Its pioneering work on the draft
code of offences against the peace and security of
humankind and on the draft statute of an International
Criminal Court was path-breaking, and set the pace for
the current developments in the area of international
criminal responsibility. Items on its current agenda,
such as universal jurisdiction, the immunity of State
officials from foreign criminal jurisdiction and the
issue of genocide, are of particular significance in
that regard.

In conclusion, Sri Lanka wishes to draw the attention
of the Council to the challenges faced by developing
States in their full and effective participation in the
multilateral treaty-making process. That is an area
where the United Nations can and must play a crucial
role, in particular by assisting States with capacity-
building, thereby contributing to the universality of
international lawmaking.

