Mr. Thoms (Germany): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today's debate.
Germany, like so many others, is deeply concerned
about the threat that terrorism and violent extremism pose
to our societies. Germany is therefore strongly engaged
in countering that threat both abroad and at home. We
contribute to support for the Iraqi Government as well
as the people affected by the crises in Iraq and Syria.
That includes immediate responses to the humanitarian
crises and structural support to neighbouring countries
that are hosting Syrian refugees, to help prevent further
destabilization of the region. Those efforts were at the
heart of the conference on the Syrian refugee situation
held in Berlin on 28 October.

An inclusive political process in Syria is a
prerequisite for successfully combating the so-called
Islamic State, and we therefore also support ongoing
United Nations efforts for a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. Another important aspect is our military
assistance in the fight against the Islamic State and its
associates, following the Iraqi Government's request
for international support.

I share the threat assessment presented in the
Secretary-General's statement as well as in the concept
note for today's debate (S/2014/787, annex). I would
therefore like to elaborate on some practical measures
that Germany has taken to counter terrorism.

In Germany we currently have Salafist followers,
numbering more than 6,000 individuals, who promote a
society governed by a fundamentalist interpretation of
Islamic rules. Approximately 450 radicalized German
Islamists have travelled to Iraq and Syria, posing a threat
there as well as on their possible return to Germany.
Whenever operable information is available in time,
our existing legal framework allows us to prevent the
travel and transit of potential foreign terrorist fighters.
We are presently reviewing our national legislation
with regard to resolution 2178 (2014).

Security organs such as border police and law-
enforcement authorities work hand in hand within
our joint counter-terrorism centre. Multilateral and
bilateral cooperation at the ministerial and agency
level, including with the European Police Office,
complements this concept.

Overcoming the factors underlying violent
extremism is a fundamental and long-term challenge
for all of our societies. Prevention is of the utmost
importance, in particular with regard to the young
generation. De-radicalization measures need to
reintegrate those who have taken on extremist views.
Security organs alone cannot accomplish this. Civil-
society actors and social institutions, especially those at
the local level, are key in contributing to this endeavour.
Women have an important role to play.

Let me cite a few measures that we have put into
practice.

Families that fear that one of their members is about
to travel to a crisis region andjoin a terrorist movement
can seek counselling and support from a help desk.
Prison environments are occasionally conducive to
further radicalization. We have addressed this with a
project that actively approaches prisoners at risk at an
early stage of their detention.

Extremist views have to be delegitimized wherever
they appear: in prisons, on the Internet, but also in
schools and sport clubs. Credible counter-narratives
must be developed. Alliances of civil-society actors,
including representatives of Muslim communities, have
the best chances of success.

The United Nations is at the core of coordinating
the international community's response to the threat of
terrorism and its efforts to counter violent extremism.
An example is the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre. The Secretary-General recently presented his
vision for transforming the Centre into a centre of
excellence. We welcome and commend the Centre's
commitment to operating in a complementary,
interlinked and supportive fashion with the
34 institutions that are combined in the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

In conclusion, aligning and focusing our capacities
is key in achieving a sustainable result in the fight
against terrorism and in drying up its root causes.

