The President: On behalf of the members of the
Security Council, I should like to condemn in the
strongest terms the outrageous, deadly and totally
unacceptable attack on United Nations peacekeepers
that occurred last night in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We understand that at least 14 Tanzanian
peacekeepers were killed and that more than 50 others
were injured. The members of the Security Council
convey their deepest condolences to the families of
the victims and to the people and the Government of
Tanzania. Those brave peacekeepers were operating
under a mandate given by the Council in order to provide
a more secure future for the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We commemorate their ultimate
sacrifice in the cause of peace.

I now invite the members of the Security Council
to observe a minute of silence in honour of those killed.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Peace and security in Africa

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Mali and Mauritania to participate
in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item of its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/1022, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay


The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2391 (2017).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


