Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Special Adviser Khan and Mr. Kachi for their briefings;
I especially appreciate Mr. Kachi's courage as he spoke
of crimes committed by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). We express our full solidarity with the
Yazidi community in the face of the heinous crimes
committed against them.

Kuwait supports the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) to achieve justice and
hold the responsible accountable. We commend the
progress that the Investigative Team has made with its
international and national members, and we hope that
it will continue its work, in close coordination with the
Iraqi Government, from the preparations stage to the
implementation of its mandate with a clear strategy, by
gathering all criminal evidence from mass graves and
the testimonies of witnesses and survivors, protecting
them, and securing physical and digital documentary
evidence, in order to achieve the goals set out in its
mandate and terms of reference.

That United Nations mechanism is of great
importance in the context of comprehensive
international measures to combat terrorism. It seeks to
renderjustice in order to provide redress for victims and
survivors and deter terrorists by holding members of
that terrorist organization accountable for their crimes,
with a View to setting an example for others in order to
prevent these heinous acts from happening elsewhere.
The mechanism sends a very important message to Iraq
that the international community has not forgotten and
will not forget the atrocities committed by terrorist
organizations against the people of Iraq - atrocities that
violate international law and international humanitarian
law. It also underscores full respect for the sovereignty
of Iraq and its jurisdiction over crimes committed on
its territory, pursuant to national legislation and in
accordance with tangible evidence collected by the
Investigative Team, without interference, in the pursuit
of justice. We also underscore the importance for the
Investigative Team to implement its mandate consistent
with other United Nations and international community
mechanisms related to counter terrorism so as to prevent
duplication of efforts.

Terrorism, regardless of its forms and definitions,
is the common enemy of humankind and international
security. It is one of the gravest threats today with
cross-border effects, and therefore no country can face
it alone. Eradicating all forms of terrorism, with the
support and assistance of the United Nations and friends
and partners in the international community, is an
international responsibility. We need today to address
the root causes of terrorism and violent extremism and
cut off the supply lines of extremist ideologies and their
culture, which often target youth and use them to serve
these criminal acts, preventing them from contributing
to the development of their communities.

On a related matter, Kuwait strives to strengthen
international measures to combat terrorism. For
example, we are part of the Global Coalition against
Da'esh and we co-chair the Foreign Terrorist Fighters
Working Group, together with the Netherlands and
Turkey, under resolution 2178 (2014). We hope that all
States will uphold their responsibility in that context,
including the repatriation of their foreign terrorist
fighters. Much work remains to be done in the same
international and unified spirit to develop and adjust
our efforts, which must be flexible and able to counter
and thwart Da'esh's schemes.

To conclude, we agree with the Special Adviser that
the brutality of Da'esh's crimes has not undermined
Iraq's unity but rather strengthened it. We once again
commend the Government and people of Iraq for
their unity, determination and resolve, which have
contributed to eradicating Da'esh, as we saw during
the Security Council's Visit to Iraq, We also applaud
Iraq's commitment to prosecuting the perpetrators of
those terrifying crimes, rebuilding affected areas and
bolstering national unity among all components of Iraqi
society in order to preserve its unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

