Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to address you, Mr. President, with our most sincere wishes for success during your country's presidency of the Security Council, and we wish everyone continued good health. The Yemeni Government yearns for a sustainable peace that is based on the agreed-upon terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and relevant Security Council resolutions, especially resolution 2216 (2015). The Government of Yemen is very keen on ensuring the success of the efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in Yemen in order to put an end to the suffering of the Yemeni people caused by the Houthi militias' coup, which resulted in one of the worst humanitarian disasters in the world. In order to achieve that goal, last May the Yemeni Government accepted the proposals made by the Special Envoy aimed at establishing a ceasefire, launching confidence-building measures and resuming the political process. That included all the proposed humanitarian and economic arrangements. Moreover, the Yemeni Government reiterates that it will continue to engage with the efforts by Mr. Griffiths and the United Nations-sponsored peace process - because we believe in the role of the United Nations and want lasting peace. We made that clear in previous commitments we abide by, including our position on matters such as the payment of salaries, opening up roads, releasing all detainees and prisoners and opening Sana'a airport to international flights through the national carrier, which would alleviate the suffering of Yemenis. We reject the continued imposition of impossible conditions by the Houthi militias. They are impossible to implement and are aimed solely at hampering the efforts of the international community and the Special Envoy and at prolonging the Houthi's futile war against the Yemeni people and impeding their aspirations. The Yemeni Government has implemented the Riyadh agreement, and stated so on more than one occasion, in line with the agreed upon timeline. In that regard, we would like to express our great appreciation for the efforts made by our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to help resume the implementation of the agreement. We call upon the Southern Transitional Council to abide by the agreement, which is considered a road map to exit this crisis. We call upon the Council to retract its declaration of a so-called self- rule arrangement and everything that entails. We also call upon it to allow State institutions to perform their duties towards citizens in Aden governorate and halt its attempts to escalate matters on the ground. We also call upon the Council to consolidate efforts to put an end to the Iran-backed Houthi militias, which aim to destabilize Yemen and the region, as confirmed by the most recent United Nations reports. We also call for coordinating efforts to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Government of Yemen underscores the need to return the situation in the Socotra archipelago to normal, which is renowned for its rich flora and biodiversity - making it one of the most important nature preserves in the world and a World Heritage Site. The continuing meddling on the island is unprecedented, rejected and condemned. The Government of Yemen has cooperated with the Special Envoy to draw up a plan to cover the payment of what remains of the salaries of civil servants in the areas under the control of the Houthi militias. We have done so by allocating the customs and tax revenues from oil products at the Al-Hudaydah port in order to pay the salaries through the Central Bank's branch in the city, under the supervision of the Special Envoy. We were surprised when the Houthis looted the deposited funds, which exceeded $35 billion rials, using them to fund their war effort and for the purpose of personal gain. We continue to await a firm position to be taken against this clear violation of the understandings sponsored by the United Nations, including the disregard the militias show for the international community and the suffering of Yemeni citizens. The Government has repeatedly issued public calls to the Houthi militias to consolidate efforts to confront the COVID-19 pandemic and adopt a unified health-care policy and devote all possible capacity to confront it. To that tend, along with the Coalition to Restore Legitimacy in Yemen, we have declared a unilateral ceasefire. However, all of those initiatives have been met by rejection on the part of the militias, which are denying the existence of the pandemic. They have also imposed a blackout on the health-care and medical situation in the areas under its control. The Houthis are intimidating medical teams and society at large, perpetrating inhumane acts against those suspected of infection and their families. The Houthi militias continue to politicize the pandemic and to reject all the initiatives being made. Moreover, they impose a lack of transparency on the ways to confront the spread of infection - that added to the shortages in testing and treatment, equipment and a health-care system near collapse. In our opinion, all of those actions are a mortal sin. We call upon the United Nations, the international community, donor countries and all relevant bodies to extend urgent aid to the Yemeni Government and people in order to confront COVID-19. We also ask for support for health-care workers and for pressure to be brought to bear against the Houthi militias to engage with the call and initiatives by the Government to consolidate efforts to combat the pandemic, which augurs for an unprecedented disaster in Yemen. The Security Council held a meeting (see S/2020/721) earlier this month to deal with the situation concerning the FSO SAFER oil tanker. The Council called upon the Houthis to take tangible steps - without delay or preconditions - to facilitate access by the United Nations team of technicians tothe tanker so they could evaluate it and carry out the necessary maintenance work, including extracting the oil. However, two weeks have passed since the meeting was held and the Houthis continue to drag their feet and impose obstacles and conditions on the team. It is blatantly clear that the Houthi militias are adopting the same way of addressing things that they have used over the years - to deflect international pressure before the Security Council holds a meeting on the topic of Yemen, after which they return to their obstinate procrastination and deceit of the international community, thereby blatantly disregarding everything the Council issues. We renew our calls on the Security Council to fulfil its responsibilities and undertake the urgent measures needed, including pressing the militias to allow the United Nations technical team to assess and empty the tanker, as well as facilitating the team's work without delay or precondition, so that we can avert an environmental, economic and humanitarian disaster that will affect Yemen, the region and the world.
