Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are gratified, Sir, that you have decided
to personally take part in today's open debate of the
Security Council, convened on the initiative of Benin,
on this important question. We welcome the report of
the Secretary-General prepared for this meeting of the
Security Council, and we would like to touch on
several points that, in our View, are of paramount
importance - above all, the problem of the use of
child soldiers by various non-State armed groups. We
firmly condemn the recruitment of child soldiers and
believe that the perpetrators must be brought to justice.

One should also bear in mind not only the
involvement of children in armed conflict but also the
efforts that will be needed in future to rehabilitate and
reintegrate them in order to prevent minors from
becoming anti-social members of society. There are
fears that a child traumatized by war, a child who
knows nothing other than hatred and violence, may not
be prepared to live normally, in conditions of peace
and legality. For those reasons, we support the efforts
of the Secretary-General to identify those parties to
armed conflicts that continue the pernicious practice of
using child combatants.

In that connection, it is necessary to determine
our position as to the legally correct interpretation of
the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, in order to avoid any broadening of
its interpretation. It is important also that efforts in
that area be appropriately coordinated to avoid
redundancies.

It must be underscored that all the efforts of the
international community will be in vain without the
active involvement of national Governments, which
bear the primary responsibility for addressing the
entire range of problems related to safeguarding and
protecting the rights of children. We share the view
expressed in the report that it is key to take into
account the child factor in the mandates of
peacekeeping missions, particularly with respect to the
establishment of child protection adviser posts and to
ensuring access for humanitarian agencies to zones of
conflict, separating civilians from combatants, and
maintaining the civilian nature of facilities
accommodating refugees and internally displaced
persons.

General policy support in the implementation of
all these tasks should be provided by the Security
Council, with a key role being played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, in particular with respect to
assisting in the establishment and coordination of
activities linked to child-related monitoring
mechanisms and better targeting of outreach, advocacy
and in-country work.

