Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): At the outset,
allow me to express my appreciation to the United
Kingdom mission to the United Nations for convening
this meeting in order to discuss this very important
issue. The delegation of Georgia fully associates itself
with the statement made by the Slovenian presidency
of the European Union.

While discussing this critical issue, I would like
to draw the attention of the members of the Security
Council to the intolerable situation of the civilian
population forcibly displaced due to the conflict in
Abkhazia, Georgia. For the past 15 years, our people
and Government have dealt with the consequences of

the protracted conflict on the territory of Georgia.
Hundreds of thousands of my compatriots still remain
outside of Abkhazia, Georgia, and since their forceful
displacement, they have been willing to return to their
homes of origin for more than 15 years now.

The expelled population is forced to live in
crowded temporary shelters or other similar
accommodations. The United Nations, and particularly
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, has been involved in negotiations to
secure the prompt and safe return of refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) to their homes, but
unfortunately those efforts have not met with a positive
response by the de facto regime. The spontaneous
return of (IDPs) and refugees has occurred only in the
Gali district of Abkhazia, Georgia. But those who
returned put themselves at great risk. Their
fundamental rights are consistently violated.

It is inadmissible that houses and other property
belonging to IDPs and refugees of all ethnicities have
been sold to new owners. Unfortunately, some have
illegally acquired private and public properties on the
territory of Abkhazia, Georgia, and this process is still
going on. We believe that the international community
must condemn those unlawful actions and treat them
accordingly. The Government of Georgia has recently
launched a State programme to collect data on the
property of IDPs and refugees left in Abkhazia,
Georgia, and this process is under way.

The young generation of returnees is deprived of
one of their most fundamental rights: studying in their
mother tongue, as the de facto regime prohibited
Georgian as an instruction language at schools in the
Gali district. In recent years we have witnessed
frequent violations of the Georgian population's
constitutional right to vote. Just recently, we observed
the persecution of religious freedom: the de facto local
authorities expelled a Georgian Orthodox priest from
the Gali district after he was banned from holding
services.

For more than a decade we have observed the
fundamental rights of civilians in the conflict zone of
my country being increasingly targeted and challenged.
It is distressing to see how members of the
spontaneously returned population have become
victims of physical and psychological violence on a
daily basis. That circle of violence can be stopped only
through joint international efforts. Here, I would like to
stress the leading and principal role of the Security
Council in addressing the outstanding issues related to
the peaceful solution of the conflict in Abkhazia,
Georgia, and would like to underline the importance of
Council resolution 1808 (2008) and the recently
adopted General Assembly resolution 62/249, which
addresses in a comprehensive manner the issues related
to the IDPs and refugees.

I want to thank you again, Sir, for giving me this
opportunity to address the Security Council today on
this very important matter.

