Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my Government's heartfelt thanks to
Mr. De Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and his team for all their efforts during
his tenure. There has always been close cooperation
between my Government and Mr. De Mistura as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and for Iraq and Special Envoy for Syria.
He has visited our country many times. I hope that next
time he can visit as a vacation to have enough time to
see the various beautiful Iranian cities. I would also
like to welcome the appointment of Mr. Pedersen as the
new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria
and express our readiness to cooperate with him in
discharging his mandate.

From the beginning of the Syrian crisis until now,
the Islamic Republic of Iran has always had a principled
position: there is no solution to the conflict other than a
political settlement. Based on that principled approach,
we cooperated with Russia and Turkey in initiating the
Astana process. To date, we have made considerable
progress and will resolutely continue the path towards
a political settlement. After years of conflict, with
all its security, socioeconomic and humanitarian
ramifications, there is now an emerging consensus
in support of the political process. Nevertheless, the
international community should facilitate in that regard
rather than dictate the process.

In that context, we attach great importance to the
establishment of the constitutional committee as a
decisive element of that process. This year, the Astana
guarantor States have made every effort to prepare
the ground for the formation of the constitutional
committee. In that regard, we would like to highlight
the progress made to date, which should be considered
a joint success of the international community and
the Syrians, as it is towards a political solution to end
the crisis.

The latest round of our endeavours was the
ministerial meeting of the Astana guarantor States in
Geneva on 18 December, where the guarantors also
held consultations with Mr. De Mistura. During the
meeting, the positive results of the consultations with the
Syrian parties on the composition of the constitutional
committee were presented. The ministers reaffirmed
their determination to facilitate the constitutional
committee beginning its work, inter alia, by drawing
up its general guiding principles through interaction
with the Syrian parties and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria. The rules ofprocedure that
will ensure the committee's efficient and sustainable
work will be determined on the basis of those principles.

Moreover, they agreed that the work of the
constitutional committee should be governed by a sense
of compromise and constructive engagement, aimed
at reaching general agreement among its members.
That should enable the outcome to receive the widest
possible support of the Syrian people. The Ministers
also agreed to make efforts to convene the first meeting
of the constitutional committee in Geneva in early 2019.

Finally, reaffirming their strong commitment to
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria, they emphasized that those principles
should be respected by all sides. That means that all
foreign forces whose presence is not permitted by the
Syrian Government should leave the country.

While significant progress has been made so far
on the establishment of the constitutional committee,
we need to continue our efforts with the utmost care,
perseverance, prudence and patience.

With that in mind, our guiding principle must be to
ensure that the committee is an effective, pragmatic and
inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned vehicle in order

to move forward. To achieve that, the committee needs
strong international support. However, ultimately,
the right to determine the future of Syria belongs
exclusively to the Syrians themselves.

At this critical juncture of the Syrian crisis, we
should all accept that there is no choice other than to
cooperate in facilitating an inclusive Syrian political
process. Therefore, all States that have influence on
the armed opposition groups are expected to encourage
those groups to end the fighting in order to join the
political process. That is absolutely crucial for any
progress to be gained in the political domain.

Likewise, parallel to the efforts in the political field,
fighting the terrorists should continue unabated. That
should of course be done by in line with international law
and with close attention to the protection of civilians.

In addition, given the ongoing positive direction
with regard to ensuring security and in view of the
increasing tendency towards the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons, the international
community should further support the reconstruction
of the country, as well as the speedy return of refugees
and internally displaced persons. To that end, all
sanctions must also be lifted.

In conclusion, I wish to stress that the Islamic
Republic of Iran will continue to play a constructive
role in bringing about peace and prosperity in Syria.

