Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, Mr. President, I wish to thank you for organizing
this debate on small arms. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his report and Mr. Dhanapala for his
supplementary comments.

France associates itself fully with the statement
that will be made by Denmark, which currently holds
the presidency of the European Union. I will therefore
confine my comments to two important points. First of
all, the Security Council must, of course, lend its full
support to measures taken by Member States to
implement the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was
adopted on 20 July 2001 in New York.

For the first time in the history of arms control, a
consensus text was adopted covering small arms and
light weapons and including a Programme of Action.
Those measures must now be implemented. Meetings
are to take place biennially; next year's will enable us
to take stock and to prepare the 2006 review
conference. Along those lines, the formulation of an
international instrument to identify illicit supply lines
and to ensure the traceability of small arms should be
encouraged by the Council. Such an instrument would
meet our ongoing concerns with regard to the
implementation of arms embargoes and peace-building
programmes in crisis situations fed by illicit arms
flows. The group of governmental experts established
to study the feasibility of an international instrument,
and voluntary cooperation among Member States on
this topic, deserve our full support. The work done by
France and Switzerland on certain aspects of these
issues will be food for thought.

In terms of following up the 2001 Conference, I
would also like to mention the wish of many States,
African States in particular, whose unstinting
commitment to the success of the Conference we hail;
they have asked for fresh consideration of arms
transfers to non-State entities, which bear such a large
part of the responsibility for promoting conflicts,
especially in Africa. I refer here to what was just said
by the representatives of Mauritius, the United States
and Guinea with respect to various conflict situations
in Africa in the Mano river and the Great Lakes
regions.

Secondly, because of the Security Council's
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, we are directly concerned with respect to the
illicit trafficking of light weapons in situations of
which the Council is seized.

I will not belabour the essential nature of
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants for the success of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The reform
begun in 2000 on the basis of the recommendations of
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) has enabled us to learn
from our experience on the ground and as much as
possible to concentrate the attention of the principal
players and donors on this crucial phase of establishing
a momentum for peace. The representative of Mauritius
also stressed disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, particularly in the Great
Lakes region.

Another important dimension of this question -
embargoes and sanctions monitoring mechanisms -
should also be a focus of our attention. We recall that
France and the United Kingdom had proposed the
establishment of a permanent sanctions monitoring
mechanism in order to get a more realistic idea of the
trafficking in all its complexity and ramifications,
especially when this trafficking of small arms is fuelled
by the illegal exploitation of natural resources or other
items of trade. The work of France and the United
Kingdom parallels that of Colombia on integrating and
better coordinating the activities of the various panels
of the sanctions Committees. In that respect, I thank
Ambassador Valdivieso for the non-paper that he
circulated among Council members.

The Council must be able to look at ways to
improve the effectiveness of arms embargoes and in
particular to learn all the lessons it can from the
sanctions Committees. Henceforth, it could be pointed
out that the practice of publicly naming the traffickers
and their key go-betweens who are violating embargoes
has borne fruit and should be further developed. We are
led to conclude that the networks at the core of that
traffic are not innumerable and the threads of the web
often lead to the same individuals. The Security
Council should call on the States concerned to take the
measures necessary to effectively suppress actions that
violate United Nations embargoes.

Regarding a subject of such great importance,
given its diverse dimensions and often technical nature,
the Council should continue its reflection and its work
by experts, particularly in conjunction with the
sanctions Committees.

