Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to congratulate the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, on the successful
start of his work. We welcome his commitment
to assisting in strengthening stability in Kosovo
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999), which remains the
fundamental document for a settlement in Kosovo. We
hope that his great experience in diplomatic affairs
will help Mr. Tanin make a significant contribution to
ensuring positive momentum in the Kosovo process.

We welcome the participation in the meeting of the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie,
and we share his views and considerations. We note
that in the statement of Ms. Vlora Citaku, rhetoric,
unfortunately, prevailed over concrete facts. We are
also forced to note that in meetings of the Security
Council, the representative of the Pristina authorities
speaks, of course, in a personal capacity.

The Security Council and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo continue
to play a leading role in resolving the problems in
the Kosovo region. At this difficult stage, there is a
clear need to maintain a high level of United Nations
presence. UNMIK should have all the necessary
financial and human resources.

The situation in and around Kosovo remains acute.
The dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, which
is carried out with European Union (EU) mediation,
is stalled. The reason for that is the suspension by the
Kosovo side of the implementation of a key agreement
on the establishment of the association of Serb-majority
municipalities, which was reached in August. The lack
of a palpable reaction to that development on the part
of Brussels, which participated directly in elaborating
the aforementioned agreement, is puzzling. Claims of
the inability to comment on Kosovo's legal procedures
are simply unconvincing. Such an approach could
be used to sabotage any agreement. It is common
knowledge that the EU examines Serbian legislation
with a magnifying glass and even imposes certain legal
decisions on Belgrade, making Serbia's progress in
European integration dependent on it. It is difficult to
the reconcile the stated high respect for the so-called
Constitution of Kosovo and the cavalier disregard
for Serbian law, according to which the province is
an integral part of the country. We believe that the
establishment of an association of Serb-majority
municipalities with the necessary range of powers to
defend the legitimate rights and interests of Kosovo's
Serb community must be a priority.

It is no coincidence that the decision to slow
down the establishment of the association of Serb-
majority municipalities was adopted by the Kosovars
on the day after the General Conference of UNESCO
rejected Kosovo's application for membership in that
organization. One gets the impression that that was
simply a form of petty revenge directed at the Serbs,
who sought to defend their position. The fact that
Kosovo applied for membership to UNESCO against
the backdrop of Pristina's categorical refusal to discuss
the protection of the Serbian cultural and spiritual
heritage in the framework of a dialogue with Belgrade
demonstrates the real level of willingness of the
Kosovar Albanians to cooperate and, in essence, their
lack of willingness to compromise.

We cannot but be concerned by the chaotic internal
political situation in the province. The so-called
Assembly is virtually paralysed. Its members regularly
settle arguments by throwing various instruments at one
another and even spraying tear gas. It is noteworthy that
the main disagreement in that regard revolves around
the agreement on the association of Serb-majority
municipalities, which the nationalist opposition has
tried to destroy from the beginning.

The key issues facing the ordinary citizens of the
province are well known. They are social and economic
issues, and they continue not to be addressed. A
dangerous development is the fact that the internal
political disagreements are spilling out onto the street.
In the last few days in Pristina there have been mass
demonstrations during which the demonstrators threw
stones, paint and Molotov cocktails at the police, and
law enforcement authorities used tear gas. As a result of
those clashes, at least 10 people were injured.

We are concerned by the lack of progress in
improving the unenviable situation of the Serb
community. The disregard for Serb property rights,
primarily related to real estate, undermines the
economic foundation for their livelihood. An extremely
alarming case is the legal entanglement of Kosovo/
Albanian interests with the Orthodox monastery of
Visoki Decani in an attempt to seize land belonging to
the Serbian Orthodox Church.

The situation surrounding the creation of a special
court to investigate the crimes committed by members
of the Kosovo Liberation Army lacks transparency.
We hope that progress will soon be made in that area.
The punishment of all those responsible, regardless of
the positions they occupy, is one of the most important
conditions for reconciliation and the restoration of
mutual trust between national communities. We hope
that that issue will be closely monitored by UNMIK
and the international community.

We would also like to express our concern with
regard to the lack of tangible results in the investigation
into the incursion of the group of fighters from Kosovo
into Macedonia in May. Attempts to downplay that case
without addressing the underlying causes may well lead
to renewed violence, the responsibility for which will
be borne by those who, owing to the political situation
prevailing at the time, decided to ignore such a serious
incident.

In conclusion, we confirm that Russia's position
on the issue of Kosovo remains unchanged. Resolution
1244 (1999) remains fully in force as the international
legal basis for a settlement in Kosovo. We believe
that the Security Council must regularly monitor
developments in the province.

