Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We would like to join other
Council members in thanking High Representative
Valentin Inzko for his report (see S/2012/307) and for
his briefing this afternoon.

Pakistan is fully committed to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
therefore support all efforts to strengthen the State at
the national level, while preserving the rights and
privileges of all communal entities. It is important for
all parties to recognize and abide by the international
and legal frameworks for the division of power.

We welcome the positive developments and the
progress achieved during the current reporting period,
which have included the formation of the State-level

Government and the adoption of the 2011 budget. The
authorities should now focus on the economic
development of the country, which, among other
factors, was affected adversely by the long stalemate
over the formation of the Government and over the
adoption of the budget. Amid poor growth prospects,
the country's deteriorating fiscal position and its high
unemployment call for serious action by the
authorities, supported by the international community.

The agreement reached on the principles to be
used for resolving the issues of the ownership and the
use of public and military assets is a significant
development. We hope there will be progress on the
implementation of the agreement, which requires the
adoption of the necessary legal acts and the conclusion
of separate inter-Governmental agreements.

Pakistan shares the concern expressed by the
High Representative in his report over the trend of
nationalist politics and the statements by some
challenging the Dayton Peace Agreement, and in
particular challenging the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the country. The reported legal and
political actions challenging State-level institutions,
competencies and laws, and challenging the authority
of the High Representative, are also a cause for serious
concern. Those developments can vitiate the
atmosphere and undermine the prospects for long-term,
peaceful coexistence. Challenges to the Dayton Peace
Agreement and its institutional arrangements, as well
as divisive rhetoric, should therefore be avoided.

We would urge the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to resolve their differences through
dialogue. The Office of the High Representative should
play an enabling role in that regard. We take note of the
fact that, while there were some signs of progress on
two issues, none of the outstanding items, out of the
five objectives and two conditions necessary for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative, was
fulfilled during the reporting period. Under the
circumstances it is only logical and imperative that the
High Representative continue his important work,
supported by an Office with adequate resources.

Pakistan supports all efforts to ensure a safe and
secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
sincerely hopes that the political leadership will join
hands, in a spirit of dialogue and cooperation, to
overcome the political and economic challenges facing
the country. We hope that we will see many more
positive developments by the time of the next report of
the High Representative.

