I would like to thank Mr. Mladenov, United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his valuable briefing. I would like to make the following points: First, we are deeply concerned of the dire and fragile situation in Gaza. Suffering people in Gaza and other occupied Palestinian territories are at risk of a potential outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic. We hope there will be no outbreak but it is good to prepare for the worst, especially we all know that the health service system is collapsing in Gaza under many years of blockade. Under the current circumstance, the concerned parties need to refrain from all acts of provocation or violence and immediately carry out necessary measures to protect civilians. We commend and fully support the works of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East on the ground. Second, we noted with much worries that the Israeli government is advancing plans of settlement construction in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. These unilateral steps on the ground continue to undermine prospects for a two-state solution. Meanwhile, the possible annexation of territory in the West Bank remains a matter of big concern and would close the door to negotiations. Third, it is urgent to resume dialogues and negotiations towards a peaceful solution to the conflict. We urge the concerned parties to step up efforts and we call for the intensification of international and regional diplomatic efforts and support aimed at achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East on the basis of the internationally agreed parameters, including the relevant United Nations resolutions. We also wish to see progress in other peace initiatives towards this goal. I would like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to mediation efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, his Special Coordinator and regional countries. Lastly Viet Nam reaffirms its position that a lasting and just peace in the region can only be achieved through realizing the vision of two states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security on the basis of the pre-1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both states.
