Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller and Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairperson of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, for their
substantive briefings.

We believe that stabilizing the situation in South
Sudan is possible only with a lasting ceasefire and an
inclusive national reconciliation process. We therefore
welcomed the successful conclusion on 21 December of
the first round of the High-Level Revitalization Forum
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). We have taken note of the consistent efforts
of regional representatives during the preparations and
of Juba's constructive cooperation with regional States
throughout this key event. We welcome the Agreement
on the Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians
and Humanitarian Access reached at the Forum.
However, it is regrettable that almost from the start
of the implementation of this Agreement, which is so
important for the ordinary people of South Sudan, there
have been mutual accusations of violations of it. We
urge all South Sudanese stakeholders to comply strictly
with the Agreement and to participate in the second
round of talks, to be held in February. However, we can
also allow for other negotiation tracks. The important
thing is to ensure that all efforts are closely coordinated
with the IGAD initiative. We call on the States of the
region to maintain a united approach to the settlement
in South Sudan, which is very important to ensuring
proper support for the peace process.

We are pleased at the pace of the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force (RPF) in South Sudan and
assume that it will continue to operate with respect for
the country's sovereignty and in accordance with the
basic principles of peacekeeping. It is important that
the front-line forces are already patrolling supply routes
that are critical for the region around the capital. We call
on the Government of South Sudan and representatives
of the troop-contributing countries to assist the RPF in
achieving operational readiness and, together with the
Secretariat, to continue studying mutually acceptable
modalities for the Force, including its deployment in
the area of Juba airport.

We have taken note of the balanced tone of the
Secretary-General's monthly reports and stand ready to
consider the recommendations of the strategic review
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, which
is being conducted by the Secretariat at the initiative of
the Secretary-General.

