Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Peru, in today's debate on the situation in Haiti,
and on behalf of cote d'Ivoire would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate him warmly on his recent
appointment as his country's chief diplomat. We also
commend Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-
General for Peace Operations, for his excellent briefing.

On 25 June (see S/PV.8559), by a vote ofa majority
of its members, the Security Council decided to
establish a new special political mission in Haiti, the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH),
to replace the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), whose mandate
expires today, 15 October, after 15 years of a United
Nations peacekeeping presence in Haiti. My delegation
would like to pay tribute to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General La Lime and the staff of
MINUJUSTH, as well as the various United Nations
entities in Haiti. The remarkable work that has been
done, in collaboration with Haitian stakeholders, has
made possible encouraging progress with regard to the
rule of law, human rights and capacity-building for the
Haitian National Police.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the establishment and
official launch on 16 October ofthe new mission. Its main
tasks will be to assist the Government in consolidating
political stability, good governance and the rule of law
and establishing an inclusive inter-Haitian dialogue. It
will also work to support strengthening the protection
of human rights and planning and organizing free and
transparent elections. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the constructive approach that has enabled
the identification of new targets and indicators for
measuring the progress of sustainable development
in Haiti after BINUH is deployed. We also welcome
the efforts of the Haitian Government to reduce
violence and urge it to redouble its efforts to increase
the financial and logistical resources of the Haitian
National Police, with a view to enabling it to carry out
its mission effectively.
Like the rest of the Council, my country continues
to be concerned about the situation in Haiti, with its
ongoing political crisis, socioeconomic difficulties,
soaring insecurity and an alarming humanitarian
situation. With respect to the political situation, the
open conflict between the opposition and the executive
branch has so far prevented the formation of a new
Government and has led to the indefinite postponement
of new parliamentary elections, which runs the risk of
creating a constitutional crisis after 13 January 2020.
On top of that, the Parliament's rejection of President
Jovenel Moise's calls for an inclusive dialogue has
focused the Council on the magnitude of the current
crisis, which requires an urgent response.

The economic situation continues to be just as
worrying, due largely to the negative effects of the
political crisis and the business surrounding the
PetroCaribe funds. In addition to the fuel shortages
and the people's deteriorating living conditions, which
are resulting in paralysing social protests, Haiti is
struggling to enact its 2018-2019 and 2019-2020 budget
laws in a context of insufficient external budget support.

The security situation, in which the armed-gang
activity continues, is also seriously worrying, and the
security challenges remain daunting and require urgent
action, despite the efforts ofthe Haitian National Police.

The humanitarian situation is also alarming.
We note that 1.3 million people are still waiting for
humanitarian assistance, while the United Nations
specialized agencies are having difficulty mobilizing
the funds needed to cover the 2019 humanitarian
response plan. Only $26.2 million of $126.2 million has
been raised so far, and ifnothing is done, 39,000 children
under the age of five could face acute malnourishment.

My country reaffirms its commitment to the
peaceful settlement of disputes and emphasizes the
need for an inclusive inter-Haitian dialogue to create
the appropriate conditions to resolve the current crisis,
with the support of the international community. In that
regard, my delegation urges the stakeholders to consider
consensus-based measures to authorize the President
to govern by decree until the renewal of Parliament
after 13 January 2020, when the term of the legislature
expires.In view of the recurring social protests, which
pose a serious threat to sociopolitical stability, my
country calls for urgent multisectoral measures aimed
at restoring and strengthening the people's confidence
in public institutions and attracting foreign investment.
It will also be important to clarify the allegations of
the mismanagement of the PetroCaribe funds and
ensure accountability.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire continues to believe
that the only way out of the crisis is for the Haitians
themselves to show willingness to find consensus-
based solutions through dialogue. In that regard, we call
on the international community, including the United
Nations and especially the Council, to support all the
national efforts to create the necessary conditions for
restoring lasting peace and stability in Haiti.

