Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): We also wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). We would
like also to thank Mr. Annabi for the very useful update he
has given us on that situation.

My delegation notes with appreciation that despite
some enormous and continuing difficulties, UNMIBH has
made significant progress in the area of police restructuring,
the review of the judicial system and the establishment of
the Breko unified police force.

We take note of the problems facing UNMIBH in the
integration of Bosniac and Croat police officers in canton
7, the establishment of the State Border Service, and the
non-compliance with the Mission's International Police
Task Force, which, among other things, creates mistrust and
apprehension and indeed retards the efforts of UNMIBH to
establish transparent and accountable police forces. This
notwithstanding, it is our earnest hope that for the sake of
peace and reconciliation these and other related problems
will be resolved sooner rather than later to permit the
restructuring and reform exercise to continue.

In this connection, my delegation fully agrees with
the observation of the Secretary-General, as stated in
paragraph 33 of his report, on the need for the Council to
support UNMIBH in its efforts to implement these
endeavours.

We also note the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, which focus on
programmes which support the return of refugees,
internally displaced persons, demining exercises and the
welfare of children. In this context, we welcome the
successful completion of the pilot projects addressing
violence against women. All of these are very important
projects which my delegation values highly. We hope that
funds will be made available for the implementation of
these projects.

Finally, we appreciate the efforts to form a Bosnia
and Herzegovina police contingent for service in a United
Nations peacekeeping operation, and we agree with the
observation stated in the Secretary-General' s report in this
regard.

