Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for taking the initiative to hold this debate, which
allows us to voice our opinions and exchange views
on the recurring issue of piracy, which has become a
genuine threat, around the world, to international peace
and security. I thank the Deputy Secretary-General for
his briefing on the matter.

The importance of this debate lies in the fact that,
although the problem of piracy varies in its severity
from region to region, it allows us to study the diversity
of challenges that the international community faces in
confronting that threat. That is particularly true since,
as with any other form of crime, piracy is inevitably
linked to other societal ills.

I would like to address the situation in the Gulf
of Guinea. Since the most recent public debate on
the subject, held on 29 February (see S/PV.6727), the
scourge of piracy has remained a very worrisome reality
in the region. It is true that the piracy that is developing
in the Gulf of Guinea cannot be addressed in the same
way as the piracy in the Gulf of Aden of recent years
or off the coast of Somalia, since the manifestations
and impact of that piracy are different in the Gulf of
Guinea, in particular because there is no failed State or
strategic maritime route there.

However, piracy still undoubtedly poses a threat to
the security, stability and economic development of the
States in the region, as recognized by resolutions 2018
(2011) and 2039 (2012). Since the adoption of those two
resolutions and the recommendations they contain on
supporting an effective struggle against the scourge,
we must note that progress on the issue has been slim,
despite the stated willingness and determination of the
States and organizations concerned. Worse, piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea is becoming even more worrisome,
given the methods used by the pirates to bring their
schemes to fruition and in particular when we look at
piracy's relationship to the general situation in West
Africa.

Indeed, according to the most recent report of the
International Maritime Organization, while there was a
decrease in the number of acts of maritime piracy off
the coast of Somalia during the first nine months of the
year, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is making the area
increasingly dangerous, with 34 documented attacks
between January and September 2012, compared to just
30 last year. The report also states that the attacks are
often violent and planned.

Given such reports, Togo's concerns can only
increase, especially because it is becoming increasingly
clear that there are links between piracy and other
forms of crime in the region, as was discussed at our
debate on 21 February on the impact of transnational
organized crime in West Africa and the Sahel (see S/PV.6717). Meanwhile, it has been established that
the income from such illicit activities as the diversion
of oil cargoes serve to finance networks that seek to
challenge or diminish States' authority. Such networks
can therefore be considered true mafia organizations
that undermine the efforts of the States of the subregion
to ensure good governance and respect for human
rights.

The impact of piracy on State economies, especially
in the Gulf of Guinea, is clear, particularly given that the
port revenue of countries involved forms a major part
of their national income. For example, the Republic of
Benin, which continues to bear the brunt ofthe increase
in pirate attacks, has experienced a catastrophic drop
in activity in the port of Cotonou. The resulting major
financial losses for that country clearly highlight the
disastrous impact of piracy on the financial security of
countries in the region.

As close as it is to Benin, Togo is obviously not
immune to that impact. My country is therefore greatly
involved in efforts to strengthen national capacities in
the fight against piracy, with the help of such partners
as France and the United States of America. That help
made it possible, inter alia, for the Togolese navy to
fend off a pirate attack by a ship under the Panamanian
flag on 8 February.

At the regional level, beyond structures already in
place, such as the Regional Centre for Maritime Security
in Central Africa and the funding system created by the
Economic Community of Central African States, we
welcome the progress made towards the adoption of a
comprehensive strategic plan for fighting piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, as called for in resolution 2039 (2012).
Togo commends the convening in Libreville on 22 and
23 October of the first meeting ofa steering committee
to plan a summit of Heads of State and Government
on maritime piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea. The committee recommended that the summit
take place in Cameroon in April 2013 to adopt the plan.

We encourage the Economic Community of
Central African States, the Economic Community of
West African States, the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the United Nations Office for West Africa in
their shared efforts to work for the critical adoption
of a strategy to combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
which would represent a major step forward towards
implementing practical, targeted measures to eradicate
that blight.
The Togolese delegation believes that the
maintenance of international peace and security with
respect to the threat of piracy, no matter in what region,
is a primary challenge for the international community
because piracy represents an attack on international
law and human rights by reason of the impingement
on the freedom of navigation and the many kinds of
violence inflicted at sea by pirates on their victims.
Such violence is an assault on human dignity. Togo
therefore supports the idea of developing strategies
to ensure the quick release of hostages and to support
their families.

The fight against piracy requires an urgent collective
response to prevent that scourge, once defeated in one
country or subregion, from moving to another. Clearly,
the international community's efforts can achieve
significant results, as we have seen in the reduction of
the number of attacks in the Gulf of Aden. At the same
time, it is clear that the countries in question, despite
their individual or bilateral concerted efforts to fight
piracy, do not have the capacity effectively to prevent
or diminish the threat on their own.

The fight against piracy must therefore be waged
in the context of a coordinated juridical framework,
based on recognized international standards, with
States firmly resolved to effectively prevent impunity
for perpetrators. It must also take into account, in an
integrated manner, the various facets of the fight and
the individual national efforts of States, especially flag
States. We must also work collectively to exchange
information and intelligence, given the tentacular
networks that characterize this worldwide scourge.

Given the shifting realities from region to region,
it is important for the United Nations to play a primary
role in every aspect of the issue as the depositary
and clearing house for best practices. It must also
take the measures necessary to protect the maritime
environment in the course of support and protection
operations at sea. Lastly, the United Nations should
encourage affected States to seek international support
for their national efforts, and coordinate international
assistance, especially in the implementation of the
global strategy called for in resolution 2039 (2012).

