Mr. Wang Min (China): Ithank High Representative
Inzko for his briefing.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina of late
has remained generally stable. There has been positive
progress in the political process and the area of the rule
of law. Despite the floods that ravaged the country in
May 2014, and thanks to the efforts of the country's
people, the overall economy is moving in the right
direction. Elections were held successfully late last
year, and in March a new Government was formed
without difficulty, for which China would like to offer
its congratulations.

China respects Bosnia and Herzegovina's
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity and believes it is the country's sovereign
right to choose its own development path and foreign
policies. The international community should respect
and support the Government and people in their choice
of a path to development. We hope that under the new
Government's leadership, all communities can live in
peace and work together on their shared development
in order to build on their significant achievements
in national reconstruction. We also hope that
comprehensive implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement will continue and that more progress will
be made in all reconstruction areas.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans, and its achievement of peace, stability
and development is in the common interests of
the international community, including the other
countries in the region. At the moment, its economic
development and national reconstruction are still facing
complications and difficulties, and the country needs
the continuing support and help of the international
community if it is to achieve sustainable economic
and social development and lasting peace and stability.
The international community should take a balanced
and prudent approach to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
issues while fully respecting its people's ownership
and independence, with a View to enhancing unity and
achieving harmonious development that can benefit all
its communities. China supports High Representative
Inzko in his efforts to fulfil his mandated tasks in a
way that will enable him to play a constructive role in
advancing the country's political process. We are ready
to join the international community in a continuing
effort to contribute to lasting peace, stability and
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

