I would like to express my gratitude to the briefers for their impressive briefings. Germany is delighted to preside over today's open debate on this very important topic. Eleanor Roosevelt, who was the only woman on the team that drafted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, famously said with respect to the achievement of human rights: "The immediate test is not only to the extent to which human rights and freedoms have already been achieved, but the direction in which the world is moving." That was in 1948. Today, we have every reason to ask ourselves: Is the world moving in the right direction? The answer is clear. The task that was handed to each of us - to make human rights universal - is far from complete. It will remain incomplete as long as the universality of human rights is questioned and undermined, even inside the United Nations. It will remain incomplete as long as borders are violated and moved at will. It will remain incomplete as long as the freedoms of speech and of assembly are illegally curtailed and withheld. My main concern today is how human rights and peacekeeping are related to each other. This topic is of high importance for the United Nations. When we look at war zones around the world, it remains a notable fact that the vast majority of victims are civilians, and often they are intentionally targeted by the parties to conflict. As Defence Minister, let me be very clear. Human rights have to be a primary concern in peace operations. Human rights should never be subordinate to operational effectiveness. Ultimately, military success is possible only as long as fundamental rights are firmly defended. Moreover, in our current situation - during a pandemic - we have to be attentive to upholding the universal human rights of every individual human being. If human rights are to mean something - anything - the Security Council has arole to play and a responsibility to fulfil. The Council has a special obligation to guarantee the protection of human rights in each of the United Nations peacekeeping operations it authorizes. We need to dedicate significant resources to the human rights elements of these missions. Fostering human rights is part of the capacity-building and advisory functions of United Nations missions, and it must happen in close cooperation with State authorities. The protection of human rights is essential to building resilient and inclusive societies so they can move towards sustainable peace. How Blue Helmets conduct their operations has a direct influence on how United Nations peacekeeping, as well as the United Nations itself, is being judged by people in every corner of the world. Peacekeepers function as role models. That is why human rights aspects must be recognized from the very beginning by being included in the training and the evaluation of troops before they deploy. I make the following pledge today. Germany will make human rights training a mandatory element in all peacekeeping training efforts we provide to the United Nations, in the same manner as we instruct and train our own German troops before they deploy. Furthermore, later this year, Germany, as a champion of the Secretary- General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative, will hold a high-level conference on peacekeeping, human rights and the protection of civilians. We want to deepen the debate on the issues at stake. We want to jointly develop practical proposals for the Secretariat and for all troop-contributing countries. The goal is to better implement the human rights tasks within operations. We will also feed into this conference the results of two new German studies, namely, a study on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping and a study on how to increase the number of women in peace operation. Women are absolutely essential for peace operations, as only diverse teams can make peacekeeping truly successful. Finally, let me thank High Commissioner Bachelet, Special Representative Shearer and Mr. Dismas Kitenge Senga for their dedicated work. Their efforts are particularly remarkable given today's unusual conditions, where conflicts continue against the backdrop of a pandemic and despite the Secretary-General's appeal for global ceasefire. It is a sign of hope that last week the Security Council adopted resolution 2532 (2020), in support of the Secretary-General's appeal.
