Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Allow me to
welcome our Libyan colleague to the Council and
especially to underline the General Assembly's vote
this morning, which allowed for the full reintegration
of Libya into our community of nations. Let me also
underline the unanimity of the Council in adopting the
very important resolution 2009 (2011).

Portugal welcomes the improved situation in
Libya and looks forward to a smooth and peaceful
transition through a Libyan-led and owned, inclusive
and representative process. We also welcome the
statements issued by the National Transitional Council
expressing its commitment to national reconciliation,
human rights, justice and the rule of law.

Over the past six months, we have witnessed
significant developments in Libya. Women have played
a central role in the historic events that have taken
place and continue to take place in the country. It is
now fundamental to ensure the equal participation of
Libyan women in all aspects of the transition process
and their inclusion in national and international
decision-making about their country's future and in
national reconciliation processes.

We also strongly encourage the Libyan
authorities to pursue the active protection of the human
rights of their citizens and foreign residents, and to
ensure that all serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law are investigated and
their perpetrators brought to justice.

Portugal fully supports the guiding principles of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL): national ownership, speed of response and
rapid delivery, and effective coordination of
international assistance. We also endorse the National
Transitional Council's request for the assistance and
support of the international community in
implementing its plans for the stabilization and
rebuilding of the country, according to the priorities it
has set out.

With the adoption of resolution 2009 (2011), the
conditions have been met for the swift setting up of
UNSMIL, thus enabling the United Nations to
promptly assist the Libyan authorities in addressing
manifold challenges and in meeting the timetable to
which they have committed themselves. The
establishment of an integrated United Nations support
mission for an initial period of three months will allow
the new authorities and the United Nations to plan
further and more effectively for a longer period, based
on a phased approach.

We recall that in several resolutions dealing with
women and peace and security, the Security Council
has expressed its willingness to incorporate a gender
perspective into United Nations missions. Portugal will
continue to stress the importance of incorporating this
dimension into all political peacekeeping mandates.
The positive contribution that women can make to all
aspects of post-conflict situations has long been
established.

As Libya enters a new chapter of its history, the
international community must unite to assist the
Libyan people in the tremendous tasks and challenges
that lie ahead. We therefore welcome the leading and
coordinating role of the United Nations, and in
particular the efforts of the Secretary-General in this
regard. Portugal stands ready to support the Libyan
people on their path to peace and democracy, including
in the framework of the Security Council and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) in this new phase, in which funds need to be
made available for State-building, economic recovery
and urgent humanitarian assistance.

Allow me to say a very heartfelt word of
appreciation for the efforts of Mr. Al-Khatib and the
valuable role he has played in recent months. I would
also like to commend the work of Mr. Ian Martin and
his team in preparing for the establishment of
UNSMIL, and wish him and all his staff every success
in the challenging tasks ahead.

