Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Iceland and Montenegro; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Albania; and the European Free
Trade Association country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.

I would like to join other speakers in welcoming
High Representative Valentin Inzko back to the
Council. Let me also express our gratitude for his work
and efforts undertaken during his time as European
Union Special Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to be difficult. We note with relief that the
overall security situation has remained calm and stable
for a long time now, but we are concerned by the
political uncertainty and the economic outlook. A
State-level Government has not yet been formed, one
year after the elections of October 2010. While we
welcome that discussions among political leaders
intensified earlier this fall on the formation of the
Council of Ministers, this has yet to translate into
results. We therefore call on the political leadership of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to form, through an inclusive
process, a State-level Government as a matter of
urgency.

In addition, we believe that the outstanding
urgent and necessary reforms to achieve qualitative
steps forward on Bosnia and Herzegovina's path
towards the European Union need to be addressed
rapidly. In that regard, we encourage the Security
Council to send a message of serious concern, urging
all political actors to find common solutions within the
General Framework Agreement for Peace.

The European Union believes that as a matter of
priority and to ensure that the country does not fall
behind the region on its path towards European
integration, it is critical that obligations under the
interim stabilization and association agreement are
fulfilled. In that regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina needs
to undertake a credible effort to bring its Constitution
into compliance with the European Convention on
Human Rights and to adopt a law on State aid that is
compatible with EU acquis. Similarly, the adoption of a
State-level census law is important.

Further progress will be needed to allow for a
credible membership application. It is the prime
responsibility of Bosnia and Herzegovina's political
leaders to achieve concrete and tangible progress,
including on the five objectives and two conditions for
closure of the Office of the High Representative.

The European Union is strengthening its
engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina so as to
support its progress towards European Union accession
through a comprehensive approach and significant
financial assistance and expertise. In that regard, the
European Union has enhanced its political presence
with the appointment of a new single European Union
Representative, Mr. Peter Sorensen, who has the lead
in supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in EU-related
matters, including through the use of a broad and
balanced toolbox.

In addition, the European Union maintains two
crisis management missions on the ground: first, the
European Union Police Mission, which will be closed
by the end of June 2012 and whose remaining strategic
tasks will be transferred to the European Union Special
Representative; and secondly, the EU-led force
(EUFOR) Operation Althea, which remains an
important element of the EU's overall strategy for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As our Foreign Ministers
reaffirmed on 10 October, the European Union is ready
to continue at this stage an executive military role to
support Bosnia and Herzegovina's efforts to maintain a
safe and secure environment under a renewed United
Nations mandate.
The main effort of Operation Althea will be in
capacity-building and training, while maintaining
situational awareness and a credible reserve, in case
called upon to support EUFOR efforts to maintain or
restore a safe and secure environment.

As regards the its overall strategy for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the European Union looks forward to the
discussions with the international community on the
reconfiguration of the international presence, including
its downsizing and the possible relocation of the Office
of the High Representative in the appropriate forum.
The European Union regularly encourages Bosnia and
Herzegovina's political representatives to act with a
greater spirit of compromise, to step up consultations
and to work for the long-term interests of the country.
We also stand fully behind the authority of the High
Representative and welcome the close cooperation
between him and the new European Union Special
Representative.

Moreover, we underline once more our
unequivocal commitment to the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign
and united country. We urge all to refrain from divisive
rhetoric and actions that would harm the interests of
the citizens.

Sixteen years after the signature of the Dayton-
Paris Peace Agreements, Bosnia and Herzegovina's
citizens deserve a qualitative step forward by their
country on the path towards European integration. On
12 October, the European Commission adopted its
2011 enlargement package. According to its findings,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made only limited
progress in addressing EU-related issues. We reiterate
our appeal to the political leaders to accelerate the pace
of the reforms in all areas, to put Bosnia and
Herzegovina firmly on the way towards the European
Union.
