Mr. Kutesa (Uganda): At the outset, I congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the United States delegation on
your leadership of the Security Council this month. I
would also like to thank you, Sir, for organizing and
presiding over this important and timely debate on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the
Great Lakes region. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Special Envoy Mary Robinson, World Bank
President Jim Yong Kim and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, for their statements.

This debate is taking place at a time when eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo is in deep crisis
again. The presence of a multiplicity of foreign
and local armed groups - including the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF), the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda, the Forces nationales de
liberation, Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and Mayi
Mayi militias - has exacerbated insecurity in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
Within the framework of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), the
region has been involved in efforts to find a peaceful
solution to instability in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, through both political and military
approaches. We are convinced that the political process
should be at the forefront of our efforts, with peace
enforcement measures complementing it. It was in
this context that the Great Lakes region conceived the
neutral international force, which the Security Council
then turned into the Force Intervention Brigade. In
that regard, Uganda welcomed the statement of the
Secretary-General of 18 July, in which he underscored

"the importance of pursuing a political solution to
address the root causes ofconflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo".

We are also encouraged by the approach taken
by Mary Robinson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, and
appreciate her engagement in the political process,
including the Kampala peace talks. President Yoweri
Museveni, in his capacity as Chairman of the ICGLR,
has convened five extraordinary summits, including
four in Kampala, aimed at finding a lasting solution
to recurrent conflicts in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The sixth summit is due to take place in
Nairobi on 31 July.

These extraordinary summits were instrumental
in de-escalating the situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo last year, and in launching
the talks in Kampala between the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the M-23,
facilitated by my colleagues Crispus Kiyonga, Uganda's
Minister of Defence, who is with me in this Chamber
today. We believe that the Kampala talks between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the M-23 provide the best opportunity for resolving
their differences. The political engagement of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the M-23 must be given priority in the search for a
durable and peaceful solution.

The successful conclusion of these talks will no
doubt make a positive contribution to the national
consultations due to start in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We are glad to inform the Council that since
December 2012, the talks have seen some progress,
with two key milestones. First, both parties reviewed
the peace agreement of 2009 between the Government
and the Congres national pour la defense du peuple and
agreed on the status of its implementation, which was a
significant step in building confidence. Secondly, both
parties presented draft peace agreements in March,
consolidating them into one draft that is currently in its
second revision and subject to further negotiation.

While these developments are commendable,
renewed fighting raises serious concern over their
commitment to the talks. We call upon the Security
Council and its partners to encourage the parties to
expedite and speedily conclude the Kampala peace
talks. We also call on the international community
to provide logistical and financial support to ICGLR
mechanisms, such as the Joint Intelligence Fusion
Centre and the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism.

Renewed fighting between the Congolese armed
forces and the M-23 is a major concern for the region
and the international community. Meanwhile, atrocities
committed by the Allied Democratic Forces, which
have links with Al-Shabaab, have grown in frequency
and intensity since the beginning of July. Over the
past three weeks, the ADF attacked Kangbayi prison,
captured Kamango town and ambushed a convoy of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These attacks
caused an influx of over 66,000 Congolese refugees
into Uganda. The humanitarian situation in the region
remains a matter of grave concern, as insecurity caused
by armed groups has led to large-scale displacements
of people.

While we deplore and condemn these attacks
by the ADF and other armed groups, these serve as
a grim reminder of the real challenges faced by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
Uganda is particularly concerned about the possibility
of an imminent attack by the ADF from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is our expectation that the
new mechanism, combined with security sector reform
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, will give it
the requisite capacity to deter foreign armed groups
from occupying and using its territory to destabilize
neighbouring countries.

We consider the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region to be a unique and important milestone
towards addressing challenges in the country and the
region. In our view, the following three elements of the
Framework are crucial. First, the Framework recognizes
a holistic approach the as best way to end instability.
Secondly, the Framework outlines commitments and
actions at the national, regional and international
levels, the implementation of which should be the main
focus. Thirdly and most importantly, it emphasizes
partnerships and collective efforts among the United
Nations, the African Union, the ICGLR and the
Southern African Development Community.

We therefore reiterate and underscore the need for
the expeditious implementation of the commitments
under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Great
Lakes region and the international community. Uganda
is committed to playing its part. It is our experience
that regional-led initiatives, with the support of the
international community, have yielded better results on
the African continent.

We underscore the need to focus on the nexus
between peace and development in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is important to support
regional initiatives in key areas such as infrastructure,
energy, trade and agriculture, as both the Secretary-
General and the President of the World Bank Group
have emphasized. In that regard, Uganda welcomed the
visit of the Secretary-General and the President of the
World Bank to the Great Lakes region in May, and the
pledges they made.

In conclusion, for many years now Uganda and
the region have called for concerted efforts to address
the root causes of conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We have also called for support to the
Government to help it effectively exercise authority
over all of its territories as a way of dealing with
armed groups that have been destabilizing the country
and region. Now is the time to redouble our resolve
and efforts to effectively address the root causes of
the conflicts in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo in a comprehensive manner. The forthcoming
extraordinary ICGLR summit, to be held in Nairobi,
will review the situation in the country and the region,
as well as actions being undertaken, and make specific
recommendations to consolidate our efforts.

