Mr. Khazaee (Iran): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Uganda's
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month and to thank you for convening this important
meeting.

The Middle East is at the crossroads of the main
divine religions of the world. It inspires a vast source
of spiritual and philosophical perfectionism. Its divine
spirit demands that it be a land of peace, justice and
compassion, and not one of conflicts and human
suffering.

It was in this spirit that the President of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Mr. Ahmadinejad, embarked
on a State visit last week to Lebanon and was warmly
welcomed by the people and the Government of
Lebanon in an almost unprecedented manner. This
warm reception of the President is indicative of the
constructive role that the Islamic Republic of Iran
plays in the region in general, and in Lebanon in
particular. This fact has been confirmed by Lebanese
officials and all influential political figures and groups
who are qualified to judge the positive effects of the
visit, unlike those who look at this important and
constructive regional event as an impediment to their
wrong expansionist political agendas in the region.

It is therefore necessary for the international
community, in particular the Security Council, and the
Secretary-General to take into account the important
and powerful role that the Islamic Republic of Iran
plays in the region and to take advantage of it to
maintain and consolidate peace and stability in
Lebanon and the region as a whole.

If the Middle East is to see the prosperity and
dignity it so deserves, the miserable plight and
sufferings of the Palestinian people must end. We must
not let the peace and stability of the region be
constantly threatened by a regime that has a dark
history of crimes and aggression. Clearly, more and
more Palestinians see little justification in pursuing
unequal peace with an unequal partner. The present
Zionist regime of blockades, separation walls and
checkpoints has led to the imprisonment of the entire
Palestinian population in Gaza and the West Bank.

As has been stated again and again, the
Palestinian issue is the core problem of the Middle
East. It is this conflict which has, over the past six
decades, spawned the ever-widening circle of Israel's
confrontations with its neighbours and the Islamic
world. It is this conflict which has contributed most
significantly to the anger and frustration of the people
of the Islamic world.

The consequences of our collective failure to
bring peace, justice and compassion to the Middle East
are disastrous for the region and beyond. What adds to
the pessimism is the continuing grave situation on the
ground in terms of the humanitarian plight of the
Palestinians, in particular the people besieged in Gaza.
Amidst this human tragedy, the ongoing provocative
and aggressive actions of the Israel regime in the
occupied territories have compounded the plight of the
Palestinian people and made a just solution to the
conflict all the more difficult.

An immediate end to the illegal practices
affecting the human rights of the Palestinian people is
the most important prerequisite for building an
environment of trust and confidence. Trust and
confidence, together with the active engagement of the

international community, are the only way forward to
peace.

In this context, there is an urgent need to address
the Israeli nuclear weapons programme. Nuclear
weapons in the hands of a regime with an unparalleled
record of State terrorism and resort to aggression and
to the threat or use of force against other countries
presents a real threat to regional and global peace and
security and the non-proliferation regime. This fact
was underlined at the third Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons in New York in April. This threat
needs to be urgently and decisively addressed by the
international community, and initiative for the creation
of a zone free from weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East should be actively pursued.

In accordance with its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has a significant and crucial role to
play in supporting efforts to restore peace and justice
in the Middle East by ending the suffering of the
Palestinians and by putting an end to the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian lands, Lebanese territories
and the Golan Heights. These are essential measures
that need to be taken in order to bring lasting stability
to the Middle East.

