It is a great honour to have been invited to participate in this important and timely dialogue on cooperation between the Security Council and regional and subregional organizations, with a specific focus on the African Union, by His Excellency Mr. Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa, President of South Africa. I congratulate South Africa on its presidency of the Security Council and thank all the members of the African Union and the Security Council for their continued cooperation and support in Somalia's journey to stability, progress and sustainable development. Somalia, as a member of both the African Union and United Nations, sees both organizations as twin, complimentary agencies for peace, security and sustainable development across the African continent and beyond. In this globalized, interconnected and interdependent world, we must not be misled by simple and neat geographical demarcations but rather be guided by the necessity to progress and prosper together on a global scale. What the coronavirus disease pandemic continues to teach us all is that, the more effective partnerships we can build and maintain, the better the opportunities for win-win development for all. The focus of this meeting on the effectiveness of African Union-United Nations partnership in contributing to the resolution of conflicts in Africa and sustaining peace, including contributing to the African Union's ambition to silence the guns on the continent in the near future, is extremely timely. Sadly, across the African continent, while many conflicts are winding down, new conflicts are breaking out. The peace and security challenge of Africa is one that has a strangulating effect on its peoples' opportunities. It is also a stain on national reputations and a source of frustration and disappointment for international partners and investors. While Africa is no longer the "hopeless continent", it has not totally succeeded in silencing the guns that made it appear such a failure to the rest of the world. Indeed, conflicts everywhere, including the African continent, are dynamic, complex and difficult to resolve without addressing root causes. However, no meaningful analysis or action is possible in the pursuit of conflict management or prevention without dialogue and robust partnerships. Since the adoption of resolutions 1809 (2008) and 2033 (2012) there has been strong partnership between the peace and security architecture of the United Nations and the African Union, which has been bolstered by regular interactions. Furthermore, the annual report of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, on strengthening the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and security in Africa (S/2020/860), clearly highlights the strong spirit of collaboration and clear commitment to approaching peace and security challenges together. This is a practice that must be nurtured and a strategy that has to be further institutionalized to be even more effective. In Somalia, the United Nations-African Union partnership is clearly evident in the operations of the forces of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which are bravely fighting alongside the Somali National Army to defeat the last remains of international terrorism in the form of Al-Shabaab. With Security Council and African Union support, we are working on successfully transitioning full security responsibilities from AMISOM to the Somali National Army at the earliest opportunity. However, we are fighting a tough and determined international terrorist group with global ambitions and absolutely no regard for human life. Accordingly, it is my Government's sincere belief that we cannot be expected to fight a national fight of global significance with the United Nations arms embargo hampering our efforts. The Security Council and African Union partnership must now, more than ever, either lift the arms embargo or support Somalia in finding a structured path out of the embargo so that we can defend our people properly and provide the stability the region, continent and world need to recover better from the socioeconomic crisis brought on by the coronavirus disease. In all matters of peace and security, it is fundamental to seek peaceful political solutions through dialogue and mediation, as envisaged by the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. It is also paramount to address the root causes, which often are many and complex. In Somalia, we are working hard on this through ongoing reconciliation and by completing the constitutional review process to ensure inclusive politics, fairness, justice and economic opportunities to cement our peace and stability. No partnership is perfect, and the United Nations-A frican Union's collaboration in peace and security on the continent could benefit from a better alignment of scarce resources and more joint activities to build the capacities of the people and institutions of conflict-affected States. The partnership must also be even more proactive and act when the earliest conflict warning signs are clear. Accordingly, maintaining peace and peacebuilding activities must be prioritized and executed effectively, as they are more beneficial and less fiscally onerous than peacekeeping for all stakeholders. In Somalia, we say "One finger does not wash your whole face", so the United Nations-African Union partnership for peace and security in Africa is an important initiative we must all support and invest in. In Somalia, we understand the pain of conflict and that the long, steep and harsh road back from it is never easy. However, what is also evident from our experience is that there must be a greater focus on addressing root causes, early conflict-prevention measures and resources, human and financial, to transition from fragility to sustainable peace and security. In this regard, the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union in enhancing peace and security in Africa has never been more important.
