Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank Mr. Pronk for his insightful briefing.

We welcome what must be a cautious optimism
expressed regarding the implementation of the

Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). It is
encouraging that the Southern Sudan Legislative
Assembly is meeting regularly, that 300 kilometres of
roads have been cleared of mines, that 1.6 million
children in southern Sudan are going to school and that
160,000 displaced persons returned to southern Sudan
in the first part of this year. We want to commend the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) for its
contribution to the creation of an environment that has
made those developments possible.

We are concerned, however, that, despite the
small amount of progress that is being made, it has not
been possible to fulfil the parties' security
commitments, and issues relating to wealth- and
power-sharing and the demarcation of borders have not
been resolved. We thus call for more diligent effort
from both sides in meeting their obligations in
implementation of the provisions of the CPA.

At this juncture, we must also express our
concern at the continued restrictions being placed on
UNMIS. This need not be the case.

There is no doubt that implementation of the CPA
will impact on the peace process in Darfur. Without
significant progress in implementation of the CPA,
efforts to implement the Darfur Peace Agreement
(DPA) will be curtailed. In the interest of the peoples
of both southern Sudan and Darfur, we again urge the
parties to the Agreement to work harder in all the tasks
related to the CPA.

With regard to Darfur, we look forward to the
meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council at the summit level planned for Wednesday.
We hope that the proposal to extend the AMIS mandate
will be endorsed by the summit so that the
strengthening of the forces provided for in resolution
1706 (2006) can go ahead.

It is, however, worth recalling that when the
Abuja peace negotiations were under way, many
around this table and elsewhere felt that they were
taking too long. Mr. Pronk has suggested that even if
they had taken one year the result would have been the
same.

We believe that the Darfur Peace Agreement
provides the basic framework for peace in Darfur. We
want to caution against encouraging parties outside the
framework to seek different accommodation, beyond
the terms of the DPA. Our effort will be well served if

we steer the parties towards respecting that Agreement
and encourage them to seek accommodation under its
terms. Thus we continue to urge the Government of the
Sudan to accept the transformation of AMIS into a
United Nations mission.

Tanzania has suffered the humiliation of
colonialism. We vow never again to yield to
colonialism. We cherish our sovereignty and guard it
jealously. We therefore will never be privy to any
efforts to colonize or recolonize any country. The
transformation of AMIS to a United Nations mission is
in the interest of the Sudan and her people. It is not an
exercise to recolonize Sudan. It needs to happen, and
urgently.

