Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France welcomes the unanimous adoption by the
Security Council of today's resolution taking measures
with regard to Iran under Article 41 of Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations.

This resolution, adopted on the basis of a draft
presented by Germany, the United Kingdom and
France, confirms the mandatory nature of the
suspension of sensitive activities in the nuclear field,
which are of concern to the international community,
because they do not have a credible civilian application
in Iran today. These include enrichment, reprocessing,
the manufacture of heavy water and the construction in
Arak of a reactor moderated by heavy water capable of
producing plutonium of military grade quality.

The resolution also allows the international
community to make sure that Iran will not benefit from
external contributions, under any form whatsoever, for
its sensitive nuclear activities, as well as for its missile
programmes. The export by Iran of sensitive
technology is also prohibited, as are services, including
financial services, surrounding sensitive transactions to
or from Iran. The travel of those with operational
involvement in the programmes will be restricted, and
their assets outside of Iran will be frozen, as will the
entities involved in sensitive programmes on behalf of
which they operate. These measures will also apply
immediately to some 20 persons and entities directly
listed in the Annex to the resolution. Lastly, the
resolution reinforces the powers of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in its verification
work.

The aim of these measures, which is recalled in
the preamble to the resolution, is to invite Iran to
conform to its commitments within the framework of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and to the demands of the Security Council
and the IAEA, to persuade it to conform to resolution
1696 (2006) and to stop the development of its

sensitive technology supporting its nuclear and missile
programmes.

These sanctions are proportionate and reversible.
The Security Council states, without ambiguity, that if
Iran re-establishes the suspension of all its enrichment
and reprocessing activities, including research and
development, the measures that the Council has just
adopted will be suspended. If it conforms to all
provisions of resolution 1696 (2006) and 1733 (2006),
as well as those of the resolutions of the IAEA Board
of Governors, these sanctions will be lifted; but if it
persists on its current path, there will be other
measures under Article 41 of Chapter VII.

This resolution sends out a clear message on the
part of the international community to Iran, which is
now facing a strategic choice, which was recalled by
President Jacques Chirac on 12 December: cooperation
with the international community or growing isolation.
We hope that Tehran will choose dialogue and that it
will take decisions that will allow for a resumption of
negotiations based on resolutions 1696 (2006) and
1733 (2006). France, with its partners, remains ready
for this at all times.

