Ms. Haq: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on mission-support
efforts in Mali.

The immediate priority of the Department of
Field Support is to establish the initial operational
capability of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
as soon as possible. My colleague, Herve' Ladsous,
has set the substantive compass according to which
mission-support efforts in MINUSMA are guided. In
my briefing to the Council today, I will explain how,
despite formidable constraints, we are on track to
meeting requirements and how we plan to satisfy the
operational needs of MINUSMA as best we can from
the transition on 1 July and onwards.

MINUSMA mission support is simultaneously
engaged in two other complex endeavours, namely,
preparations for the presidential elections, the first
round of which will take place on 28 July, and follow-
up to the interim agreement signed in Ouagadougou
last week. That would be a formidable triple challenge
in any context, but it is complicated by several features
of the operating environment in Mali, and specifically
in the northern part of the country.

Our efforts to set up the Mission currently focus
on several priorities, including the provision of rations
for troops, fuel for vehicles and premises for work
and living. We are confident that our systems for the
distribution of rations and water after 1 July will meet the
needs of MINUSMA troops. We still face some critical
information gaps with regard to fuel, but we anticipate
that the MINUSMA fuel-distribution capacity will be
operational by 1 July. With regard to the premises for
the Mission, we are making arrangements to establish
the various force and sector headquarters in Bamako
and the north, starting with Gao and Timbuktu. A
mission presence in Kidal will be established in due
course.

In support of the elections, we have been involved
in transporting election materials to Gao and Timbuktu.
The agreement signed by the Government of Mali
and representatives of the Mouvement national pour
la liberation de l'Azawad last week in Ouagadougou
has significant implications for MINUSMA mission
support. In particular, MINUSMA is expected to
support and supervise the cantonment of combatants
in one of the most challenging environments in the
country, namely, Kidal.

MINUSMA is rightly considered to be one of
the most logistically challenging missions the United
Nations has ever launched. That is so for several
reasons.

First, the climatic conditions in northern Mali,
where most of our operations will be located, are
harsh, to put it mildly. Sixty-five per cent of Mali's
landmass, which is twice the size of France, is desert
or semi-desert. The temperature in Timbuktu, which
will be the sector-west headquarters for MINUSMA,
regularly reaches 48°C, or 120°F. Last week, our team
visited Kidal when the afternoon temperature there
reached 52°C, or 125°F. There is no functioning power
grid in Gao. Our energy needs there, as in Timbuktu
and Kidal, will therefore be met through mobile
power generators. At such temperatures, even high-
capacity generators will be put to the test. Indeed, all
information and communication technology, vehicles,
refrigeration and tentage ultimately to be used in Mali
will be exposed to climatic conditions that accelerate
their decay. We already know that certain technological
options are out of the question. For example, we are
unable to deploy our mobile communication system to
Kidal because its sensitive components will melt.

Under those extreme conditions, it comes as little
surprise that water availability is limited, particularly
in the arid north, where our operations will be
concentrated. An initial engineering assessment by
the Mission has already confirmed that in Kidal the
Mission will jeopardize local water supply by tapping
into local reservoirs. Therefore, conscious of the
explicit request in resolution 2100 (2013) to manage
the Mission's environmental impact carefully, we are
looking into other technologies that would allow us to
produce water from air humidity.

True operational capability means that MINUSMA
must be able to provide a broad range of essential
aviation services: ground services such as cargo
handling, fire fighting and fuel delivery and storage;
the ability to carry out search and rescue missions;
and airfield and helicopter landing-site construction
and renovation. Given the long distances that must be
traversed in Mali, each and every one of those services
must be in place, intact and functioning. Those are also
highly technical and capital-intensive endeavours that
take time to establish from scratch.

The airfields in northern Mali are unable to service
large aircraft. The airstrips allow for only small to
medium aircraft, which carry limited passengers and
cargo. For the time being, therefore, we will need to
rely on military helicopters for an unusually large
share of air transport requirements. We are eagerly
awaiting confirmation from various Member States
as to the provision of helicopters for the Mission.
The central importance of medical support to United
Nations personnel is recognized by all. We all agree
that we must ensure casualty evacuation and medical
evacuation capability. In northern Mali that translates
directly into more helicopters.

Of course, under those circumstances, road
transport becomes all the more important, but there
are challenges in that regard as well. Last week, when
trying to determine the most feasible way to transport
some computers, a satellite dish and some generators to
the north, we discovered that there was no way for the
equipment to arrive safely by road.

The problem is twofold. First, the road infrastructure
in the north is spotty, often consisting of little more
than sand over long stretches. Secondly, with respect
to the security situation, even with the agreement with
the Mouvement national pour la liberation de l'Azawad
(MNLA) in Kidal, there are still armed groups that have
sworn to oppose and attack the United Nations at every
opportunity. We need only recall the concerns raised
by the suicide-bomb-making workshop discovered by
French forces two weeks ago just a few miles outside
of Gao, or the several thousand pounds of fertilizer,
uniforms and uniform-making equipment that was
seized.

We have deployed some of our most experienced
mission-support colleagues to lead the effort in
Bamako - our "A-team". These are colleagues with
experience in starting up and sustaining some of the
most challenging missions of the past 30 years. If
anyone can get this done, they can, and I am confident
that they will.

Others are chipping in. Because of the shortage of

aircraft, the United Nations Mission in Liberia has lent
its B200 aircraft to meet its short-term needs. Because
of the time it would normally take to procure critical
items, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
has made reserve equipment available for immediate
delivery. The United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) has made available air assets, equipment and
a range of back-office support functions, including
human resources, finance and procurement staff. For
its part, the Global Service Centre has drawn from
the strategic deployment stocks in Brindisi to provide
vehicles, communications equipment and security
material for airlifting to Bamako.

The Global Field Support Strategy (GF SS)
articulates a vision wherein the United Nations provides
faster, higher-quality support for a win-win situation
that benefits troops, civilian staff and the United
Nations system as a Whole. In sum, due to exigency as
well as the upholding of GFSS principles, inter-mission
cooperation, shared services and a smaller footprint
with less risk to staff all are central features of the
MINUSMA start-up and will remain central features
throughout the life of the Mission.

Together with Herve Ladsous and Jeff Feltman, we
have instructed all peacekeeping and special political
missions to expedite the release of staff who are needed
in Mali.

The Department of Field Support and other
departments have played an important part in staffing,
financing and establishing the Mission during this
critical start-up phase, with a strong emphasis on
flexibility, pragmatism and timely action. The contract
to rent several major facilities, including the building
that will serve as force headquarters in Bamako, was
prepared with staff from the Department of Field
Support, the Department of Management, ONUCI
and MINUSMA, and was concluded and signed by
all parties concerned Within one week of the initial
interface with the landlord in Mali. For the United
Nations, that is lightning speed. While United Nations
rules and regulations are being closely adhered to, the
emphasis on flexibility is leading to positive results
indeed.

In Mali, neither the challenges nor the risks at
hand should be underestimated. Much is beyond our
control. But our efforts to date and the results achieved
by MINUSMA thus far suggest that with commitment,
vision and the continued support of Member States, we
just may be able to beat the odds. When we reduce the
Mission's environmental footprint by introducing solar
power or technologies for local water production, we
also reduce the costs, and security risks, of an exposed
and vulnerable supply chain. When the Global Service
Centre deploys engineering expertise, vehicles and
information-technology equipment from its holdings,
a mission becomes operational more quickly than
it would have otherwise. This is a new way of doing
business. This is a better way of doing peacekeeping.

