Ms. Majdalani: On a hot summer day in 2017,
the family of a 5-year-old boy, Mohammad, decided to
escape the harsh realities of Gaza by going to the beach.
His parents did not realize that the nearby stream
flowing into the sea was full of raw sewage. Later that
evening all of Mohammed's family fell terribly ill;
within 10 days Mohammad was dead. A virus attacked
his brain after he swam in polluted waters.

As we speak today, 97 per cent of the Gaza's
groundwater is not suitable for human consumption,
and 30 per cent of illnesses in Gaza are from waterborne
pathogens. With an average of four hours of daily
power supply, wastewater facilities fail to operate,
daily emptying the equivalent of 34 Olympic-sized
swimming pools of raw sewage into the Mediterranean
Sea. After more than 12 years of blockade, consecutive
wars and loss of life, including children, and the failure
of internal Palestinian reconciliation, a humanitarian
catastrophe in the Gaza Strip is happening right now,
right before our eyes.

Rather than be negligent, Gidon and I are here
before the Security Council, together with Yana, the
Jordanian Director of EcoPeace Middle East, as part
of a dedicated team that refuses to allow our children
and our environment to remain hostage to the conflict.
We are here to impress upon members that water and
climate security issues are critical for a better future for
all the people in our region. While politicians can speak
of a disengagement policy, the fact is that we cannot
disengage from our shared environment. EcoPeace
revealed to the public that the Ashkelon desalination
plant, which provides 15 per cent of the drinking water
in Israel, has been intermittently closed due to the
pollution carried by the currents from Gaza beaches
towards the north. That is a big lesson to us all: water
and the environment know no borders or boundaries.

The demise of the Jordan River is another example
of the environmental cost we pay for the broader Arab-
Israeli conflict. Amin, the father ofan EcoPeace activist,
lived his childhood on the banks ofthe Jordan River. He
remembers its waters as being clear and fast-flowing.
His family used to fish and pump water from the river
to irrigate their fields. Following the occupation of the
West Bank, in 1967, Amin and his family lost access
to the river's banks and to their rightful share of its
waters. Amin visited the Baptism Site with EcoPeace
more than 50 years later, and he was in total shock. The
mighty river he recalled had become a trickle.

Like other refugees and residents, when Amin and
his family look at the Jordan Valley they see a complex
political reality that works against even their basic
needs. Restricted access to water, the confiscation of
land for the expansion ofillegal settlements and talk of
a looming annexation of Area C makes them even more
determined not to give up on a better future.

For the very reasons I have just mentioned,
EcoPeace has designed an integrated master plan for
the Jordan Valley, which could turn around a valley of
poverty and despair into one of shared prosperity for
all communities from the Sea of Galilee to the Dead
Sea, based on principles of sustainable development
and equal opportunities and in the framework of the
two-State solution along the 1967 borders.

EcoPeace has advocated that solving water issues
cannot wait. We argue that water issues and obtaining
Palestinian water rights can no longer be delayed owing
to a failure to agree on all other final-status issues. The
terms and mechanisms set out in the Oslo Accords on
transboundary water and wastewater management are
today failing Palestinian, and even Israeli, sustainable
development needs.

The impacts of climate change over the past decade
have further brought to the fore the importance of our
argument and the urgency for policy change. The past
20 years have witnessed recurring drought, the deepest
droughts in our recorded history. They have contributed
to wider cross-border implications on increased water
scarcity, political instability and increased refugee and
humanitarian crises in our region. If no immediate
action is taken against the Gaza crisis today, the
international community should be ready for more
refugee boats.

As a civil society organization, during our
latest conference we were able to convene senior
representatives from our three Governments, who all
agreed that climate change presents itself as a threat
multiplier in relation to our water security. While most
of the world is fearful of a 2°C increase in average
temperatures, the Middle East is concerned about a
4°C increase.

Building on the examples I have presented, we come
here with a powerful message to our own Governments
and to the members of the Security Council. We
together face a common threat due to conflict and
climate-induced water scarcity. Climate change does
not differentiate between the stronger and weaker side
of the conflict. Action is needed today. A reassessment
of assumptions, a rejection of unilateralism and an
effort to advance cross-border water cooperation is
needed as a matter of national and regional stability
and security.

