Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express my
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for presiding over the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
the Permanent Representative of Costa Rica and all the
members of his delegation for having guided the work
of the Council last month with great skill and wisdom.
I also wish to thank Mr. Robert Serry, United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for the briefing he has given us.

Syria has chosen peace as a strategic option and
has expressed its readiness to achieve it since its
participation in the Madrid Conference, 17 years ago.
We did so also in the run-up to the 2002 Arab summit
in Beirut, which launched the Arab Peace Initiative.
That Initiative illustrates the clear desire of Arab States
to achieve peace once Israel demonstrates genuine

readiness to comply with the just peace requirements,
including by withdrawing from all occupied Arab
territories to the 4 June 1967 lines and enabling the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with
Al-Quds as its capital.

At the Arab summit held in Damascus on
29 March 2008, Arab leaders reiterated the need to
achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East on the basis of resolutions of international
legality, the Arab Peace Initiative and the principles of
the Madrid Conference. The Council may recall that,
when the Arab Peace Initiative was launched in Beirut
in 2002, Israel's response was to invade the West Bank
and to carry out massacres in and lay siege to Jenin and
Nablus, while also killing unarmed Palestinian women
and children, desecrating places of worship and
implementing a scorched-earth policy, in addition to
detention and collective punishment.

Israel has continued to build settlements despite
the repudiation of the international community. It is
also continuing construction of its apartheid wall of
separation on occupied Palestinian territory, in blatant
disregard of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice. Having lately and abruptly discovered
its virtues, Israel also responded to the Arab Peace
Initiative by brazenly attacking Lebanon in the summer
of 2006 in an attempt to undermine all efforts at peace.
Israel has also continued to reject calls to withdraw
from occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan, while increasing settlement activities therein.

As we meet again today, the entire world is
witness to what Israel, the occupying Power, is doing
to the Palestinian people in Gaza and the West Bank:
imposing a siege, causing hunger and starvation,
destroying property, carrying out extrajudicial killings,
detaining Palestinians and forcibly displacing them at a
rate unprecedented in modern history. It is doing so
through its use of organized State terrorism against
unarmed Palestinians. Before the eyes of the occupying
Power, settlers continue to attack Palestinians, Muslim
and Christian alike, as well as their holy places.

On 25 November 2008, on the instructions of the
President of the Syrian Arab Republic in his capacity
as chair of the Arab summit in Damascus, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Syria sent identical letters to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council calling on the United Nations to assume its
responsibilities with regard to Israel's inhuman and
immoral actions in Gaza. The Minister recalled that
Israel's siege of the Gaza Strip, including the complete
closure of all crossing points, is a collective threat to
the lives of Palestinians that has led to a grave
deterioration of all aspects of life in the Gaza Strip,
including the humanitarian situation, thereby
increasing the suffering of Palestinians. That collective
punishment includes the cutting off of potable water,
electricity, food, medical supplies and fuel; and has led
to an increase in poverty, hunger and unemployment.
Despite the efforts of the Secretary-General and his
repeated calls to the occupying Power to put an end to
such practices, it has not yet responded.

Thus, my country, the Syrian Arab Republic,
stated in its message to this Council that it looks
forward to immediate measures to be taken by the
Council to address this humanitarian crisis, which is no
less dangerous than other humanitarian catastrophes.
The United Nations should act quickly in this crisis and
pressure Israel to open the crossing points immediately.

The Syrian Arab Republic would like once again
to reiterate its continuous and firm support for the right
of the Palestinian people to the restoration of their
occupied territory and to the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with Al-Quds as its
capital. The Syrian Arab Republic emphasizes the
importance of restoring Palestinian national unity
through national dialogue and reconciliation in order to
strengthen the Palestinian negotiating position, support
the will of the Palestinian people and end Israel's
attempts to attack the Palestinian people and their
aspirations. The Syrian Arab Republic, as chair of the
Arab summit, is attempting to achieve that.

Israel continues, as the Council knows, its
occupation of the Syrian Golan, flouting international
law and resolutions, including resolution 497 (1981),
which declared Israel's decision to annex the Syrian
Golan as null and void and having no legal merit. Israel
continues to disregard General Assembly resolution
62/85, which states that the ongoing Israeli occupation
and annexation of the Syrian Golan as a fait accompli
hamper the achievement of a just and comprehensive
peace in the region, and calls on Israel to withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of
4 June 1967, in implementation of the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

Israel continues to plunder the natural resources
of the Golan, including its water resources, and to plant

mines, which have led to 589 injuries, including 17 to
children. Israel, the occupying Power, continues to
bury nuclear waste in our occupied Golan.

We have identified these important and serious
issues to the various specialized United Nations
agencies, and we are still waiting for those agencies to
take the necessary action, in keeping with their core
mandates under the United Nations Charter.

It seems to us that the clearest possible
expression of the truth, as stated by President Bashar
Al-Assad, is that peace is not the major preoccupation
of the Israeli Government. Its major preoccupation is
security, in its narrowest sense: their security, which
cannot be achieved, from their point of view, except at
the expense of our rights and our security. It is
unacceptable and illogical that we, the Arabs, should
be called upon to provide evidence of our desire for
peace, despite the fact that we have proclaimed it
repeatedly and called for it on many occasions, in
particular since the holding of the Madrid Conference
in 1991. It is time for the Israelis to provide evidence
of their desire for peace, to express, through their
actions, their readiness to bring about peace and to
convince us, the Arabs, of that readiness. The Israelis
are the ones who are occupying our territory,
committing aggression against our people and
displacing millions of our people, and not the other
way around. They undertake all these actions, and then
they ask for protection and guarantees and use these as
a smokescreen in order to pursue their extortion and
obtain more concessions from us.

Despite all of this, the withdrawal of Israel from
our occupied Syrian Golan to the 4 June 1967 lines and
the achievement of peace is a national priority for the
Syrian Arab Republic. We have therefore entered into
indirect talks with Israel, through Turkish mediation,
which we are thankful for. We would have liked to
have agreed on a basis to start direct negotiations under
the auspices of multiple international partners, but the
matter requires an American will to make peace in the
Middle East one of its top priorities. The United States
must abandon the deliberate disregard and neglect that
have been its practice for nearly seven years and led to
the deterioration of the situation in the region.

Worse still, the United States occupation forces in
Iraq committed an aggressive act against the Syrian
Arab Republic on 26 October 2008, targeting a civilian
building in the town of Abu Kamal. Labourers inside
the building were shot, eight Syrian civilians were
killed and one was injured. This aggression was
unjustified and constitutes a serious violation of Syrian
sovereignty and of the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter. It demonstrates the insistence
of the current United States presidency to pursue its
policies until the last day of its administration. Those
policies have led to nothing but death and destruction
in the region and have only contributed to the rise of
tensions, destabilization and chaos there.

The Syrian Arab Republic, which upholds
international law, has appealed to the United Nations
and the Security Council in particular to shoulder their
responsibilities to prevent the repetition of this serious
violation and to lay the responsibility for the killing of
innocent Syrian civilians squarely on the aggressors in
order to maintain security and stability in the Middle
East.

Developments in the Middle East require the
Security Council to assume its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, restore
occupied territory to its legitimate owners and stop the
Israeli aggressors from achieving their objectives. That
is the only way to bring about a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East and to restore
stability to that very important part of the world.

In conclusion, I believe that the representative of
Israel has today once again used the forum of the
Security Council to falsify the facts concerning the
Israeli practices of organized State terrorism over the
decades in the region. The representative of Israel
believes falsely that by including the name of my
country in her statement, she can divert attention from
the root cause of the problem of violence and terrorism
in our region, which is the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories and the crimes against humanity that have
been perpetrated by successive Israeli Governments
against the unarmed people of Palestine in their
occupied land, as described by the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian
territories occupied since 1967, Richard Falk. The
whole world knows that Israel is imposing an unjust
siege and carrying out a sadistic and pathological
holocaust against more than 1.5 million people in Gaza
and a similar number in the West Bank. The occupying
Israeli authorities have done nothing to stop the
aggressive terrorist attacks committed by Israeli
settlers against the Palestinians in Hebron and in other
parts of the West Bank. Despite all of this, the
representative of Israel tells us that the evacuation of
one house of those hooligan settlers in Hebron is a
great accomplishment that rises to the level of
inventing the wheel or even landing on the surface of
the moon.

