Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): It is a tremendous joy to
see you, Sir, up there, and I am delighted that you came all
the way to this meeting. I wanted you to know that those
of us in the Non-Aligned Movement are really pleased at
what your delegation has been doing in the Security
Council. They are doing such a good job that some of us
are even thinking of not joining the Security Council.

The meeting today comes at a very important time.
Even though the subject is not quite related, our hearts go
out to our neighbours in Mozambique and in Zimbabwe,
who are devastated by the floods that have taken place in
that part of the world. Our hearts go out to them. I could
not pass up this opportunity to mention them, even though
the subject here may be slightly different.

The Security Council has often witnessed in the past
how a breakdown in peace and security in many countries
invariably leads to humanitarian crises. These humanitarian
crises in turn can fuel further instability and a breakdown
in security.

One of the things that could be said about the Security
Council is that it has an undeniable role to play in support
of humanitarian activities. Already the Council refers to
humanitarian situations in its decisions and communications
on conflict situations around the world. These references
highlight humanitarian difficulties and add political
authority to efforts to address them.

While the Council has a role to play in humanitarian
activities, we believe its actions should in no way
undermine the principles of impartiality related to
humanitarian assistance.

In Article 1, the United Nations Charter states that the
purpose of the United Nations is, amongst others,

"To maintain international peace and security,
and to that end: to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to the
peace".

It further sets out:

"To achieve international co-operation in
solving international problems of an economic,
social, cultural or humanitarian character".

South Africa sees the role of the Security Council in
humanitarian activities as twofold.

The first role, which it currently performs, is to
focus attention on humanitarian aspects resulting from
conflict situations. In this regard, we believe that the
humanitarian dimension should also be incorporated at the
earliest stage in the formulation of peacekeeping
mandates. Care should be taken to keep a clear distinction
between peacekeeping and humanitarian activities.

The Council's second role, which we believe could
be strengthened, underscores the need to address the
safety and security of humanitarian personnel. Clearly,
with the increase in intra-State conflicts, there is greater
pressure than ever on the United Nations to provide
humanitarian assistance. South Africa participated in the
Council debate on this issue in February 2000. We still
believe that stronger action is needed on this issue, as
criminal activities against humanitarian personnel have yet
to stop.

South Africa therefore supports three specific
recommendations, which we believe the Council could
implement. The first would be to undertake more
concerted efforts to obtain commitments on unhindered
access to civilian populations in conflict situations. The
second would be to establish a system of monitoring such
access, as well as criminal activities directed at
humanitarian personnel. We propose that the Council
invite the relevant United Nations bodies to report on a
quarterly basis, in an open meeting, on humanitarian
issues. Lastly, the Council could develop stricter measures
and credible mechanisms to enforce penalties on parties
who persistently, and with impunity, commit crimes
against humanitarian personnel.

South Africa believes that the Council can also play
a positive role in calling on the international community
to provide resources for humanitarian activities. By
focusing attention on humanitarian crises which have

 

resulted from conflict situations, the Council can inspire the
international community to provide much-needed resources
where they are lacking.

Ultimately, the Security Council should, in our view,
promote a safer working environment for humanitarian
personnel and, where appropriate, provide support for
humanitarian activities.

