Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I should like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this open
meeting of the Council on this important subject. I should
also like to thank the Secretary-General for the very
important statement which he has just made and for his
report on the role of the United Nations in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants
in a peacekeeping environment. Both the Secretary-
General's statement and his comprehensive and most
informative report on the subject have provided us with an
extremely useful basis for in-depth consideration of this
subject.

It is, indeed, encouraging to note that considerable
progress has been made since we last debated this issue in
July last year, during Malaysia's presidency of the Council.
Ibelieve that the report relating to principles and guidelines
on DDR, prepared by the Lessons Learned Unit last year,
is now ready to be issued to all Member States. We believe
that the report, when released, will contribute enormously
to the more effective implementation of DDR on the
ground.

Since the late 1980s, we have learned that
peacekeeping operations cannot be mounted in isolation.
Experience tells us that DDR has to be a part of the overall
effort in making a peace process a success. It provides a
link from cessation of hostilities to sustainable peace by
incorporating political, security, economic and social
objectives into the process. DDR is a long-term
programme which continues until all ex-combatants are
fully reintegrated into the mainstream of society at all
levels. It is a holistic process, involving many actors and
requiring the full cooperation of society. It is therefore
important that all parties to the conflict be made fully
aware of the process involved and have the political will
to undertake it.

As rightly pointed out in the Secretary-General's
report, DDR must be viewed not as a simple sequence of
events, but rather as a continuous process whose elements
overlap with one another and are mutually supportive.
The success of the process is dependent on the success of
each of its steps. Clearly, the DDR process must begin
with the first step - namely, disarmament - which, of
course, can be achieved only on the basis of a ceasefire
in the context of a peace agreement. The effective
disarmament of ex-combatants represents an important
indicator of progress towards post-conflict peace-building
and the normalization of a conflict situation.
Demobilization, which follows, is possible only when
there is some level of disarmament, and its success can be
achieved only when there is effective rehabilitation and
reintegration of ex-combatants into society. Reintegration
of ex-combatants - the third stage - can be effectively
carried out only in the context of a comprehensive
political settlement, in which national reconciliation will
obviously have to play a major part.

These are important steps, but we also agree with
the view that to ensure the final success of the process,
elements of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
should also be integrated not only in peacekeeping
mandates but also in peace agreements.

In a number of conflicts, armed fighting among
various factions continues despite the conclusion of peace
agreements and the presence of United Nations
peacekeeping missions on the ground. A major factor
contributing to such a situation has been the continued
availability of large amounts of armaments, in particular
small arms and light weapons. The proliferation of these
weapons in a climate of continuing insecurity in a post-
conflict situation is clearly not conducive to the speedy
return of peace and certainly dampens efforts at
promoting social and economic development. In this
regard, if disarmament is to be undertaken effectively, it

 

may be necessary to impose a regional mechanism to
strictly monitor an arms embargo.

Equally important in this exercise is the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers. While
Governments could be held accountable for the use of
children as soldiers, it is often difficult to induce change in
rebel groups and to have them admit to the use of children.
It is shocking to learn that as many as 300,000 children
under the age of 18 are currently participating in armed
conflicts around the world. Even more alarming is the fact
that this trend of involving children in armed conflict is on
the increase. Until and unless this issue is seriously
addressed, children may not only be exposed to grave
physical risks when they participate in armed conflict but
also suffer severe long-term psychological consequences. In
this context, I should like to pay special tribute to the
important work and enormous contribution of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu.

It is imperative that the special case of child soldiers
be included in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes and that their special needs be
addressed. In this regard, the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) and other relevant United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations with expertise in the
field can make important contributions in the effective
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration as they relate to children. We also feel that the
role of women, as highlighted by the two women speakers
before me, in respect of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration should also be recognized and appropriately
reflected in future reports.

The education and training of peacekeepers on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are important
elements for the successful implementation of these
activities in mission areas. In this regard, I would like to
commend the United Nations Secretariat, in particular the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, for successfully
coordinating the excellent work that has been carried out by
some Member States and organizations towards the drafting
of a training programme and action plan on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. We hope that the training
activities will have the support of as many Member States
as possible, including international organizations and non-
governmental organizations.

As in all United Nations programmes and activities,
financing continues to be a problem in the effective
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. While little or no support can
be expected at the local level, for obvious reasons, the
generous support of the international community is critical
for the effective implementation of DDR programmes.
There is clearly a need for greater coordination in the area
of funding, both assessed and voluntary, for more
effective implementation of these programmes. We
therefore urge the various United Nations organs and
bodies to work out arrangements that would satisfy the
requirements of specific disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes in different post-conflict
situations in the context of the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of the countries concerned.

It is clear that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration has become an important, indeed,
indispensable component of all contemporary
peacekeeping operations which I believe should be
addressed by the Council on an ongoing basis. The
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process is
certainly not an end in itself but must be seen as an
objective that will help restore normalcy and make a
contribution to lasting peace. My delegation believes that
all ex-combatants should be reintegrated, except persons
responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Because it may not always be possible to prosecute the
perpetrators immediately after the conflict, statutory
limitations should not apply in cases of war crimes and
crimes against humanity. Bringing the perpetrators to
justice remains an essential element of national
reconciliation, which provides an indispensable basis for
a durable peace.

Given the importance of the subject in the context of
contemporary peacekeeping operations, my delegation
urges the Council to continue to address this issue on a
regular basis and in this regard looks forward to a further
report from the Secretary-General in the future,
particularly as regards the implementation of DDR
training programmes. It is hoped that the report will also
address the important issue of financing in greater depth,
as it remains a critical element for the success of the
programme.

In conclusion, my delegation fully supports the draft
statement that we will be adopting at the end of this
meeting.

