Ms. Leskovar (Slovenia): At the outset let me
thank you, Sir, for organizing this timely and useful
open debate on peace and justice, with a special focus
on the role of the International Criminal Court.
Slovenia is a strong supporter of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We were actively involved in
the promotion of the Court and its work from Rome to
Kampala and will remain committed in the future.

Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the European
Union. In addition, we would like to make three more
remarks.

First, let me encourage the Security Council to
hold open debates with a special focus on the ICC on
a regular basis. We welcome the first judgment of the
ICC and the first decision on reparations for victims. It
is a clear sign that we have in place an effective judicial
institution that can deliver impartial justice to victims
and show perpetrators of the most serious crimes of
international concern that there will be no impunity
for their atrocities. Having achieved this, the ICC is an
important element in maintaining international peace
and justice. We encourage all States to become parties
to the ICC in order to achieve its universality.

Secondly, I would like to place special emphasis
on the Court's preventive function. It is now well
established that grave crimes represent a threat
to international peace and security. An effective
international criminal justice system plays a key role
in prevention. It is the prevention of grave atrocities
that is our final goal. Individuals should be aware that
there is no impunity for committing such crimes, and
everything possible should be done in order to prevent
them in the future.

Slovenia also sees this aspect of shared
responsibility in the light of a concept known as the
responsibility to protect. Our leaders have committed
all States to the responsibility to protect, and we must
now enhance our dialogue to find a viable strategy for
implementing it in practice.

Let me draw the Council's attention to the initiative
that my Prime Minister presented during the general
debate, entitled "A world free from genocide" (see A/67/PV.12). Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and the United Nations system should
form an intergovernmental forum of like-minded
countries that would provide the concept of the
responsibility to protect with new tools to enforce
prevention and develop a mechanism to enable a
more rapid and effective response to acts of genocide
and mass atrocities. Slovenia stands ready to start a
dialogue on this.

Lastly, let me express our deep concern about
the escalation of the situation in Syria. In our view,
the Security Council should refer the situation to the
ICC, at least for the sake of the innocent victims. The
atrocities committed should be investigated and their
perpetrators brought to justice. At the same time, we
also encourage the Security Council to follow up on the
cases already referred and to address the questions of
States' cooperation with the Court and their compliance
with Council resolutions with all due attention.

It is our obligation to make the world of the twenty-
first century free from genocide and mass atrocities.

