Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): We would like to
thank you, Mr. President, and the members of the
Security Council for this opportunity to address an
issue of major concern to the international community.

The issue before us has been discussed here for
many years, beginning with Iraq's invasion and
occupation of Kuwait, a small neighbouring country.
The Government of Iraq's record with regard to the use
of chemical weapons against its Kurdish population
and during aggression against Iran is a matter of the
most serious concern to all of us. The Government of
Iraq's lack of serious commitment thus far to fully
complying with Security Council resolutions has
contributed to the grave situation we are facing today.

As a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, we
share the views expressed in the final documents of the
Kuala Lumpur Summit, in particular regarding the need
for the Iraqi Government to fully comply with Security
Council resolution 1441 (2002).
The Government of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste issued a statement on 19 March that
expressed, inter alia, its consternation at the Security
Council's inability to reach a consensus on the
implementation and enforcement of its resolutions
concerning Iraq. As a small, peace-loving country, we
stand for a multilateral approach in the search for
solutions to the problems affecting the world.

It is our hope that, in the current military
intervention, all sides will respect international
humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva
Conventions and Additional Protocol I, concerning the
treatment of civilians and prisoners of war. We appeal
to the Secretary-General and to the members of the
Security Council to continue to focus their attention on
this grave situation and to build a consensus, not only
to provide adequate and urgent humanitarian aid to the
Iraqi people, but also to bring about lasting peace with
respect for territorial integrity and to work on scenarios
for the post-conflict situation.

Timor-Leste knows from its own experience that
when the United Nations system - in particular the
Security Council - is willing to act, it has proved to
be very effective in restoring peace and international
legality, in maintaining stability and in creating sound
foundations for democratic countries in which human
rights and freedom will flourish. At this difficult
moment, we should like to express our solidarity with
the people of Iraq in their struggle for lasting peace,
freedom, democracy, human rights and national
reconciliation.

We share the conviction - expressed here by
many countries - that we must also address the
demands for freedom and independence on the part of
the people of Palestine in order to achieve lasting
peace, justice and stability in the region. Therefore, we
welcome the renewed commitment of the United States
of America and the European Union in that regard.

Yesterday, the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, made an urgent appeal for unity and common
purpose in the Security Council. In echoing his appeal,
we urge the Council to continue to search for solutions
to these and other conflicts with determination and
unity, fulfilling their obligations under the Charter of
the United Nations.

