Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Like
others, I would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for
his briefing and for his effective chairmanship of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).

The quarterly report that he has presented today
shows that the Committee continues to do important
work in support of Security Council resolutions in
a context of ongoing concerns with respect to the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme.
Luxembourg is also grateful to the independent Panel
of Experts established under resolution 1929 (2010)
for the vital support it provides to the work of the
1737 Committee. We welcome with satisfaction its
final report (see S/2013/331, annex), which is well
documented and meticulous from a methodological
point of view. We welcome the publication of the
report as a Security Council document and we strongly
advocate in favour of seeing the recommendations
contained therein followed up with action.

Thanks to the final report, it clearly appears that
behind the increasing number of reported incidents and
the various circumvention techniques used is hidden
a sophisticated system of persistent violations by Iran
of the decisions by the international community with
respect to it. In my delegation's view, a prompt and
concrete response from the Sanctions Committee is
needed where violations of sanctions regimes have been
clearly shown. Not reacting, prevaricating or ignoring
the gravity of the violations committed means that we
are shirking our responsibilities, and risk losing our
credibility. However, helping the Sanctions Committee
to effectively fulfil its role as a guarantor of the
implementation of Security Council resolutions means
contributing to protecting the international community
from the dangers that might threaten it.

We take note with renewed concern of the
conclusions of the latest report (GOV/2013/27) of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), published 22 May 2013, on the
implementation of the safeguards agreement within
the framework of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. It is a cause for concern that Iran
continues to fail to work as it should with the IAEA
with a view to defining a structured approach leading
to the required verification and resolving outstanding
issues regarding the possible military dimensions of its
nuclear programme. We strongly deplore the fact that
negotiations with a view to concluding an agreement on
those issues are being bogged down and that the issue
of access to the military site at Parchin in particular
remains pending.

Added to that is the fact that Iran, in violation of its
international obligations, is continuing the construction
of its heavy-water reactor at Arak, is continuing to
increase its capacity to produce enriched uranium by
installing new centrifuges at the Natanz site, and is
pursuing enrichment activities at Natanz and Fordow,
thus increasing its stockpiles, which far exceed the
country's apparent needs.

Those developments cause us grave concern, which
we ask the Iranian authorities to dispel by discharging
all of their international obligations in accordance with
the provisions contained in Security Council resolutions
and those of the IAEA Board of Governors. Only in that
way will confidence be re-established.

At the same time, I would like to reaffirm
Luxembourg's attachment to a negotiated solution based
on the principle of a two-track approach that opens the
way for dialogue while demanding that the Iranian
authorities commit to providing substantial answers to
the questions concerning the ultimate purpose of their
nuclear programme.

That is the principle that prevailed on 26 and
27 February in Almaty with the resumption of dialogue
between Iran and the E3+3, led by the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy. At the previous public
briefing, on 6 March, we were pleased by the fact that
that February meeting was able to initiate a new cycle
of negotiations (see S/PV.6930). Today, we regret that
the subsequent meetings were not fruitful, following
Iran's refusal to engage on the proposals put on the
table by the E3+3.

In conclusion, we urge the Iranian authorities -which
have just changed at the presidential level - to take
the opportunity being afforded to them to finally agree
to positively follow up on the E3+3 proposals. We ask
them to participate constructively in the negotiating
process under way. By choosing that path, the new
Iranian authorities will contribute towards giving
real substance to the dialogue with the international
community and will pave the way for a long-term
diplomatic solution that we all wish to see.

