Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation endorses the statement made by Costa
Rica on behalf of the Rio Group. We are also grateful
also for the statements that have been made here by so
many delegations during the past two days where we
find a variety of perspectives on this issue that will
serve as a frame of reference for further discussions
within the Security Council.

In recognizing the importance of this general
debate on Iraq, we wish to stress the centrality of this
multilateral forum in discussing this situation that has
attracted enormous attention on the part of the Security
Council over the past twelve years. We also stress the
special importance of using multilateral means to
respond adequately and legitimately to issues of global
concern. We trust that, at the end of our exchange, the
actions adopted will confirm the Security Council as
the central and indispensable actor in any international
decision regarding Iraq.

Colombia is participating in the consideration of
this issue, motivated essentially by the need to preserve
the role and effectiveness of the United Nations and the
multilateral system; by the need to stress the role of the
Security Council as the principal guarantor of
international peace and security; by the need to have all
Member States comply unconditionally with its
resolutions, and by the need to reaffirm international
law and the general principles that make possible our
peaceful coexistence.

We are aware of the general dissatisfaction in the
international community regarding the response the
Iraqi Government has given in the past to the demands
set by the Security Council following the events of
2August 1990. Up until just a few weeks ago, the
attitude of Iraq towards the Secretary-General was
intransigent. Its communications with regard to the
Council were defiant and its views on the resolutions
adopted were a source of considerable surprise. Iraq
sowed doubt and mistrust in the international
community and thus, in turn, well-founded suspicions
were created with regard to the possibility that Iraq was
continuing its programmes for the development of
weapons of mass destruction.

We value the intention of Iraq to cooperate
unconditionally with the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
for the return of weapons inspectors. We recognize the
progress made and the practical results achieved in
negotiations between the Executive Chairman of
UNMOVIC and the Baghdad Government. But we
note, at the same time, that the work of the Security
Council and each of its members would have been
considerably easier if, from the outset, the Baghdad
authorities had cooperated unconditionally in applying
the Security Council resolutions in accordance with
Article 25 of the Charter.

It was clear to the international community that
its unequivocal signals that measures would be taken in
the case of Iraq's non-compliance with Security
Council resolutions led to a change of attitude on the
part of the Iraqi authorities.

We firmly support the work of Dr. Hans Blix and
his UNMOVIC team, as well as that of Dr. Mohamed
ElBaradei of the IAEA. Their professionalism and
great diplomatic skill have been evident in recent
weeks. We are certain the Security Council will
continue to support their leadership so that they can
achieve the objective of disarmament, which has not
been possible for more than a decade.

We consider it indispensable that the weapons
inspectors should be able, as soon as possible, to finish
the work that the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) was unable to complete. It is urgent that
they examine and verify the information the Iraqi
Government is obligated to provide its compliance with
Security Council resolutions. We are sure there will be
credible, serious, respectful, professional and firm
inspections, for which purpose we need genuine
cooperation on the part of the Iraqi authorities.

UNMOVIC, however, must arrive on site with a
renewed mandate from the Security Council that
validates its determinations and adapts them to the new
realities. For Colombia, there are political and legal
reasons that make it necessary to define with precision,
firmness and clarity the parameters for the inspections.
This would be consistent with the statements of Dr.
Blix to the effect that it is advisable to begin activities
on the ground after the Council has reached a decision.

Our greatest challenge is striking a balance
between, on one hand, the willingness of the Baghdad
Government to fulfil its obligations, and, on the other,
the steadfastness and determination that the
international community must maintain to prevent a
repetition of the challenge faced by the Council during
the last four years.

Given present circumstances, this is a unique
opportunity and, in any event, the only opportunity for
a nation that must overcome isolation and rejoin the
community of nations on equal footing. Therefore, the
greatest challenge for Iraq is to demonstrate to the
world that it does not constitute a threat to anyone.

Iraq not only has problems relating to its potential
capacity to produce weapons of mass destruction.
There is a disturbing humanitarian situation concerning
the Iraqi population, for which the Iraqi Government is
directly responsible. The oil-for-food programme
established by the Council to respond effectively to
that situation has shown favourable results, despite
difficulties in its implementation.

There are also other pending issues which must
be resolved satisfactorily. We refer to the return of
Kuwaiti property by Iraq, especially the national
archives, on which a commitment was recently
reached. Additionally, there is the matter of prisoners-
of-war and missing persons who are nationals of
Kuwait and other States. The discussion on the return
of weapons inspectors should not distract us from those
obligations of the Baghdad Government.

Twelve years ago, when Iraq launched its terrible
invasion of Kuwait in 1990, Colombia was, at that time
also, a non-permanent member of this Council. On that
occasion, Iraq disregarded the decisions of the Council
and other means had to be resorted to, which,
unfortunately, did not achieve their goal. This time we
have great confidence in the statesmanship of the
actors involved and their ability to ensure that we will
not become involved in a political and military cycle
similar to that of 1990.

We, the Council members, must make a
fundamental contribution, which would begin with a
supreme effort to narrow differences and decide, in a
cohesive, even unanimous, manner, what course to
follow to resolve this critical conflict.

Let me conclude with two thoughts. First, we
should separate the subject of this general debate from
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian issue. The political motivations that
underlie our positions on the two situations are
substantially different.

Secondly, developments in this situation and in
other situations on the Council's agenda should not
distract us from the fight against international
terrorism, which is the biggest challenge facing today's
world. Terrorism does not rest, and it has continued to
show its almost unlimited capacity for causing
destruction and death. We must continue facing it with
renewed determination.

