Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his briefing. We also welcome the
appointment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We
are confident that her experience, technical knowledge
and leadership will be of great value to the Mission. We
would also like to thank Mr. Maman Sidikou for his
services as Head of MONUSCO.

We reiterate our concern about the unrelenting
environment of violence and serious insecurity. We
also regret that conflict is focused on disputes over
access to natural resources, clashes between armed
groups, intercommunity tensions and ethnic violence.
We strongly condemn such occurrences, including the
violent acts that took place during the 31 December
protests and, in particular, the threats being made by
armed groups in different areas of the country that have
led to the continued deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, as mentioned in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/16). The report highlights
the fact that more than 4 million people were internally
displaced, including nearly 900,000 women and more
than 2 million children. Also, in recent years, more
than 620,000 Congolese sought refuge in neighbouring
countries, 100,000 of them in 2017. Approximately
8 million people face severe food insecurity, which
represents a 30 per cent increase over the same period
last year. An estimated 13 million people will need
protection and humanitarian assistance this year, a 50
percent increase over 2017.

We commend the efforts of humanitarian partners
and encourage them to continue their work. We also
urgently call on the international community and donor
countries to pay special attention to this situation,
which is now a level 3 emergency, the highest level of
emergency identified by the United Nations Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

Bolivia supports the Special Representative's
initiatives and good offices with regard to the
implementation of the Comprehensive and Inclusive
Political Agreement of 31 December 2016, in
particular its impact on the implementation of
the confidence-building measures enshrined in
the Agreement and its efforts to create a positive
atmosphere for the holding of peaceful and credible
elections. We also highlight MONUSCO'S work on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
well as the repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
of members of the various insurgent groups, both
Congolese and foreign, operating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We commend the intensification of the Mission's
efforts to provide security to civilians through its early-
warning system, the reinforcement of its troops for its
projection strategy and by intensifying its presence
at the Semuliki base following the terrible attack on
peacekeepers on 7 December 2017. Bolivia associates
itself with the words expressed by various members of
the Security Council. We express not only our sorrow
and condolences, but also our solidarity with the families
of the Blue Helmets who died in those circumstances.

Similarly, we offer our support for local conflict-
resolution mechanisms that promote peaceful
coexistence between communities and joint monitoring
with the authorities regarding the spread of insurgent
groups in mining areas in the province of Maniema,
among other initiatives. We also encourage the Mission
to continue all these and other initiatives for peace
and stability in the region, in coordination with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its armed forces, in accordance with its mandate.

Bolivia welcomes the publication of the electoral
calendar by the Independent National Electoral
Commission on 5 November. We highlight the progress
made by that body with respect to voter registration and
call upon it to adhere to the timeline and to complete
the voter registration. The 31 December Agreement
must be respected and supported by all actors for the
effective conduct of peaceful, credible, inclusive and
timely elections leading to a peaceful transfer ofpower.
We urge the signatories of the Agreement to implement
the confidence-building measures enshrined in the
document. With this understanding, Bolivia takes
note of the prompt adoption of laws in Parliament to
revise electoral regulations and allocate a budget for
the elections.

We commend the consensus of the region for the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework as well as the efforts of the Southern
African Development Community and the African
Union Peace and Security Council to provide the
Independent National Electoral Commission with the
necessary resources for the implementation of the
31 December Agreement. We welcome the meeting held
on 9 December among the Presidents of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Angola and the Republic of
the Congo, in which a communique was issued calling
on political actors to safeguard peace and work for
peaceful elections. Similarly, we believe that the joint
work of the Head of MONUSCO and the Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region in preparing the elections,
as well as their outreach to national political actors and
Government authorities, will be crucial in garnering
regional and subregional support.

Finally, the principles of preventive diplomacy and
good offices aimed at a negotiated political solution
should not be overlooked, while the Congolese people
and institutions should take the decisions regarding the
future of their country. We must support their decisions
on their sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity in order to achieve peace, stability and
development in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

