Mr. Rivard (Canada): It has been a busy winter
and spring for Afghanistan. Today's debate in the
Security Council comes on the heels of a series of key
high-level meetings over the past months that have
included discussions on the future of the international
community's engagement in Afghanistan beyond the
end of the transition period. In Bonn, Camp David
and Chicago, the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community made significant progress
in mobilizing continued support for Afghanistan and
recognized the concept of mutual accountability.
Canada is confident that the 8 July Tokyo conference
will allow us to build on that progress, ensuring that
Afghanistan undertakes the required reforms and
has the support needed to successfully implement its
development agenda for self-reliance, prosperity and
stability during the remaining phases of the transition
period and into the transformation decade.

Canada has been and will remain a committed
partner in Afghanistan. As stated by Prime Minister
Stephen Harper at the NATO Summit, Canada will
continue its current training mission through to March
2014, with a view to ensuring that the Afghan National
Security Forces are well trained and can assume full
responsibility for their country's national security.

To help ensure a secure future for Afghanistan
beyond 2014 and to build on the gains made thus far, the
Prime Minister also announced in Chicago that Canada
will provide $110 million per year over three years
beginning in 2015 to help sustain the Afghan National
Security Forces to provide security and stability in a
sovereign and democratic Afghanistan.
As we prepare for Tokyo, Canada acknowledges
the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan in
the development of its "Supporting self-reliance in
Afghanistan" strategy. The national strategic vision
for the transformation decade focuses on the main
development challenges in Afghanistan and, as such,
provides both Afghan Government officials and donors
a common framework for supporting an Afghan-owned
development process. In developing that framework
further, Canada recommends that greater emphasis
be placed on essential services, such as health and
education, and on the particular needs associated with
the ongoing humanitarian challenges in Afghanistan.

Furthermore, we look forward to working with our
partners to ensure that the Tokyo conference becomes a
milestone in defining civilian support for Afghanistan
beyond 2014. In doing so, a clear and credible mutual
accountability framework will be required if the
continued efforts of the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community towards long-term
stability in the country are to be successful and
sustainable. Timely endorsement of well-sequenced
national priority programmes ready for implementation
with clear deliverables, concrete progress towards the
International Monetary Fund's programme benchmarks
and increased capacity of the Afghan Government
to absorb, manage and execute budget financing are
pivotal in that regard.

Canada remains hopeful that the Government
of Afghanistan's concerted efforts in defining its
self-reliance strategy denote a strong commitment to
addressing the Government issues that have seriously
undermined development in the country. Reducing
corruption, strengthening judicial institutions,
increasing the meaningful participation of women and
conducting elections that meet international standards
all remain as key transition indicators. It is essential that
the elections in 2014 and 2015 demonstrate improved
integrity, inclusiveness and sustainability and lead to
an orderly transfer of power that is viewed as legitimate
by the wider Afghan public. To make that a reality,
Afghanistan must undertake needed electoral reform on
the basis of a broad consensus among political parties,
civil society and other stakeholders.

The situation of Afghan women and girls also
deserves our unwavering attention. Canada believes
that the success of the transformation decade must be
judged by the extent to which women contribute to
security, stability and inclusive economic development
in Afghanistan. In that regard, it is imperative that
we build upon the principle established at this year's
Group of Eight summit which recognized that political
stability, democratic governance and economic growth
cannot be sustained without according full and equal
opportunities to both men and women and the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
the freedom to practice religion. The advancement of
women and girls in Afghanistan and the protection and
promotion of their human rights remains a priority for
Canada. Our ongoing civilian programming aimed at
improving infant and maternal health, girls' education
and women's literacy and women's increased access to
and participation in Afghanjustice and electoral systems
reflect that priority. Canada will also continue to play
a key role in coordinating with Governmental and civil
society organizations, including women's organizations
and networks, to promote greater coordination and
strengthen advocacy for sustainable change.

As the third tranche of the security transition has
recently been announced, we must remain vigilant
as to the impact of the security transition on women
and girls, and work to address the threat of sexual
and gender-specific violence. In doing so, all parties
must live up to our common commitment to take into
consideration the different experiences of women
and men in conflict and in fragile States, promote
the meaningful participation of women in peace and
security, and take special measures to protect women
and girls in armed conflict, as outlined in resolution
1325 (2000).

(spoke in French)

The recent announcement by President Karzai of
the third tranche of the transition is another indicator of
the growing capacity of the Afghan National Security
Forces to assume greater responsibility in terms of the
security of their country. In recent months, the security
forces have proved by their actions that their leadership
and capacities are developing swiftly, in particular
during the attacks by insurgents in Kabul on 15 and
16 April.

National political reconciliation remains central to
lasting peace in Afghanistan. Canada remains hopeful
that progress will be made in the peace process on
the basis of broad societal reconciliation, transitional
justice and respect for the Bonn principles.

Canada remains supportive of Afghan-led efforts
to reach out to those who renounce violence, have no
links with Al-Qaida or other terrorist organizations and
respect the Afghan Constitution. Moreover, Afghan
reconciliation cannot be considered in isolation from
regional dynamics. In that respect, Canada is heartened
by the progress made in recent months towards greater
regional cooperation, notably through the Istanbul
process.

At the Kabul ministerial conference held earlier
this month, Canada welcomed the continued efforts of
the Heart of Asia countries in moving forward with a
regionally led process that features concrete, cooperative
measures aimed at addressing common security and
economic challenges. Canada stands ready to support
the implementation of the process and its related
confidence-building measures, including through
our ongoing facilitation of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
cooperation process.

In moving forward with its regional and international
partners, Canada's ultimate goal remains to sustain the
gains that have been made as a result ofthe sacrifices of
Canadian, Afghan and international troops, and to help
the Afghan people rebuild a viable society that is better
governed, more stable and more secure, and that will
never again be a safe haven for terrorists.

