The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the case of
an Iraqi aircraft which flew from Baghdad, Iraq to
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia on 9 April 1997 and then
departed.

"The Government of Iraq, in a letter dated
3 February 1997, had requested clearance from the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 661
(1990) for the release of 50 million dollars from the
frozen Iraqi assets being held in Saudi Arabia, Bahrain
and the United Arab Emirates to cover pilgrimage
costs and requested the agreement of the Committee
for flights by Iraqi Airways to transport those pilgrims
to Jeddah, during the holy pilgrimage season.

"The Committee answered in a letter dated
3 March 1997 that it would be in a better position to
consider the release of the frozen Iraqi funds if a
request was submitted by a country which was
willing to release such funds to meet the pilgrimage
costs.

"The Government of Iraq proceeded with this
particular flight without specific consultation with
the Committee. Such consultation would have
allowed the Committee to consider the matter and to
determine whether the flight required Committee
approval under the relevant resolutions.

"The Security Council draws to the attention of
Member States their obligations under resolutions
661 (1990), 670 (1990) and other relevant
resolutions.

"The Council underlines its respect for the
obligation of Muslims to perform the Hajj
pilgrimage."
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/21.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
