Mr. Fernandez Amunategui (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by expressing my sincere thanks
to you, Mr. President, and to the members of the
Security Council for having organized this debate on
the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). This is the first time I
have had the honour of addressing the Council in my
capacity as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Haiti since I began fulfilling my duties on
26 June.

I am honoured to share with the Council an
assessment of the most recent developments in the
political and security situation in Haiti and of the
2
activities of MINUSTAH in support of stability, the
development of the rule of law and recovery efforts in
the wake of the January 2010 earthquake.

Today, I have the privilege of presenting to the
Council the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2011/540), issued on 25 August. The report includes
a summary of the most relevant findings and
recommendations of the security assessment mission to
Haiti that was conducted by the Secretariat in response
to the Council's request in its resolution 1944 (2010) of
14 October 2010.

The post-earthquake surge, authorized by the
Security Council to meet the needs arising from the
large-scale humanitarian operations that had been
launched and to the complex nature of the subsequent
elections, was very necessary at the time. The current
situation, however, affords us an opportunity to think
about reducing force levels. Such a reduction would
need to be accompanied by a reconfiguration of
MINUSTAH in order to ensure an adequate response to
current needs, including support for the political
process, the consolidation of State authority and State
capacity-building, as well as the strengthening and
possible creation of institutions responsible for
upholding the rule of law.

Since the previous report of the Secretary-
General to the Security Council (S/20ll/l83), issued
on 24 March, Haiti has witnessed a historic event with
a change in presidential leadership in which one
democratically elected Head of State transferred power
to a new leader from the opposition. I believe that we
should congratulate the people of Haiti for having
achieved this important milestone and President Michel
Joseph Martelly on his election as the new leader of
Haiti.

I also wish to thank the Organization of American
States (OAS) and the joint electoral observation
mission of the OAS and the Caribbean Community for
their support to a successful and significant election. I
am particularly pleased to see Haiti being represented
by its diplomatic officials in the Council today.

Despite all this, Haiti's political transition has not
been without its difficulties. Even before the new
President took office and the forty-ninth legislature
began, the electoral process was tarnished by a
decision of the Provisional Electoral Council whereby
it decided to change the results for the winners of
11-50056
17 seats in the Chamber of Deputies and two in the
Senate. Furthermore, discrepancies remain between the
text of the constitutional amendments approved by
Parliament during the last term of President Rene
Preval and the text that was subsequently published.
This is delaying the constitutional reform process and
has brought it to a standstill, owing to the decision by
President Martelly to reverse the promulgation of the
proposed amendments. As a result, the 1987
Constitution remains in full effect.

The greatest challenges to the political process in
Haiti, however, are that it has been impossible for the
new President to obtain parliamentary approval for a
new Prime Minister and, in turn, to form a new
Government and draft a viable policy agenda with the
assent of Parliament.

Four months after President Martelly took office,
and after two failed attempts to have Parliament ratify
a Prime Minister-designate, Haiti is still without a
Head of Government. Other ministerial appointments
are pending, and there is a continuing lack of a very
necessary political agreement between the executive
and the legislative branches on the main rule of law
institutions and key public policies, as previously
mentioned.

In recent days, there has been a positive sign with
the nomination of Mr. Garry Conille, a long-time
United Nations official. It is hoped that Parliament will
approve him as President Martelly's first Prime
Minister. Information emerging from Parliament
indicates that he will most likely be approved as Head
of Government. I stress that such approval alone would
change the political landscape of Haiti and open up a
far more promising future.

In the midst of political paralysis and before the
possible approval of a Prime Minister, the
humanitarian situation remains of concern. Despite the
successes achieved before the earthquake, the
relocation of those living in camps for displaced
persons has slowed in recent months. At the moment,
approximately 634,000 people are still living in camps,
and the Government plan to relocate them has enjoyed
limited success. While the basic humanitarian needs of
displaced persons have been met by the distribution of
humanitarian assistance, the sparse socio-economic
opportunities and the rising costs of food and oil have
exacerbated the Haitians' living conditions. Similarly,
the prevalence of such diseases as malaria and cholera
11-50056
remains a serious problem. Although the cholera
mortality rate fell in all departments, from 5.6 per cent
at the beginning of the epidemic last year to 1.4 per
cent in August, it is clear that the epidemic has not
disappeared.

In general, recovery and reconstruction activities
are progressing, supervised by the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission. We are seeing, however, that
much remains lacking. Of the funds pledged by
international donors for 2010-2011, only 37.8 per cent
have been disbursed. I take this opportunity to appeal
to donor countries to honour their donation pledges to
ensure that Haiti will have the resources necessary to
advance its reconstruction.

There security situation is somewhat calm, but
very fragile. Political tension, alongside a precarious
socio-economic situation, is generating new tensions in
the security situation. The second round of voting in
2011 was carried out without major incident, largely
thanks to the assistance of MINUSTAH police and
troops to the Haitian National Police. As the Secretary-
General's security assessment confirmed, law and
order did not totally break down following the
earthquake, although there has been a recent rise in
crime rates. Undoubtedly, the calm but fragile security
situation of recent months, due to the overall political
instability generated by the lack of a Government, has
led to greater fragility in civic security.

I am particularly concerned over the instability
that could arise should the political and socio-
economic situations continued to deteriorate.
MINUSTAH will have to continue to play an
invaluable role in supporting the fight against
criminality. In August, the United Nations fell victim to
the rising violence. I pay tribute here to Sergeant Serge
Kamali of Rwanda, a United Nations police officer
who was shot in Port-au-Prince last month and whom I
visited in the Santo Domingo hospital before his death
on 26 August. The Sergeant's death was the first in two
years to be caused by a malicious act, and it represents
a loss to MINUSTAH and the United Nations.

Against that backdrop, I should like to highlight
the work that MINUSTAH has been doing in key
aspects of its mandate and in response to contingent
needs since the issuance of the Secretary-General's last
report (S/2011/183).

First, the Mission continues to provide support to
the Haitian electoral authorities and the political
3
process. In addition to its substantial technical and
logistical support and coordination efforts for the
presidential and legislative elections during the second
half of 2010 and early 2011, in recent months the
Mission has focused its efforts on launching a dialogue
with the authorities, civil society and the private sector
in support of agreements on governability that will
promote the creation or strengthening of institutions
necessary to the proper functioning of the rule of law,
which is critical to Haiti politics.

The political stalemate between the new President
and Parliament, in addition to the absence of a
Government, has complicated prospects for progress in
this area. Haitian political and civil society leaders
continue to clamour for national consensus in key
areas, such as the national budget, education, recovery
and development priorities, elections and constitutional
reform. I add my voice to the appeals of the Haitian
political class that we heed the calls for greater
understanding and demonstrate greater political will to
reach agreement that will undoubtedly help to improve
the lives of the Haitian people and reflect clear
progress in the consolidation of the rule of law, and
hence towards Haiti's complete self-reliance in its
development efforts, which is our common aspiration
as we work in that dear country.

The tireless efforts of MINUSTAH to facilitate
national and local dialogue in order to motivate an
exchange of ideas among the Government, civil
society, the private sector and other key actors will
remain critical in the future. It will also be important to
support the electoral process in Haiti, which is
preparing for partial legislative and local Government
elections in November. In that respect, I stress that
electoral reform, including the establishment of a
credible permanent electoral council, is indispensable
if Haiti hopes gradually to reduce its dependence on
international electoral assistance.

Secondly, with regard to the consolidation of
State authority, progress has been made, but the
Administration's current capacities, the provision of
basic services and the administration of justice remain
far below the levels necessary if the Haitian authorities
are to fully assume their responsibilities for ensuring
stability. During the period covered by the report,
MINUSTAH continued to provide technical support to
increase the capacities of State institutions at both the
national level, including Parliament, and at the local
level, and to assist in the development of the
infrastructure of ministries and local administrative
bodies.

In that context, one important priority remains the
strengthening of rule of law institutions and the
protection of human rights. Progress in this area has
been hindered by the absence of a new Government
and the lack of agreement on the nomination of four
judges, including the President of the Court of
Cassation and the Superior Council of the Judiciary -
a priority that has long remained unmet. President
Martelly has announced that these nominations will be
made by early October, and we hope they will.
However, the nominations to those vital institutions
and other key judicial posts have been marred by
controversy and require dialogue and, in particular,
political will on the part of leaders. I would say quite
frankly that such political will is hard to come by in
Haiti.

Parliament recently endorsed 18 candidates, from
whom the President must nominate the President of the
Court of Cassation and other pending judicial
appointments. We hope that these necessary decisions
will be taken soon. That would represent a very
important step forward in the area of the rule of law,
which is fundamental, as I have repeatedly stressed, to
international cooperation and MINUSTAH's work in
Haiti.

With regard to the strengthening of human rights,
MINUSTAH and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights have investigated
violations, including extrajudicial executions, arbitrary
detention and detainee abuse. Thus 26 local courts
have been set up in various parts of the country, which
have coordinated their efforts with those of the United
Nations country team in order to train judicial actors in
the area of gender violence so that they have the
necessary legal framework in place to deal with
violations of human rights.

With regard to corrections and the penal system,
MINUSTAH is providing support to the Haitian
authorities in the conclusion of judicial cases, which
has led to the release of 260 detainees since March
2011. Continued support and bilateral cooperation with
donor countries has made it possible to develop prison
infrastructure, thereby helping to increase by 28 per
cent the space that detainees have in their cells.
Nonetheless, prison overpopulation is a problem, and
violations of prisoners' human rights remain a serious
11-50056
concern. To date there has been no improvement in
administrative reform at the national level. Given these
challenges, I am convinced that the strategic focus of
MINUSTAH will continue to be to support the
strengthening of institutions and the rule of law for the
protection of human rights and, above all, to contribute
to providing greater stability to the country.

This leads me to a third priority of MINUSTAH,
mentioned in the report, namely, our support in the area
of security and stabilization. I wish to share with the
Council the successful joint operations of our military
and police personnel in support of the Haitian police to
prevent and minimize the activities of gangs and
maintain public order, particularly in important areas
of Port-au-Prince such as Cite Soleil, Bel Air and
Martissant. I should like to recall here Operation
Phoenix, carried out in July 2011, which made it
possible to detain various gang members as well as
fugitives from justice responsible for criminal
activities throughout the city.

MINUSTAH has continued its efforts to protect
vulnerable groups, carrying out 24-hour patrols in
camps for internally displaced persons and providing
assistance to victims of sexual abuse and gender-based
violence. The Mission is training the Haitian Police to
respond to and prevent this kind of violence,
particularly against women and children. That support
has been reflected in the establishment of a gender and
women's affairs coordination office, in cooperation
with the Haitian National Police.

There has been significant, concrete progress in
the training of the Haitian National Police. Let us
recall that its capacity to create and maintain security
conditions is one of the fundamental aspects with
respect to a reduction of MINUSTAH and the
development of a strategy for its eventual exit. May
witnessed the graduation of the twenty-second
promotion of Haitian National Police officers, whose
strength currently stands at 10,000, of whom 783 are
women. MINUSTAH continues to provide support in
the enrolment and certification process for future
promotions as well as in the elaboration of a
development plan for the next five years that will
replace the current one, whose deadline is December
2011.

The Haitian National Police has continued to
support the MINUSTAH structure and to work with
other international groups in order to improve the
11-50056
process of recruitment, training and the development of
infrastructure. This, however, must change in future if
Haiti wishes to gradually assume responsibility for its
own security.

As I indicated at the beginning of this briefing, it
is the Secretariat's vision, with which we fully agree,
that we gradually reduce the MINUSTAH force
levels - levels that had been approved as a result of
the 2010 earthquake but that now can and should be
reduced. The Secretary-General, in a report that
Council members have probably already seen, has
recommended reducing the Mission's authorized
military strength by 1,600 personnel and 1,150 United
Nations police officers. That would leave 7,150 troops
and 2,300 police.

Such a quantitative reduction should be
complemented by a greater emphasis on the
qualifications and specialization of police officials.
This is particularly important with regard to the
creation of a police academy, which will require
international cooperation so that it can become an
institution of excellence and be an important
instrument in the rule of law as well as in enabling
Haiti to fight the most sophisticated types of modern
crime.

In the coming days, we will be hosting 50 special
police officers who are experts in fighting narco-
trafficking and organized crime. This is a very
important contribution that will qualitatively
complement the proposed quantitative reduction, and I
believe it is particularly important for Haiti and for
MINUSTAH in carrying out its activities.

Finally, I should like to refer to the efforts of
MINUSTAH for recovery and development in the long
term. The United Nations peacekeeping missions,
including MINUSTAH, are not development
operations, but they are essential to creating the
conditions for long-term development. As such,
MINUSTAH is continuing - and must continue - to
contribute to sustainable recovery in Haiti.

This year the Mission has worked with the United
Nations country team, together with the Haitian
authorities and with other international donors, to
respond simultaneously to the needs of displaced
persons, as specified in the mandate of MINUSTAH,
and to make progress in the area of peace. Since July
2010, the United Nations country team has identified
and submitted 18 project proposals to the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission; eight have received funding
through the Haiti Recovery Fund, while another three
have received funding from bilateral donors. This is
promising, but not sufficient to meet people's urgent
needs and change their lives for the better.

Likewise, a resumption of the activities of the
private sector will be fundamental to the long-term
stability of the country. This sector has been weakened
by the lack of security and the absence of the legal
framework necessary for investment in the private
sector.

On a smaller scale, but equally important,
MINUSTAH has contributed to recovery in Haiti
through its quick-impact projects, through its
programme to reduce violence in communities and
through its military engineering reconstruction
projects. In 2010-2011, the majority of the 229 quick-
impact projects were focused on the rehabilitation of
public infrastructure and the provision of basic public
services in areas where assistance from the
Government is non-existent. Various projects have
created income for women and other civil society
groups, enabling them to develop the capacities of the
members of the various communities of the country.

Since the earthquake, a total of 99 programmes
for the reduction of violence in communities have been
implemented in response to environmental and
socio-economic needs. Those programmes include the
construction of canals, the installation of public
lighting, professional training, and initiatives to
provide employment. About 30,000 women and young
people at risk have been given temporary employment
through those programmes. More than 1,100 young
people have been provided access to training
programmes and employment in the private sector. In
addition to these small-scale initiatives, MINUSTAH
and its military engineering units have been able to
contribute to the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
the country. The military force increased the number of
engineers following the earthquake, and that number
should be maintained as part of the reconfiguration of
the activities of our Mission.

Since April 2011, military engineers have
finalized 80 projects, including the removal of rubble
from former Government buildings and public
institutions damaged by the earthquake, the repair and
construction of roads, groundwork for the construction
of facilities for dealing with outbreaks of cholera, the

construction of storage space and the draining of
canals.

I should like to stress that a reduction of the
efforts of MINUSTAH in the area of reconstruction and
development would represent a setback in this respect,
particularly given Haiti's politically fragile situation,
and we could see a further deterioration of the security
situation. Furthermore, all of the projects carried out
by MINUSTAH are primarily aimed at ensuring peace
and security, such as providing public lighting in areas
where there was none after dark. This is being
welcomed and supported because it is a great
contribution to the security of the population. Many of
them also have a positive impact on development,
infrastructure and employment, among other areas. But
they are not solutions in the long term.

I must therefore also call on the members of the
Security Council and of the international community to
help stimulate investment and development efforts in
Haiti and to make available to the United Nations
country team the resources necessary to contribute to
that end. This will be increasingly necessary in order
for MINUSTAH to begin to drawdown its military and
police presence.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that Haiti
and MINUSTAH are today at an important crossroads.
The Haitian people have demonstrated great strength
and admirable determination in the face of many and
varied challenges and catastrophes. The international
community can feel proud of its show of solidarity
vis-a-vis the Haitian people. I trust that this solidarity
will continue. In that regard, I would like to express
my gratitude for the commitment and efforts of the
men and women serving in MINUSTAH, as well as to
the wider United Nations family serving in Haiti.

The situation in Haiti continues to be fragile, and
certain reversals could generate a new crisis. The
future stability of Haiti, and ultimately its prosperity,
will continue to depend upon the political will of its
leaders and citizens, as well as the support of the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole.

I should like to conclude by launching an appeal
to all stakeholders involved to continue our
commitment to cooperate with Haiti so that the country
may achieve the best of futures, which it deserves.
