Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his
important briefing this morning on developments
in the Middle East, especially the peace prospects. I
should like to affirm Egypt's support, despite all the
difficulties and challenges it is facing.

I should also like to affirm our association with the
statements to be made by the representatives of Iran
in the name of the Non-Aligned Movement, Oman on
behalf of the Group of Arab States, and Guinea on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Today, we meet again at a crossroads in the
developments in the Middle East. Today is 29 April,
the last day of the negotiations, launched under the
mediation of the Secretary of State of the United
States, between the State of Palestine and Israel nine
months ago to reach a final settlement. I should like at
the outset to repeat Egypt's support for the efforts of
the United States to reach a peaceful settlement based
on the two-State solution of two States living side by
side in peace within the borders of 4 June 1967, and
with Al-Quds al-Sharif as the capital of the State of
Palestine. Moreover, I should like to congratulate the
State of Palestine on its recent adherence to the four
Geneva Conventions and a number of other international
human rights treaties, demonstrating the commitment
of the State of Palestine to international law.

On this occasion, I should like to call on Israel to
review its latest decision to freeze negotiations and
impose additional sanctions on the Palestinian side, as
if the occupation and its daily practices, as well as the
construction of illegitimate settlements and the siege of
Gaza, were not sufficient to exert pressure on Palestine,
its Government and its people.

Events of the past three months reflect once again
the same logic that has prevailed in the Middle East
since the beginning of the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories. The Government of Israel continues to
behave in contradiction to the resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly and to violate the
rules of international law, international humanitarian
law, and conventions and accords previously reached
with the Palestinian side and the United States mediator
in the peace process. These violations include its refusal
to release the fourth batch of refugees, its building of
new settlements and expansion of existing settlements,
its siege imposed on the city of Gaza, its prohibition of
access of Palestinian Muslims to the Al-Aqsa Mosque;
and its restrictions on Palestinian Christians seeking
access to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre for the
Easter ceremony in another attempt to overturn the
status quo at the holy sites.

Of course, all those procedures have not safeguarded
the security ofIsraeli as violations have persisted every
day and Israel has continued to feel a lack of security,
despite its arsenal of weapons of mass destruction and
traditional weapons, which are of a higher quality than
those in all other countries of the region.

Israel does all that yet expects the international
community to support such acts or at least to remain
silent. The Israeli Government has been very upset
by the European Union guidelines on boycotting
settlements and refusing to do business with institutions
that support or fund settlement activities. It continues
to try to encourage investment in Israel. We praise
the international community and companies that
have developed strategies to put an end to settlement
activities. We confirm that the problem is related not
to the State of Israel per se, but to the insistence of the
current Israeli Government on pursuing its expansionist
activities in the settlements in order to suppress
the peace process or to delay any genuine peaceful
settlement with the Palestinians. We therefore call on
Israel once again to stop such acts and instead to resort
to logic. We call on the Security Council to assume
its responsibilities and to put the pressure necessary
to compel Israel to adhere to international law and its
provisions and to cease its ongoing provocations in
occupied lands, especially holy lands.

Moreover, Israel punishes the Palestinian Authority
when it seeks to return to the peace process, work
to unify the Palestinians, or adhere to international
organizations and treaties. What kind of logic is that and
how can peace be achieved from the Israeli viewpoint?
Egypt supports the efforts towards Palestinian
reconciliation and affirms that it will do its utmost
to achieve a real consensus and peace process based
on international legitimacy. Until then, Israel, as the
occupying Power, must assume its full responsibility
for the occupied territories and be aware that pointing
its finger at other countries will deceive no one and
or exempt it from accountability. The Security Council
must take all necessary measures to ensure Israel's
adherence to such commitments.

I now turn to the situation in Syria, where
destruction and the killing of civilians is on the rise.
Egypt supports the efforts ofthe Secretary-General and
the Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States to find a political
settlement. We call upon all parties, especially the
Syrian Government, to take no decision that is not in
line with the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/523, annex).

We affirm once again that current events in Syria
cannot be used as a pretext for ignoring the importance
of implementing relevant Security Council resolutions
to put an end to the Israeli occupation of the Syrian
Golan. We also express concern over the visits of senior
Israeli officials to the occupied Golan during the past
three months, as well as their provocative statements
suggesting that the Golan is an integral part of Israel, in
full disregard of relevant Security Council resolutions.

To conclude, I would like to congratulate Ms. Angela
Kane and Ms. Sigrid Kaag on their diligence and earnest
efforts to implement resolution 2118 (2013). I call upon
the members of the Security Council, especially the
permanent members, to implement paragraph 14 of
resolution 687 (1991) on creating a zone free ofweapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East without waiting
for the next tragedy to occur.

