Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): At this first
meeting of the Council under your leadership, Sir, let me
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Council. We look forward to working closely with you on
the important matters that will be coming before the
Council in the course of this month.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Wisnumurti of Indonesia for his outstanding
work last month. As experience demonstrates, the month
of August is not a vacation season for this Council. We
were certainly fortunate to have his wise guidance in our
deliberations for the past month.

Today we have endorsed the creation of a fact-
finding Commission to investigate the deadly flow of
arms and other war materiel to the former Rwandan
armed forces. The Commission will determine whether
arms dealers are indeed stoking the fires of civil war.

The Commission of Experts appointed to investigate
the Rwandan genocide concluded that the former
Rwandan leaders should be indicted and tried for
genocide and crimes against humanity, and to that end, in
resolution 955 (1994) of November 1994, the Security
Council created the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda to bring them and others to justice.

Now these same international criminals seem to be
rearming, recruiting and retraining their forces, with the
assistance of persons outside Rwanda who are willing to
flout the international prohibition contained in Security
Council resolutions.

 

In resolutions 918 (1994) and 997 (1995), the Security
Council imposed an embargo on all sales or transfers of
arms to be used in Rwanda. Resolution 1011 (1995)
suspended the embargo on arms transfers to the new
Rwandan Government, but maintained the embargo on
shipments of arms to the former Rwandan armed forces.
With the adoption of this resolution, the Security Council
is taking the steps necessary to enforce this arms embargo.

When the Government of Zaire first proposed the idea
of a commission to investigate the flow of arms to the
former Rwandan armed forces, my Government welcomed
the concept. We recognize the hardships the Government
and the people of Zaire have faced due to the influx of
hundreds of thousands of refugees. Even with the infusion
of massive amounts of humanitarian aid, there has been
increased competition for the already scarce resources in
this impoverished area, leading to political instability. We
regret the Government of Zaire's decision last month to
forcibly repatriate refugees, and we trust that they will not
return to such drastic measures. We commend them for
taking the initiative to suggest the International Commission
of Inquiry which we have acted upon today.

Zaire's proposal was an important step in the
development of the resolution adopted today, which we
believe will make a significant contribution to the effort to
maintain peace in Central Africa and create the conditions
for the voluntary return of refugees in dignity and safety.
We are especially pleased that this resolution empowers the
Commission to go wherever necessary to gather evidence
of possible arms transfers and military training. We believe
the Commission should conduct interviews and place
observers at the airfields and border checkpoints near
Rwandan camps in Zaire and Tanzania, the places illicit
transfers are most likely to occur. They should also explore
allegations of suspicious activities in and around the reputed
military camps of the former Rwandan armed forces.

The Commissioners should cast their net wide, with a
firm determination to identify anyone or any group engaged
in illicit arms traffic. We look forward to the Commission's
report in December.

The flow of illegal arms to the former Rwandan armed
forces can fatally undermine the fragile stability and peace
in the region and undermine the efforts of all those working
so hard to improve the political, economic and humanitarian
situation. The region is awakening from the nightmare of
death and brutality. We must ensure this nightmare does not
recur.

