Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/444), which in many
respects is hopeful. That should encourage us to exert
even greater efforts in Kosovo. We are also grateful
for presentations given by Minister Ivan Mrkie and by
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

The Security Council will have to follow closely
the implementation of the 19 April agreement. This
is a critical moment in relations between the parties.
The support of the international community and its
commitment to Kosovo continue to be essential. We
hope that the parties will continue to do everything
within their reach to implement the agreement. The
Belgrade agreement with the Kosovo Serbs continues to
be important in that regard. Likewise, Pristina should
complement those efforts and conduct activities to
disseminate those agreements and provide assurances
to the local population.

We agree with the Secretary-General that, in order
to avoid tensions and achieve success, it is important
for Kosovo Serbs to see themselves as co-participants
in the process. Moreover, it appears to be positive
that in the north of Kosovo the frequency of incidents
related to the use of explosive devices has decreased
significantly. We note that there has also been a
decrease in the number incidents affecting minority
communities across Kosovo, in comparison with the
previous period. We also note that the application of the
integrated management agreement on crossing points
continues without major problems.

Despite that progress, the report also indicates
that there are persistent tensions in northern Mitrovica
with regard to the construction of houses for internally
displaced persons (IDPs) from Kosovo and Albania.
We are concerned that, according to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), in April and May there were only 36 cases
of IDPs returning to Kosovo, in comparison with 159
during the same period in 2012. According to UNHCR,
a lack of sufficient funding to assign either housing
and/or land continues to be one of the main obstacles
to voluntary return.

As we mentioned in the latest debate on this topic
(see S/PV.6979), we believe that he United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has a central role to play during this new phase of
implementing the 19 April agreement. We welcome
the fact that UNMIK is intensifying its efforts and its
cooperation with all the relevant parties when it comes
to major problems in the field. We support UNMIK's
efforts to carry out mediation and facilitation functions
in northern Kosovo and to serve as a channel of
communication between municipal representatives and
minority communities to ensure the effective provision

of public and social services.

There is a broad range of activities in which
UNMIK continues to use its capacity and resources
to help reduce tensions and incidents. That is why it
is important for UNMIK to continue enjoying all the
necessary support to strengthen its presence in Kosovo,
especially in the north.

Moving on to the work of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) special
investigative task force on the inhumane treatment of
migrants and organ trafficking, we note with interest
the information included in the report on EULEX
activities annexed to the Secretary-General's report.
We follow its progress with attention.

We take very seriously the Secretary-General's
comment on the importance of the international
community's continued commitment to move towards
reconciliation and to help heal wounds created by
the conflict. We agree that the tasks of resolving the
legacy of the conflict must remain a priority, including
pending cases of missing persons and accountability
for war crimes and other crimes.

To conclude, we affirm the primacy of resolution
1244 (1999) as a legal framework applicable to
Kosovo, as well as the importance of full respect for
international law. We thank the Special Representative
for his continued efforts to promote reconciliation
among Kosovo's communities.

