Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa would
like to take this opportunity to welcome the Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, to the Council. He can be assured of
our support. We also wish to pay tribute to former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zannier for his contribution to the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

We again welcome Foreign Minister Jeremic' to
the Council and thank him for his statement. We also
welcome Mr. Hoxhaj and thank him for his statement.
My delegation reiterates its conviction that
resolution 1244 (1999) remains in force and forms the
basis for resolving the situation in Kosovo. UNMIK's
role is to promote security and stability in Kosovo, and
it should be allowed to fully implement its mandate as
authorized by the Council. Further, it is essential that
the international presence in Kosovo maintain its
status-neutral posture in the execution of its mandates,
in line with the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2008/44) adopted in November 2008.

South Africa supports the dialogue process
between the two sides, as mandated by the General

Assembly. Moreover, we believe that this regular
contact between the parties is an important confidence-
building measure that will, hopefully, improve trust
and allow the parties to address the outstanding
contentious issues. In this regard, we note from the
Secretary-General's report (S/2011/514) that
agreements have been reached on political measures
aimed at improving the lives of the ordinary people of
Serbia and Kosovo in the areas of freedom of
movement, civil registry, academic diplomas and other
practical matters, as acknowledged by the
representatives of both parties here today. Although the
dialogue has been suspended until September, we urge
the parties to engage constructively with the aim of
resolving all outstanding matters and promoting
reconciliation once the dialogue resumes.

However, the achievement attained in the
dialogue process could be undermined by negative
developments on the ground. In this regard, we are
concerned about the developments of 25 July in
northern Kosovo, which have led to a deterioration in
the already tense security situation in that area.
Unilateral actions by Pristina will jeopardize the
advances made by the parties in the dialogue process
and ultimately make reconciliation more difficult to
achieve.

The international presence in Kosovo is mandated
by this Council to facilitate peace and reconciliation.
Therefore, any action by either side aimed against
either UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) or the Kosovo Force is
unacceptable. We support the Secretary-General's calls
on Pristina and the authorities in Mitrovica to
demonstrate full respect for the international presence
and to provide reassurances that the inviolability of
UNMIK's premises will be protected and observed.
In this Council's previous debates on UNMIK in
February (S/PV.6483) and May (S/PV.6534), we stated
that the limited progress towards reconciliation
between the communities in Belgrade and Pristina
could also be undone by the allegation of human organ
smuggling. We reiterate our position that a credible,
thorough, impartial and independent inquiry into these
allegations should be conducted as quickly as possible.
South Africa believes that there should be no impunity
for grave violations of human rights.

In this regard, we have noted the statement issued
by EULEX that it has the capacity, expertise and

jurisdiction to handle the investigations, and indeed
that it has assumed responsibility for them. We have
also noted the creation of the EULEX special Task
Force. South Africa wishes to encourage EULEX to
provide regular reports to the Council on the progress
of these investigations.

In conclusion, sustainable peace, stability and
development in the region are best served by
reconciliation between Belgrade and Pristina. Dialogue
is the only way to find a viable and long-term solution
to the situation on the ground and for the region to
move forward in its socio-economic development and
regional integration. South Africa stands ready to work
in the Council with these partners in support of that
process.

