I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and presentation, which once again confirms the relevance of the mission entrusted to the International Criminal Court in Darfur. The fight against impunity is one of the key elements of the transition in the Sudan, which France actively supports. Indeed, the prosecution and conviction of the perpetrators of the most serious crimes contribute to the restoration of democratic life and reconciliation in the country. We cannot emphasize enough that without justice, the building of a just and lasting peace in the region is not possible. The Office of the Prosecutor must therefore be able to exercise its prerogatives without hindrance or obstruction. We welcome the legislative initiative of the Sudan's Sovereign Council, which allows for better cooperation with the Court, and the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan , which also provides for stipulations to that effect. The conclusion expected shortly of a memorandum of understanding between the Court and the Sudanese authorities will complete the legal framework necessary for the implementation of that new initiative. We are therefore delighted that the Prosecutor was able to visit Khartoum in October for the first time in 10 years. Those positive developments should now lead to concrete progress on the ground, in response to the Court's requests. First of all, access for investigators in Darfur, under satisfactory security conditions, must be quickly and freely granted. Such access is essential if the Court is to fulfil its mandate and bring justice to the victims of crimes against humanity and war crimes. France takes note of the progress of the proceedings in the case against Mr. Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, also known as Ali Kushayb, and calls on the Sudanese authorities to welcome the Court's requests for cooperation. Secondly, while complementarity remains a cardinal principle, the execution of the four outstanding arrest warrants is crucial. France welcomes the continued dialogue between the Court and the Sudanese authorities in order to examine all the possibilities offered by the Rome Statute. Lastly, the security and humanitarian situation in Darfur has deteriorated over the period covered by the report, marked by the death of some 100 civilians and the displacement of tens of thousands of people, the vast majority of them women and children. We encourage the Sudanese authorities to continue to implement their national plan for the protection of civilians, today with the support of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and tomorrow with the assistance of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan, particularly with regard to reporting on human rights violations and strengthening the capacity of the Sudanese police. France condemns in the strongest possible terms the violations of human rights and international humanitarian law, in particular gender-based and sexual violence, the victims of which are mostly minors. We are pleased that, under the leadership of Prosecutor Bensouda, the prosecution of sexual and gender-based crimes has become a priority for her Office. A permanent and universal criminal court is more necessary than ever to bring the perpetrators of the most serious crimes to justice and to break the cycles of impunity and violence at work in too many crisis situations. The International Criminal Court is the cornerstone of the fight against impunity at the international level. It plays an essential role within the multilateral system. France reaffirms its full support for the Court, which must be able to act independently and impartially within the framework defined by the Rome Statute.
