Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
First, let me join others in welcoming you back to the
Council, Madame. I want to express my delegation's
appreciation that you are again leading our Council's
deliberations on a topic of such complexity and
genuine importance. Your presence adds significance to
our debate today and is clear evidence of your personal
commitment and that of Ambassador Mufioz and the
Chilean delegation to finding creative ways for the
Security Council better to meet future challenges.

Like many people around the world, Americans
also live in a post-conflict society. Although our
wrenching national tragedy - what we call the Civil
War - ended nearly a century and a half ago, its
echoes have been felt throughout the intervening
generations. Historians have written volumes about the
issues related to national reconciliation faced by the
United States as the agonies of war gave way to the
promise and realization of a reunited, peaceful and
prosperous nation.

Although our own reconstruction was obviously
achieved without the assistance of the United Nations,
we believe that the issues we faced as a nation still
have relevance to nations attempting to recovery from
their own, more recent national nightmares. The need
to address issues of transitional and long-term justice,
reconciliation, the establishment or reinvigoration of
democratic institutions, economic restructuring and
recovery, and reintegration into the community of
nations remains as critical and as challenging today as
it was when we began our effort to address some of
those same issues as a post-conflict nation, beginning
in the latter half of the nineteenth century. Our effort
continued through the twentieth century and, in some
ways, is still ongoing this very day.

But twenty-first century circumstances offer
enormously promising new opportunities for nations
facing the challenges of post-conflict national
reconciliation. Advances in communications and the
increasing interdependence of our world mean that
national tragedies are now played out on the world
stage. A growing sense of commonality and shared
experience has increased the number and scope of
potential remedies available as countries begin their
long roads back to peace, justice and normalcy.

Intra-State conflicts are fundamentally different
from those that occur between nations and it is an
unfortunate fact of recent history that deadly conflicts
are increasingly occurring within, rather than between
States. Unlike traditional conflicts between States,
where the belligerents can be expected to return to their
own territories, in these conflicts former belligerents
must, at the end of the conflict, resume their roles as
neighbours and fellow citizens. That was the case in
my country at the end of the Civil War.

Finding a home to come home to is the great task
of any post-conflict society. Among the most
significant potential resources available now to assist
nations in their effort at post-conflict national
reconciliation - finding that home to come home to -
is the United Nations itself. In its deliberations last
week, the Council focused on children and armed
conflict. Finding homes for those children to come
home to poses a unique and special challenge. Indeed,
all the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and activities of the United Nations and
other international actors are, in a very real sense, the
mechanism to accomplish that goal.

The various organs and specialized agencies of
the United Nations have experience and demonstrated
expertise in a number of relevant areas. The scope and
duration of the United Nations direct involvement
should and will vary considerably from case to case.
We may use it to go as far as creating an interim
administration that effectively becomes the post-
conflict governing authority until local authorities are
ready to assume that responsibility themselves. In other
cases, the United Nations involvement may be more
narrowly focused, drawing on the wide range of
capabilities it can bring to bear, many of which we
have already discussed this morning. Our task as the
international community and as the Security Council is
to find the right set of tools to help bridge the gap
between the end of conflict and the resumption of
normal economic life in a reconstituted society.

Others have noted that each national situation is
unique. The United Nations experience over the years
in dealing with conflicts at varying stages and in
different capacities makes it a repository of knowledge
and a valuable unifying instrument that can materially
enhance the effectiveness of international assistance to
a nation embarking on the path of reconciliation and
recovery.

My delegation looks forward to hearing from
others about their individual reconciliation experiences
and I think the intervention by the representative of
Angola was very illustrative in that regard. Lessons
learned from the past may help us address the cases of
national reconciliation that will - unfortunately but
inevitably - face us in the future. In those future
cases, as with those in the past, there will be no easy
prescriptions for success and the cost of failure will be
almost immeasurably high.

That said, it is the belief of my Government that
the establishment, restoration or preservation of
democratic governance should be the most important
overarching objective of post-conflict reconciliation.
Only thus can the requisite political will and
commitment to recovery be built and maintained. Such
will is a fundamental precondition for reconciliation.
Without developing democratic governance, the
likelihood of successfully addressing the critical
questions of justice, truth and equitable reconstruction
will be vanishingly and tragically small.

