Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Equatorial Guinean presidency
for organizing this open debate on the African Union's
ambitious Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative and for
its outstanding leadership of the work of the Council.

Allow me also to welcome your presence among us,
Sir, which testifies to the leadership and commitment of
your country to the efforts made by our States to make
a reality of the noble African ambition of silencing the
guns on our continent by 2020.

I would like to express my delegation's
appreciation to our briefers for their wise analyses
and timely recommendations. I thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, African Union High Representative for
Silencing the Guns in Africa; and Mr. Vasu Gounden,
Founder and Executive Director of the African Centre
for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes. I thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, whose commitment to conflict prevention
and the maintenance and consolidation of peace and
security in Africa is well-known.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the outstanding progress
made since the adoption in January 2017 of the African
Union Master Road Map of Practical Steps to Silence
the Guns in Africa by the Year 2020 and welcomes the
adoption today of resolution 2457 (2019), submitted
by the Republic of Equatorial Guinea on behalf of the
three African members of the Council, in accordance
with paragraph 5 of the Peace and Security Council
communique of 16 January 2017.

We congratulate our colleague Ambassador
Anatolio Ndong Mba and his entire team for their
excellent work throughout the month of February. We
are convinced that the resolution marks an important
step in the process of the assumption of ownership by
the United Nations and its competent bodies of this
important project, which is perfectly in line with the
African Union's efforts to promote peace, security
and development.

On 16 January 2017, the African Union Peace
and Security Council of the African Union adopted
the Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the
Guns in Africa by the Year 2020, in line with Agenda
2063 of the African Union, towards the socioeconomic
transformation of the continent. Since then, the pan-
African organization has spared no effort to make a
reality of the dream of a peaceful Africa, steadfastly
on its way to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals, as Ambassador Lamamra has just demonstrated.

Convinced that the coordinated efforts of all
stakeholders constitute the best means of effectively
implementing this important project, the African Union
has tirelessly mobilized all member States, subregional
organizations and African civil society, as well as the
international community, including the United Nations.
Indeed, the coordination of our strategies and the
pooling of our resources are critical, even indispensable
conditions for effectively leading the struggle against
the increasing and evolving nature of conflicts in
Africa, as well as the worrisome proliferation of
arms trafficking.

While we cannot deny that combining our efforts is
essential to silencing the guns in Africa, it should also
be recognized that it is first and foremost the task of
Member States to combat the ravages caused by arms
through national legal and operational frameworks.
Indeed, silencing the guns as a means of conflict
prevention must be the primary responsibility of States
under the Charter of the United Nations. It is in light of

this primary responsibility that cote d'Ivoire, which has
experienced the pain of post-electoral armed conflict,
has implemented a relevant national legal framework
stemming from the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Convention on Small Arms
and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other
Related Materials and the Arms Trade Treaty.

At the operational level, the fight against the illicit
proliferation of and trafficking in small arms and light
weapons has been carried out in conjunction with
our disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process for ex-combatants and security sector
reform. In this regard, my country has created an
authority on DDR, a national security council to lead
the security sector reform and a national commission
for the fight against small arms and light weapons.
The DDR process, which was completed in June 2015,
was financed with 72 per cent of our own funds and
followed by community disarmament and a policy to
reintegrate ex-combatants, which is essential for the
sustainability of the gains we have made in peace,
security and stability.

Cote d'Ivoire is of the opinion that the
implementation of the African Union Master Roadmap
of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020 must also and above all be based on strong
political and financial commitments in order to achieve
our common goal of preserving future generations from
the burden of war and violent conflict. It is therefore
particularly important to insist on the decisive role
of the regional economic communities, as defined in
paragraph 4 of the African Union Peace and Security
Council communique of 16 January 2017.

In this regard, I would like to cite and welcome the
example of the positive cooperation among the national
small arms and light weapons committees of ECOWAS
member States within the framework of the Convention
on Small Arms and Light Weapons and the Arms Trade
Treaty. Such cooperation facilitates the strengthening of
national capacities in the fight against arms trafficking,
as well as the regular exchange of experiences and good
practices, thereby enabling member States to make
excellent progress in monitoring, tracing and securing
stockpiles of weapons and munitions.

cote d'Ivoire also underscores the need for the
African Union and international partners to maintain
their multifaceted support in strengthening the
capacities of regional organizations in order to increase
their effectiveness in the fight against the proliferation of
arms, awareness-raising and community disarmament,
alongside civil society organizations. In this regard, my
country welcomes United Nations efforts undertaken
through the United Nations Mine Action Service,
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, and the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons. We urge the United Nations to continue
its cooperation with the African Union, in accordance
with the Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security between the two institutions, to
work towards conflict prevention in Africa.

Our commitment to silencing the guns in Africa by
2020 must take into account structural vulnerabilities,
such as poverty and unemployment. Our coordinated
efforts must take security and development concerns
into account and provide young people in particular
with alternatives to crime and illegal arms-related
activities. We must also consider the need to further
include women in our approach to security and
development issues.

To conclude, I make an urgent appeal to the
international community, including the Security
Council, to support the African Union's Silencing the
Guns initiative - an expression of the readiness of
its member States to work towards the establishment
of peace, security and development in Africa. Cote
d'Ivoire will certainly play its part.

