Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her report and
briefing on the recent developments in the Darfur case.

As pointed out by previous speakers, it has been
almost 10 years since the Security Council referred
the situation in Darfur to the ICC as its first instance
of such referral. We commend the decade-long
efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor in purusing
its investigation and judicial activities. Despite such
efforts, however, the initial high hopes for rendering
international criminal justice and ending impunity have
not been realized, mainly because of non-cooperation,
coupled with a worsening security situation in Darfur.
We believe that it is time for the ICC and the Security
Council to deliberate more vigorously on the practical
options to cope with this issue, especially to address
the underlying reasons for the lack of cooperation
from the Government of the Sudan and other States.
We have learned over the years that simply denouncing
or reprimanding non-cooperation is not enough to
encourage necessary action from the relevant authorities
and parties.

The report on the ongoing activities of the ICC
in Darfur shows that the Court is striving to conduct
robust monitoring of alleged crimes against civilians,
peacekeepers and internally displaced persons. We also
welcome the fact that the Office of the Prosecutor is
paying special attention to the widespread occurrence
of gender-based and sexual crimes, especially to the
allegations of mass rape in Thabit. The Prosecutor
should be able to continue a full and transparent
investigation without interference.

With regard to the allegations in a report by the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, we welcome the Secretary-General's efforts to
get to the bottom of the case by establishing the review
team. We hope that its recommendations will be duly
implemented.

Finally, we support all the efforts of the Security
Council and the ICC to end impunity and assure
accountability in Darfur and anywhere else in the
world.

