Mr. Hassouna (League of Arab States) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the League of Arab States, it is
indeed my pleasure to welcome Your Excellency the
Foreign Minister of the Gambia and to congratulate you,
Sir, on your presidency of the Security Council during this
open meeting, which is of particular importance in view of
the issue being discussed. We also wish to welcome our
brother from Libya, Mr. Muntasser, who has honoured us
with his presence at this meeting.

Allow me to express my gratitude to all the members
of the Security Council for having agreed to hold this
meeting and devoting it to the discussion of the Lockerbie
incident in all its aspects for the first time after several
years, which augurs the beginning of a new stage in dealing
with the problem, and which we hope will lead to a
peaceful, just and final settlement of the problem.

Since its inception on 22 March 1945 as the first
regional organization within the framework of the
international order in the wake of the Second World War,
the League of Arab States has supported its member States,
helping them to safeguard their independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. It has also endeavoured, in
accordance with its charter and related agreements, to
reach a peaceful settlement to all international disputes,
either in relations among its members or in their relations
with other States. It is on this basis that the League of
Arab States from the beginning of the Lockerbie crisis in
1991 has affirmed its support of and full solidarity with
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya with a view to reaching a
peaceful settlement to that dispute in order to avoid all
negative and serious consequences, not only to the
brotherly Libyan people alone, but also to the people of
the whole region.

To that purpose, in 1992 the League of Arab States
set up the ministerial Committee of Seven, entrusting it
with following up on the developments of the case and
establishing the necessary contacts with the parties
concerned and with the Security Council in order to find
a solution to the problem in keeping with the provisions
of the charter and the principles of international law.

Moreover, I would like to mention in this respect the
efforts undertaken by Dr. Esmat Abdul-Maguid, the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, to
explain the point of view of the Arab States concerning
this issue and to endeavour to find a just settlement to it.
These efforts were represented by his repeated visits to
the United Nations Headquarters in New York and his
intensified meetings with the members of the Security
Council and with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations. In fact, he wanted to attend this meeting, but
prior obligations did not allow him to do so.

Within the framework of the international efforts
undertaken to reach a peaceful and just solution to the
crisis and on the basis of the provisions of Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter concerning the activities of
regional organizations that are in keeping with the
objectives of the United Nations, the League of Arab
States, in cooperation with the Organization of African
Unity and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, has
submitted three options to the Security Council as a basis
on which to solve the problem. These proposals, as you
know, consist of either a trial of the suspects in a neutral
country or at the headquarters of the International Court
of Justice, or by a special penal court. This is provided
that the Security Council would consider approval of
provisional measures to except air travel for humanitarian,
religious and official purposes from the application of
sanctions.
 

Libya has responded to all the proposals and has
manifested flexibility for the purpose of reaching a peaceful
and just solution to the conflict. This has been emphasized
before you today by the Libyan Foreign Minister,
Mr. Muntasser. Thus Libya has accepted the principle of
bringing the suspects to trial. It has also accepted the
jurisdiction of the Scottish court and the application of
Scottish law. It has cooperated fully with the French
judiciary authorities in all of the investigations. It has
repeatedly declared its condemnation of terrorism.

But at the same time, it has insisted that the trial take
place in a neutral country and in an atmosphere free from
bias, refusing to surrender the two suspects for trial in the
United States of America or Scotland, which would be
contrary to its own national laws, to the provisions of
international law and to the 1971 Montreal Convention on
the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Civil Aviation. This is particularly important as there is no
treaty in force for the exchange of suspects between Libya
and the United States and the United Kingdom. These are
the firm legal principles that Libya has maintained.

The main objective of all the efforts undertaken by the
League of Arab States and the other regional and
international organizations, such as the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Group of 77, which represent the
majority of the members of the international community, is
to achieve a just, peaceful and final settlement to the
problem in the framework of international legitimacy that
would be satisfactory to all the parties concerned, including
the families of the victims, and at the same time, to
safeguard Libyan sovereignty within the framework of law
and justice. The time has come to alleviate the suffering of
the Libyan people and to allow this sister country to play
its positive role fully in the Arab, African, Islamic and
Mediterranean context.

The members of the Security Council have recently
examined the report of the fact-finding mission headed by
Mr. Vladimir Petrovsky and sent by the Secretary-General
of the United Nations to the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. The
report, with its information sources of unimpeachable
credibility, refers to the deteriorating economic and social
conditions in the country, particularly in the health, social,
agricultural and transportation sectors, as a result of the
continuing sanctions imposed on it year after year, which,
in reality, constitute a form of collective punishment of an
entire people despite the fact there is so far no proof of
either the guilt or the innocence of the two suspects. It is in
fact a case of flagrant denial of justice for an entire people.

Unfortunately, the negative consequences of the
sanctions extend to other, neighbouring Arab and African
countries, affecting the stability and the welfare of an
entire region. Perhaps this is why many have raised their
voices before the Security Council today, declaring that
the time has come for the sanctions on Libya to be lifted
and for a peaceful settlement of the dispute to be reached.
President Robert Mugabe, President of the Republic of
Zimbabwe and the current Chairman of the Organization
of African Unity, has previously, in this very Council, on
25 September 1997, expressed this same opinion. This is
the same request made by several Arab and African
Presidents, like President Nelson Mandela of the Republic
of South Africa.

The Security Council decision to maintain the
sanctions on Libya was taken on 6 March 1998, despite
the Judgment rendered by the International Court of
Justice on 27 February 1998 concerning the claim
submitted by Libya against the United States and the
United Kingdom. It is a Judgment we fully welcome, and
we consider it a very important step towards settling the
dispute.

Our opinion was that the Security Council should
take into account the Judgment of the highest judiciary
authority of the United Nations because indeed it does
give a new legal dimension to the very nature of the
dispute and indicates a way by which the Security
Council could deal with it. The Judgment of the Court has
determined that the Lockerbie incident is indeed a legal
dispute between Libya and the United Kingdom and the
United States which falls within the jurisdiction of the
Court and that all the parties to the dispute should respect
it and abide by it. The conflict essentially has to do with
a legal matter, which is a dispute over the interpretation
and application of the 1971 Montreal Convention on the
safety of civil aviation. Consequently, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya has, from the very start, followed the correct
path as it resorted to the International Court of Justice, in
accordance with Articles 33 and 36 of the Charter of the
United Nations. This is what had actually taken place
before the United States and the United Kingdom resorted
to the Security Council and before the renewal of the
imposition of sanctions.

In our view, wisdom should have dictated that the
Council take into account the nature of the dispute in
accordance with Article 36 of the Charter, which states:

"The Security Council should take into
consideration any procedures for the settlement of

 

the dispute which have already been adopted by the
parties."
With the Judgment which has been rendered, to the
effect that a legal dispute exists with regard to the
interpretation and application of the Montreal Convention,
the Court will consider it in the future stages with the
participation of all parties to the dispute, in accordance with
what they announced a few days ago. We welcome these
developments.

Therefore it is no longer acceptable for the sanctions
against Libya to continue without proving the international
responsibility of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya or the
responsibility of the two suspects. On these bases, the
League of Arab States calls upon the Security Council to
suspend its resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1992) at this
stage, until the International Court of Justice settles the
substance of this dispute.

Finally, we look forward to the fact that this meeting
of the Security Council will be the starting point towards a
change of the way in which the Council has been dealing
with this dispute. This should result, through an in-depth
consideration of all the aspects of the problem, in the taking
of practical and definitive steps to contain the crisis and
speed up its solution, bearing in mind the proposals
submitted by the League of Arab States and the other
regional organizations.

Yet, I add that this cannot be accomplished unless
there is the political will on the part of the other two parties
to the dispute with Libya in order to reach an acceptable
and just solution based on the application of the law
governing the settlement of international disputes. This
undoubtedly will contribute to the consecration of
international legitimacy and the reinforcement of law in
international relations.

