Mr. Vidal (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Through
you, Madame, I wish to congratulate Brazil on having
convened this Security Council debate on the
interdependence between security and development. As
proposed in the concept note before the Council
(S/2011/50, annex), this concept is being addressed as
a complex relationship. That is due to a number of
reasons, including the existence of numerous actors
and activities that are interrelated and often overlap, as
well as to the specificities of each case, making it very
difficult to offer uniform responses.

One additional difficulty in addressing this issue
in the Security Council is related to the Council's
instinctive tendency to prioritize security issues when
addressing the eruption or seeking a way out of an
armed conflict, while neglecting issues connected to
economic and social development in the affected
country or region. Certainly, without security there can
be no development, because the former is a sine qua
non for the latter. Certainly, too, underdevelopment and
poverty are not necessarily decisive causes in
generating conflict, while a number of actors within the
United Nations system have more responsibility for the
issue of development than does the Security Council.

Yet, it is also true that, without adequate and
early recourse to all instruments available within the
system to promote the sustainable economic
development of the country or region affected by
conflict, there is a serious risk of a relapse into
violence that may undo years and sometimes decades
of great human and material effort and cost devoted to
the maintenance of peace, and result in the sustained
maintenance of the security component on the ground
without envisioning a safe exit strategy.

We have seen that in the two missions to which
Uruguay has contributed a considerable number of
personnel. These are the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo - which until recently was the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - in which we have
participated for 12 consecutive years, and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, in which we are
entering our seventh year, although the United Nations
military presence in Haiti dates back to 1994.

It is on the basis of that experience that Uruguay,
along with a number of other countries, promotes at
every possible opportunity - be it in consultations on
peace mission mandates within the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations or other forums - the strengthening of
support for peace missions and peacebuilding in the
receiving State. We also focus on efforts to promote
sustainable economic and social development.

It is difficult for a peacekeeping operation to
resolve all causes of conflict, and we do not believe
that that should be its goal or its indicator for
determining an end to a mission. However, it is
essential for the mission to begin working from the
outset to strengthen national institutions and capacities
so that they can peacefully resolve problems on their
own. Strengthening institutional capacities in the
security and rule of law sectors is crucial, and we
therefore encourage the Council to continue to include
this aspect in peace mission mandates.

That, however, is not the only area in which
peace operations have the capacity to have a positive
influence. The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants are also
fundamental, not only because of the likelihood of a
resurgence of conflict, but also because a large number
of individuals may turn to crime in the future. We
therefore need to ensure a positive economic
environment with prospects for growth.

Unemployment among the young has been
identified by the PBC review panel as a potential threat
to any peacebuilding process. That is why the
Commission has taken up the recommendation to focus
on generating employment in this sector of society, and
considers its implementation a priority. In part, this can
be carried out through immediate-impact projects
managed by peacekeeping operations, which generate
tangible peace dividends and have been successful in
countries such as Haiti.

Finally, another crucial area where peacekeeping
operations where can make a major difference is in
rebuilding infrastructure, which is a key multiplier of
development in countries affected by conflict.
Sufficient material capacity and appropriate
deployment conditions are essential to carrying out this
task. In all of these activities, developing countries
possess great potential for cooperation. To that end, we
have significantly increased our bilateral contribution
to countries in the aforementioned situation. We also
believe it essential to strengthen mechanisms for
South-South cooperation through so-called triangular
cooperation, in which the countries with the greatest
financial capacities participate in an effort to meet
these challenges most effectively.

