Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Eliasson and Mr. Simonovie for their statements, as
well as the Permanent Representative of Ukraine for his.
This past Saturday, the international community sent a
unanimous message to Russia on behalf of the Council,
to whit, that the referendum it had instigated in Crimea
was illegal and null and void under international law.
Russia's veto changed nothing - quite the contrary.
The illegal act of separating Crimea, which had been
in preparation since a long time, appeared all the more
blatant.
Yesterday Crimea was annexed by Russia,
despite the picture painted that has fooled no one.
The annexation was accompanied by flags, drums
and trumpets forming a gathering wave of aggressive
nationalism, the future consequences of which, once it
is awoken, are unknown; nationalism that never leads
to anything good, a nationalism that is used to mask or
to justify attempts to suppress civil rights.

Moreover, little effort has been made to hide the
use of force. The referendum was hastily organized,
Russian soldiers were everywhere. Nothing was
left to chance. The media was controlled at the level
of describing events, international observers were
recruited from among the far-right European parties
and if fascists are part of the story, they are certainly not
where they are claimed to be. Finally, the final results
appeared so excessive that they lost all meaning. How
could more than 86 per cent of the people have voted,
when some communities - particularly the Crimean
Tartars and Ukrainians that represent nearly 14 per cent
of the population - had called for a boycott.

The United Nations was created to ensure that
one would no longer witness such spectacles which
dishonour the organizers and in effect reflect upon
the entire international community. The rule of law
must guide relations among States. The acquisition of
territory resulting from the use of force or even from
simple threats is simply unacceptable. That principle
that Russia subscribed to in the early days is our code.
I would call it the DNA of the Organization. As I stated
on Saturday (see S/PV.7I38), by voting against the draft
resolution, it is the Charter of the United Nations that
Russia has in effect vetoed.

We have just heard from Mr. Simonovic' that nothing
in Ukraine justified references to extremely serious
attacks on human rights or minorities placed in critical
situations. If any serious human rights violations have
occurred, it was during the time of Yanukovych.

At least we are reassured regarding the situation
throughout the country. The authorities in Kyiv are
endeavoring to extend their hand to all of the various
components of Ukrainian society. Nothing will justify
in the long-term the current discussion about an
irresponsible Government whose actions could lead to
fear among its populations.

In terms of the protection of Russian and Russian
language populations in Ukraine invoked by Moscow
to justify its intervention in Ukraine - it is again clear
that it does not correspond to the reality of the situation,
nor is it a legal justification of the military occupation
of a territory of a sovereign State and it becomes even
less relevant when used as a pretext to extend its own
borders.

We continue to recall that minorities in Ukraine,
including religious and language minorities, must be
protected. That falls first and foremost to the transition
authorities - and that is what they are doing. The
situation in Kyiv, L'viv, Donets'k or Kharkiv should not
concern the Council. It is in Sevastopol and Simferopol
that the law is being flouted, militiamen terrorize those
who will not give in to force, and Ukrainian soldiers are
being killed simply because they refuse to surrender.

Faced with a Russia that does not heed the concerns
of the international community as a whole and has not
even responded to the sensible propositions we have
made to peacefully resolve the crisis, we are forced to
respond. All that remains is to make Russia understand
that we will never accept the fait accompli that it has
just imposed on the ground. But we must also look to
the future, with a double call on Russia.

The first is to tell it to stop there. Agents provocateurs
are already at work in eastern Ukraine; let them not
play the same game as in Crimea; let Russia cease its
thinly veiled manoeuvres. It has already succeeded
in creating lasting alienation between Ukraine and
European countries; to go further wold be most grave.
The second call regards the need for Moscow to open a
channel of direct negotiations with Kyiv. Russia should
make no mistake - Ukraine cannot be replaced with
something else, as it seems to hope; no one will decide
Ukraine's future except Ukraine itself.

We are already counting the first casualties of this
grim misadventure. Yesterday, the Ukrainian Prime
Minister announced that the conflict with Russia was
now moving from a political phase to a military one.
We continue to call on Russia to see reason, listen to
the voice of the international community, and not drag
the international community into a spiral that will
sooner or later spin out of control, or at least escape the
restraint of the Ukrainians.

