Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I should like at the outset to thank you
for having convened this meeting and to extend our
thanks also to Judge Pocar, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY); Judge Byron, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR);
Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor of the ICTY; and
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the ICTR,
for their progress reports on the Tribunals' completion
strategies and for their briefings to the Council.

The Tribunals are continuing to move forward in
the implementation of their completion strategies, with
the support of the Security Council and in accordance
with its resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). They
are continuing to take steps at various levels in order to
complete those strategies by the end of 2008.

While we recognize the need for the Tribunals to
complete their work by the deadlines set, we would
like to stress that there must be a balance between
respecting such time frames and ensuring the full
implementation of the Tribunals' mandates in an
effective manner that guarantees a fair trial for all
indictees.

The establishment of these two Tribunals
exemplifies the commitment of the international
community and of the United Nations to put an end to
impunity by bringing to justice those responsible for
the most heinous crimes against humanity. However,
that commitment must be matched by a continued
commitment by the Security Council and all States to
arrest and bring to justice those indictees who are still
at large. Justice cannot be complete while they remain
at large before the eyes and ears of the international
community. We therefore call upon all States to fulfil
their commitments to the two Tribunals, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, by
arresting the fugitives, foremost among them Mladic,
Karadzic and Kabuga, and transferring them to the
Tribunals, and by fully cooperating with the two
Tribunals in their work. We call once again upon the
Security Council to guarantee the strict implementation
ofits own resolutions.
Now, during the Tribunals' final years, we must
focus on their legacy: a significant legacy of
international jurisprudence that can guide future courts.
We call upon the Tribunals to continue their efforts to
complete their work, because the victims of these
heinous crimes are pinning great hopes on them for the
affirmation of justice and peace, and because the work
of the Tribunals contributes significantly to the
achievement of security, stability and national
reconciliation.

We believe that the two courts cannot complete
their work until they bring the principal indictees to
justice; this requires full cooperation on the part of all
States concerned, with a view to regaining stability in
the regions concerned.

I would like to pose a few questions to the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of the two Tribunals.
We have listened to the briefing of the President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
Mr. Pocar, in which he requested that the Council send
a strong message to the fugitives; the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda requested
no particular measure from the Council. I would ask
for a frank and complete answer to this question: What
is required of the Security Council in supporting the
work of the Tribunals? If the answer is that the Council
should take certain measures against those States that
do not cooperate with the Tribunals, then the Security
Council should approach the matter seriously and
strictly so as to guarantee that no one can ever again
enjoy impunity.

My second question too is directed to both
Tribunals. It concerns the failure to transfer accused
within a specific time frame. Here, I would refer to an
issue raised by Mr. Jallow, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, when he
said that the principal suspects must be transferred.
They, in addition to Felicien Kabuga, must be brought
to justice before the end of 2007. If these suspects are
not transferred before the end of 2007, the work of the
Tribunal may be jeopardized. We also heard some
Council members state that they would not agree to an
extension of the work of the Tribunals after the expiry
of their mandates. Whether the mandates end in 2007,
2008, 2009 or 2010, if these suspects are still at large,
what measures should then be taken? Would these
suspects be transferred to national jurisdictions?
Perhaps they would not be prepared to deal with such
suspects. Is there a clear strategy regarding this issue?
My third question is directed to the Prosecutor of
the ICTY. In her statement, she spoke of the transfer of
certain cases to some States and said that she believed
that certain Governments had interfered in the judicial
processes of the cases that she had transferred to
national jurisdictions. If there is true interference by
those States, that would be a serious matter which
should be dealt with not only by the Security Council
but also by the Office of the Prosecutor. If she had
predicted that something like this might happen, why
did she transfer these cases to national jurisdictions?

My last question is for the representatives of the
ICTY, who know that the Security Council is dealing
with Kosovo at the present time. There is a settlement
plan that includes judicial measures. What would be
the impact of a settlement plan in Kosovo on the work
and jurisdiction of the Tribunal?

