Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like in my national capacity to thank the
delegations that have condemned the terrorist attack on
the Jewish Museum in Brussels for their expressions of
sympathy.

(spoke in English)

I am pleased to take the floor on behalf of the Group
of Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions. This
group is comprised of Austria, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and Belgium.

First of all, we thank the Committee Chairs for
their informative briefings. We commend the Security
Council for organizing this biannual meeting, and for
creating the opportunity to discuss United Nations
sanctions regimes.

The need to further develop fair and clear
procedures in United Nations sanctions regimes is
widely recognized, as we have heard again today. As in
previous years, the Group of Like-Minded States aims
to support the efforts of the Security Council to enhance
the fairness and transparency of its various sanctions
regimes, thereby contributing to their credibility and
effectiveness. Much has been done with regard to
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities. In particular, the creation and
strengthening of the Ombudsperson process were vital
steps towards an independent and effective sanctions
review mechanism.

However, considerable due process concerns persist
and legal challenges have been filed in jurisdictions
around the world. The ruling of the Court of Justice
of the European Union in the Kadi case in July last
year, concerning the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, is
one of several judicial decisions confirming that in
the implementation of United Nations measures, the
actions of Member States are subject to full judicial
review as to their conformity with fundamental
norms, such as the right to be heard, the right to have
access to one's file - subject to legitimate interests in
maintaining confidentiality - the right to ascertain the
reasons behind a decision, and the right to an effective
remedy. The right to have cases decided upon within
a reasonable time frame should also be respected.
Therefore, as long as national and regional Courts
consider United Nations sanctions to fall short of the
minimum standards of due process, national authorities
may find themselves unable to fully implement them at
the national level.

In order to further strengthen the effectiveness of
the United Nations sanctions regimes and in line with
the continuous need to ensure due process, the Group of
Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions invites the
Security Council and Member States to consider the
following proposals and ideas, which were submitted in
writing on 17 April in document S/2014/286.

First, the Office of the Ombudsperson should
be made permanent. That will give more weight and
credibility to the Ombudsperson's work.

Secondly, information-sharing between Member
States and the Ombudsperson, as well as between the
Sanctions Committee and Member States, national
or regional courts and other authorities should be
improved.

Thirdly, transparency should be enhanced. All
decisions regardless of whether they maintain a listing
or delist an individual or entity should contain adequate
and substantial reasons. Moreover, those reasons,
as well as a redacted version of the comprehensive
report of the Ombudsperson, should be published,
while allowing for legitimate privacy, security and
confidentiality interests to be adequately protected.

Fourthly, the Committees must continue to conduct
the triennial review in a timely and thorough manner and
to regularly inform Member States about the results of
all reviews provided for under resolution 2083 (2012). In
the course of the review, the Committee should actively
confirm each listing in order to maintain it on the list.
In so doing, the Committee should give reasons why
a listing remains appropriate. In case a listing is not
reviewed and confirmed within the required three-year
period, it should automatically be deleted.

Besides these four proposals for the immediate
future, the Group of Like-Minded States would also
like to submit a few ideas for the longer term, aimed at
ensuring the effectiveness of all the Council's sanctions
regimes, while improving their fairness and thereby
bringing them in line with human rights jurisprudence:

First, we recommend providing the Ombudsperson
with the authority to decide, when a delisting request
is made, whether to maintain a listing or to delist an
individual or entity. At the same time, Member States
and relevant international organizations and bodies
should encourage individuals or entities that may
consider challenging their listing through national
and regional courts to first seek their removal from
the Al-Qaida sanctions list by submitting delisting
petitions to the Office of the Ombudsperson.

Secondly, we propose beginning a reflection on
improving due process in other sanctions regimes as
well, given that one of them is already subject to a
review by the European Court of Human Rights. We
should consider gradually extending the important
procedural safeguards of the Ombudsperson process to
other appropriate sanctions regimes. In so doing, the
need for possible adaptations to the Ombudspersons
mandate should be explored. Besides that, other due
process safeguards should be introduced in other
sanctions regimes, such as informing in a timely
manner the listed individual or entity of the designation
and communicating a narrative summary of reasons for
listing. Lastly, the holds procedure time limits adopted
by the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) could be extended to other sanctions
regimes.

The Group of Like-Minded States would be happy
to further discuss these proposals with the members of
the Security Council and all members of the General
Assembly.

