Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia deems it very appropriate that the Council is
continuing to reflect on experiences and good practices
in connection with States' commitment to protect
civilians in armed conflict. This issue is particularly
relevant to our country in that it has had to deal for
nearly five decades with illegal armed groups that
have engaged in terrorist activities and attacks against
civilian populations.

Colombia restates its commitment to human
rights, international humanitarian law and refugee
law for the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
As a demonstration of its commitment, Colombia is
preparing a major high-level international conference
on assistance to victims, to be held next year. That
conference is intended to establish synergies between
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction, the Convention on
Cluster Munitions, Protocol V on explosive remnants of
war and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities in order to deal with the issue of assistance
to victims adopting a holistic approach.

We emphasize that international assistance in this
field must conform to the conditions and principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence,
as enshrined in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
Abiding by those principles while appropriately
channelling collective efforts in support of national
authorities takes on particular importance when such
cooperation is taking place with countries that have
democratic institutions and legitimately constituted
Governments. My delegation would also like to
reiterate how important it is for United Nations bodies
to have clear information regarding the efforts of
national Governments in terms of the protection of
civilians, in establishing the priorities of their work,
and in informing the United Nations about their
respective situations. Verified, objective, balanced and
impartial information includes the identification of
shortcomings and challenges but also the identification
and recognition of the progress made in each country.
Moreover, while we understand that compliance with
international humanitarian law by illegal armed groups
is essential for the protection of the civilian population,
nonetheless we feel that contacts with United Nations
organs and agencies does not necessarily guarantee that
their actions will conform with existing legislation on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

For that reason, the international community
must bring the requisite pressure to bear to ensure
that such groups repudiate violence and pursue their
objectives through the institutional channels offered by
a democratic State. Colombia therefore stresses that the
appropriateness of such approaches should be analysed
on a case-by-case basis; it is certainly a matter that
should be decided by the States involved in a sovereign,
autonomous and independent manner.

Following the invitation in the concept note
(S/2013/447) prepared by the presidency, I should like
to reiterate that Colombia deems essential measures
aimed at prevention, protection and the guarantee of
non-repetition for victims in situations ofarmed conflict.
My Government believes that the rights of victims must
be guaranteed and reflected in assistance, attention and
reparation measures. We are therefore establishing a
risk map as a means of identifying organizations and
communities at risk, including women's organizations.
We are also establishing a network of observatories
for human rights and international humanitarian
law. We are training public officials and members of
the forces of law and order in matters relating to the
rights of victims to truth, justice and full reparation;
women's rights; the implementation of a differentiated
approach; sexual violence; and the need to coordinate
and publicize the various protection programmes.

We also believe that to promote the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, it is necessary to devise
and implement measures that are aimed, inter alia, at
making the administration of justice more flexible,
ensuring coherence among transitional justice
structures, guaranteeing equitable and full reparation
to victims, and prosecuting perpetrators. Colombia has
initiated a peace process based on Law No. 1 of 2012,
which guarantees that, when an armed conflict ends,
perpetrators of crimes against humanity will be held
accountable and the rights of victims upheld.

We express our thanks for today's very timely
debate today and wish to conclude by stating that
the measures taken in our country reflect our deep
conviction ofthe need to devise responses and solutions
that make it possible to protect the civilian population
and to achieve national reconciliation and peace for the
benefit of all.

