Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): At the outset,
Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank you
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We
thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Robert Serry, for his comprehensive
and detailed briefing. The Indonesian delegation is
particularly pleased to welcome the participation
of Mr. Riad Malki, Foreign Minister of the State of
Palestine, in this meeting.

My delegation associates itself with the statements
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
representative of Djibouti on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.

Like many members of the international
community, Indonesia is very concerned over the
absence of progress in the peace process between
Israel and Palestine. We are very clear about one thing:
the hurdle of illegal settlements is the most potent
obstacle to the prospect of peace in the Middle East,
with particular implications for the two-State solution.
In recent months, Israel has continued its defiance by
proclaiming an escalation in settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory and East Jerusalem,
including through the so-called E-l corridor plan. That
attitude is an affront to the cause of peace. It must be
confronted, and it must be stopped.

Because of those considerations, my delegation
reiterates that Israel must fully abide by the resolutions
of this Council in respect of settlements. Continued
illegal construction and expansion of settlements
compounds the problem of fragmentation of the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. That inevitably
hinders the prospect of negotiations.

All the while, Gaza continues to endure widespread
suffering caused by Israel's menacing blockade, making
recovery almost impossible in that area. Meanwhile, we
must also urgently and comprehensively address dire
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian Authority, which
are directly linked to the damaging and illegal Israeli
policy ofwithholding tax revenues. In that regard, I wish
to underline the calls made by the Palestinian leadership
for the contributions that the Authority urgently needs
in order to carry out its functions, deploy humanitarian
relief and develop its capacity.

Indonesia remains ardently supportive of the two-
Statesolution,basedontheconvictionthatanindependent
State of Palestine, with rights and responsibilities equal
to those of other States, will contribute to achieving
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. The historic decision by the General Assembly to
accord non-member observer State status to Palestine,
through resolution 67/ 19, is indeed a strong testament
to the support of the majority of Member States for
the struggle of Palestine to exercise its right to self-
determination, in line with the principles outlined in
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road
map and the Arab Peace Initiative. However, we must

continue our support for Palestine's full membership in
the United Nations.

Let me now turn to the situation in Syria, which has
been raging for some time now. We must urgently work
for an immediate end to the violence and address the
dire humanitarian needs of the people. We must also
ensure that vital humanitarian assistance can reach
the people in need of it, in order to stop the deplorable
human suffering of the Syrian people. To complement
the work of the Joint Special Representative for Syria,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the international community
must play a more robust role and be united so as to find
a comprehensive solution to the situation. Indonesia
welcomes the upcoming International Humanitarian
Pledging Conference for Syria, to be held later this
month in Kuwait.

Finally, we must also start, without delay, a
political process aimed at finding solutions that are
in accordance with the wishes and aspirations of the
Syrian people.

