Mr. Adam (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having agreed to preside over this
important meeting of the Security Council and I
congratulate Canada for the eminent role it is playing and
in particular Ambassador Fowler for the delicate task he
is discharging with honour. I also welcome most
particularly the presence among us of the Minister of
External Affairs of Angola. I subscribe fully to the
statement that has just been made by the representative of
Portugal on behalf of the European Union.

Belgium unreservedly supports the aims pursued by
the sanctions Committee and believes that the report of
the Panel of Experts constitutes a significant stage in the
search for solutions that would allow Security Council
sanctions against UNITA to be effectively applied.

 

The report that was submitted to the Council on 10
March is innovative, and it attests to the will to tackle the
causes of and the real responsibility for the violations of the
sanctions. This is why the international community has the
right to expect that the quality of the report measures up to
the expectations it created and that the recommendations
resulting from it will allow for a genuine improvement in
the effectiveness of the sanctions.

Belgium attaches all the more importance to these
problems since in recent months it itself has engaged in
significant deliberations and consultations aimed at
examining the various actions that can be undertaken to
contribute to peace and stability on the African continent,
in particular in Central Africa. The recent missions to the
region by several members of the Belgian Government are
a concrete illustration of this. Their main purpose was to
encourage all the parties directly involved to implement the
Lusaka agreements and to support the restoration of peace
in the Great Lakes region. All steps aimed at reducing the
suffering of the populations of African countries affected by
wars, such as Angola and Sierra Leone, will therefore
receive Belgium's firmest support.

It is from this perspective that Belgium took a great
number of measures aimed at ensuring the application of
the sanctions of the Security Council, actions that
unfortunately were not mentioned in the report of the Panel
of Experts that was the subject of the debate in the Security
Council on 15 March. I made this point on that occasion,
and I would appreciate it if the Council would take note of
those measures.

First of all, I want to stress that Belgium cooperated
from the beginning, and without reservation, with the
sanctions Committee and with the Panel of Experts.

An inter-ministerial working group, referred to as the
task force, was set up, and it includes all the ministries and
Belgian services concerned. The group has met seven times
since the beginning of the year and has studied and adopted
several measures to improve control over the origin of
diamonds. This task force led to a reinforcement of customs
controls and to the start of judicial inquiries against people
suspected of illegally trafficking in diamonds.

I wish to recall that Belgium is the only European
Union country that has a licensing system for the import
and export of diamonds. Besides the customs controls, a
second, physical inspection of all imports and exports is
carried out by sworn experts. Our country is also
considering the adoption of a law on extraterritoriality for
crimes in the diamonds sector.

The control of the provenance and the origin of
diamonds, which the Panel of Experts took up in
paragraphs 92 and 95 of its report, constitute a key
element of a problem whose complexity cannot be
underestimated. The possibility of identifying with
certainty the origin of a diamond through a physical
examination is for the moment considered by specialists
to be an almost impossible endeavour. The number of
diamonds of small size dealt with each year is in the
hundreds of millions. Moreover, it remains difficult to
distinguish between diamonds coming from different
mining areas that extend beyond borders. Lastly,
determining the origin of a diamond is not enough to
establish when it was extracted from a given deposit;
moreover, that deposit may even have passed from the
control of the Government to that of Savimbi. Belgium
nevertheless remains convinced that effective procedures
intended to control the diamond trade can be developed
and continues actively to encourage research undertaken
in this field. Furthermore, Belgium is the only country to
have detailed statistics in this area that make it possible
to identify trends. These data are at the disposal of all
interested parties.

The Diamond High Council of Antwerp, a body that
represents the private diamond sector, took into account
the recommendations of the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee. It took steps intended to lead to a better
application of the sanctions, inter alia, through the
establishment of a task force on Angola. Together with
Angolan authorities, it has set up a system of issuing
more reliable certificates of origin. At the request of the
Government, it is also engaged in reviewing its
procedures. Let me also mention that another working
group that includes representatives of the Belgian
Government and the Diamond High Council was created
with the mission of drafting a programme of measures to
be taken. This group met for the first time in September
1999.

The Diamond High Council also signed an
agreement with the relevant judicial authorities, by virtue
of which it is committed to centralize and to communicate
all information that comes to its attention having to do
with criminals or criminal activities. A study is being
carried out within the High Council, and preliminary
contacts have been made to examine to what extent a
system of control comparable to that in place for Angola
is also possible for Sierra Leone.

 

The physical control of the arrival or dispatch of
diamonds is done in Antwerp by sworn experts. Since the
introduction of sanctions against UNITA, no case of
embezzlement has been noted. However, it was judged that
the administrative statute relating to these experts should be
reformed, and currently the competent governmental
authorities and the Diamond High Council are discussing a
new statute. When those deliberations are concluded, the
sanctions Committee will be informed of their results.

Belgian expertise in diamonds is recognized and
long-standing. Belgium will always put this expertise at the
disposal of the international community, inter alia, within
the framework of the conferences of experts on this subject.
An international conference of representatives of all the
diamond centres will be convened in Antwerp in July, in
which Ambassador Fowler will participate.

The report of the Panel of Experts on violations of
Security Council sanctions against UNITA constitutes, in
the eyes of our country, a significant instrument
contributing to the resolution of the problem arising from
the illicit financing of groups that perpetuate wars in which
the first to suffer are civilians.

Belgium reiterates its complete willingness to continue
to work in close collaboration with the sanctions Committee
and with its Chairman, Ambassador Fowler.

