Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
meet once again to discuss a crisis that has resulted in
hundreds of thousands of innocent victims, displaced
millions of families and contributed to establishing a
safe haven for tens of thousands of mercenaries and
terrorists whose presence is a threat to the region and
the world. Despite the fact that Syria's humanitarian and
security disaster and the Syrian conflict are among the
top priorities of the media, politicians and, for several
long years, the Security Council's agenda, and while we
have repeated the same condemnations and expressions
of compassion countless times, that disaster continues
unabated and without mercy. As the years go by, the
crisis only deepens and becomes increasingly complex
to such an extent that a political situation, which should
have been the definitive solution, has now become only
a first step to try to contain the disastrous repercussions
that the Syrians and the people of other countries in
the region continue and will continue to suffer for
many years.

I deplore the fact that there have been so many
times throughout all these years when we thought that
a political solution was within reach, that the outline
of a settlement was clear in our minds and in the
international documents we produced, that there was
a consensus expressed in those documents. Now, once
again, we are faced with a another conundrum, another
breakdown that is evidence of a new international and
regional polarization. Instead of managing to bring
the various Syrian parties together, the international
community has forcedthem to dig in their heels to defend

false hopes of achieving a victory that is impossible to
achieve. The march to such an illusory victory will only
increase the suffering of the Syrian people.

We have issued many warnings about how serious
it is to accept this polarization both within and outside
the Security Council. I have said more than once that
this regional and international rivalry will lead only to
more deaths. Failure to interfere or to support one of the
parties in the Syrian conflict does not mean that one is
abdicating one's responsibilities. Quite the country, it
simply means that there will be no winner in this crisis
and that as long as the crisis continues the suffering of
our Syrian brothers and sisters will also continue.

We have sought to reach an agreement in the
Council and outside it to put an end to a proxy war that
threatens the future of everyone. Iwould like to call once
again on the various international actors, particularly
the joint chairmanship of the International Syria
Support Group, Russia and the United States, to work
as quickly as possible to reach a political agreement. I
would also like to underscore that cooperation is best
way to counter those who are trying to undermine the
possibility of reaching a political settlement.

Those who exploit the vacuum created by
polarization are trying to undermine all attempts to
end the crisis. That is why I would like to call on all
the Syrian parties, regardless of their orientation, to
act responsibly and engage in serious and objective
negotiations in good faith and without preconditions
for the future of the country under the auspices of
Special Envoy De Mistura. I call on them to set aside
their narrow interests and ask them to understand that,
if they do not do so, they and the Syrian people will be
the losers in this conflict.

Once again, I recall that the interests of the
Syrian people and of these various parties will not be
served by acting in the interests of the parties' foreign
sponsors; that will lead only to more destruction and
further deepen the disaster in Syria, a country that has
made significant contributions to a Muslim, Arab and
international culture. I am not exaggerating when I say
that achieving an agreement based on the interests of
the Syrian people will force everyone to accept the will
of the Syrian people.

Due to the gravity of Syria's experience and
the Security Council's inability to agree to open an
investigation into the Khan Shaykhun events, I reiterate
our call to move forward and investigate these events in
a clear, neutral and independent manner. I would like
to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. De Mistura, for his efforts, and reiterate that Egypt
will spare no efforts in supporting his work pursuant
to resolution 2254 (2015) and the road map that has
been adopted.

