Ms. Dinculescu (Romania): I should like at the
outset to express our deepest condolences to the
Russian delegation in connection with the premature
and sudden passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin.
Romania commends Ukraine for having convened
this timely and important open debate of the Security
Council. This meeting follows the Munich Security
Conference, at which issues critical to global peace and
security were discussed extensively.

Europe has long been a beacon of stability and
prosperity, and we are certain that it will remain so.
However, a few years ago we could not have foreseen
that we would be discussing conflicts in Europe, and
certainly not in the Security Council. Unfortunately,
today Europe faces a wide array of challenges, starting
with the one most relevant to the United Nations:
respect for international law.

I wish to use the opportunity offered by this debate
to mention some issues about protracted conflicts in
the close vicinity of Romania that continue to pose
challenges to regional security and stability, also
affecting the European continent as a whole.

Sadly, decades of negotiation have not produced the
expected solutions. As a result, countries are affected,
trade is distorted and people have little chance of sharing
the prosperity and stability of neighbouring regions.
Alongside Transnistria in the Republic of Moldova,
South Ossetia and Abkhazia in Georgia, or Nagorno
Karabakh, the risk of seeing another protracted conflict
around the Donbas region of Ukraine remains high.

Romania is convinced that, despite the setbacks
and delays, the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements is the only available and workable tool able
to deliver a negotiated political solution and achieve
enduring peace. We remain committed to supporting
the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence
of Ukraine.

As already mentioned, we strongly believe that
respect for and full compliance with international law
is the main element also in approaching protracted
conflicts throughout the wider Black Sea region: in the
Republic of Moldova, in Georgia and elsewhere. Only
through negotiations and mutual respect can a peaceful
settlement be envisaged.

The resolution of the conflict in the Transnistrian
region of the Republic of Moldova remains a matter of
high priority for us. Romania sees the 5+2 talks as the
only format able to foster a political, negotiated and
sustainable solution to the Transnistrian conflict, with
full respect for the Republic of Moldova's sovereignty
and territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders. Romania expresses the hope that
during the Austrian chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, all parties
involved will continue to support this negotiation
format and work towards a solution.

Romania has been active in regional organizations,
and assisted the European Union and NATO in
increasing the cooperation with our partners and
friends, aiming at extending the space of stability and
security. We will continue to do so relentlessly.

At the same time, we expect all actors to make
the utmost efforts and to demonstrate political will
to contribute to lasting political solutions, on the
basis of the norms and principles set out in the United
Nations Charter, while respecting the commitments
already made.

