Mr. Pouleas (Greece): I would like to congratulate
the Malaysian presidency for convening this open
debate on children and armed conflict, a topic which
has been high on the agenda of the Security Council.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative Ms. Leila Zerrougui and the
other speakers for their thought-provoking briefings.

Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union. We would like to
add a few words in our national capacity.

At the outset, allow me to acknowledge the
importance of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
pertaining to mass and grave violations against children
in armed conflict. The latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/409), which lays out gross violations
committed against children in armed conflicts, is
particularly important. Sadly, it includes some of the
worst human rights violations a child could experience,
including death, abduction and forced recruitment,
which take place from Syria and Iraq to Nigeria and
South Sudan.

Among the unprecedented challenges highlighted
in the report, it is particularly alarming that in 2014
there was an upward trend in the abduction of children
by armed groups. Abductions of children have been
used as a tactic to terrorize ethnic groups or religious
communities. In Iraq and Syria, over 1,000 girls and
boys were abducted by the so-called Islamic State. In
Nigeria, Boko Haram abducted hundreds of women and
girls in Chibok. Abductions are often followed by other
grave human rights violations, such as recruitment,
rape or even killing.

It is crucial that abductions are included in the
criteria for listing in the Secretary-General's report
on children in armed conflict. Greece welcomes and
co-sponsored today's Security Council resolution
2225 (2015), which adds abductions to the criteria for
including responsible parties in the Secretary-General's
report. The unanimous adoption of this resolution
is an important step in enhancing the international
community's ability to face this alarming trend and
to bring perpetrators to justice. However, much more
needs to be done to further strengthen international
efforts to protect children in armed conflicts.

It is imperative to ensure that children are able to
grow up in a safe environment, free from exploitation,
abuse and any form of Violence. In that connection we
strongly encourage all States to sign, ratify and fully
implement the international human rights framework
for the protection of children, including the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.

In Greece, by virtue of national legislation in
2011, the recruitment of children in armed conflicts
constitutes a war crime under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and is punished as such
by the national judicial system with at least 10 years
of imprisonment. In addition, the competent Greek
authorities are currently elaborating an action plan
on the rights of the child, which has a distinct chapter
on children and armed conflict. More specifically,
an awareness-raising campaign in schools is being
developed, to be launched with a view to organizing
information seminars on the Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.

Furthermore, Greece was among the 39 countries
that joined the Safe Schools Declaration in Oslo on
29 May, which calls upon parties to an armed conflict to
avoid using educational buildings for military purposes
or making them targets of attack. We believe that the
Safe Schools Declaration provides a concrete way for
countries to commit to protecting children's education,
even during armed conflict.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that we remain
committed to effectively ensuring respect for and
protection of the fundamental rights of children as
a crucial guarantee for the future of our societies.
My country fully subscribes to the need to intensify
international and regional efforts to strengthen
cooperation in putting an end to the grave violations
against children in situations of armed conflict around
the world.

