The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

To start with, let me thank today's briefers - Ms. Bintou
Keita, Mr. Maman Sidikou, Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed
and Mr. J 0510 Vale de Almeida - for their very informative
statements on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and recent developments in the region.

The root causes of conflict in the region, which have
created challenges in the areas of good governance and
development, are similar in nature and interdependent.
The problems and challenges faced are cross-border in
nature. In that context, cooperation among neighbouring
countries and within regional organizations is crucial
for achieving tangible and long-lasting progress. The
G-5 Sahel, together with its Joint Force, is an example
of such comprehensive cooperation.

We express our full support for the mandate of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force and hope that, with the support of
the international community, it will soon achieve full
operationalization. Furthermore, the operations of the
Joint Force must be conducted in full compliance with
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.

Poland supports the G-5 Sahel Joint Force with
in-kind assistance. We have provided the contingent
of Chadian troops operating within the force with
considerable material support. Moreover, we recently
decided to provide additional support to the G-5
Sahel Joint Force through Polish training capacities.
Responding to the request made by the G-5 Sahel

countries, Poland announced its readiness to conduct
training sessions in the area of countering improvised
explosive devices.

Lastly, Poland would like to fully express its
support for the actions taken by the United Nations, the
European Union, the African Union and the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, as well as to underscore our recognition
of the key role played by regional partners in military
operations in the Sahel.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 5.20pm.
