Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): It is an honour for
me to address the Security Council on the agenda item
entitled "Children and armed conflict".

I would like at the outset to express our gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for initiating and organizing the
follow-up to the open debate of the Council on this
important issue, held in June 1998.

My delegation welcomed the Security Council's
open debate on this issue as a means of drawing attention
to the plight of children in conflict and post-conflict

 

situations. It also welcomed the presidential statement
adopted by the Security Council on this issue last year,
strongly condemning the targeting of children in armed
conflicts. The discussion that the Security Council is having
today is both timely and necessary. It enables us to refocus
our attention on this issue once again, bearing in mind past
experience. It is hoped that, as a result of this discussion,
the Council will adopt a strong, practical resolution and
thus send the clear message from the international
community that the protection of children affected by wars
and conflicts is high on its agenda and that strong, effective
domestic and international measures are needed to cope
with this problem.

My delegation fully agrees with previous speakers that
the protection of children in armed conflicts has become
one of the most pressing human security and moral issues
facing the world. Today it is the civilian population, in
particular women and children, that is suffering most in
armed conflicts. Millions of children are targeted in armed
conflicts; they are abused, abducted, used in hostilities and
killed. In some 50 countries, if not more, children are
suffering, both physically and psychologically, from the
impact of armed conflicts. It lies heavily on the conscience
of the international community that it has allowed, during
the last decade alone, two million children to be killed, over
one million to be orphaned and six million to be seriously
injured or permanently disabled. It has been estimated that
in 1998, child soldiers numbered over 200,000; in a year,
that figure increased to nearly 300,000. The report given to
the Security Council last year by Mr. Olara Otunnu, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, his informative and thought-
provoking statement this morning, and the seminal report of
Ms. Graga Machel, the Secretary-General's expert on the
question of impact of armed conflict on children, are most
revealing and alarming. The plight of children in armed
conflicts, unfortunately, has not changed for the better; if
anything, it has worsened.

We believe that it is futile to talk about human
security if we cannot ensure the protection of children in
wartime or in armed conflicts, and the protection of their
rights under international humanitarian law. We believe that
without protecting its children, that is, its young, innocent
and unprotected members, no society can be fair, stable or
prosperous. All societies are morally bound to protect
children and to create all the conditions necessary for their
development, education and welfare. The State is called
upon to play an important role. Simply said, the protection
of children and the defenceless is the real yardstick for
assessing a State's commitment to human rights and
dignity.

The consideration in such an open debate, with the
wide participation of Member States, of the negative
impact of armed conflict on children is important not only
for drawing the attention of the international community
once again to this pressing question, but also for
determining the adequate practical ways of combating
such atrocities. In this regard, my delegation fully
subscribes to the recommendations reflected in the five
areas of engagement that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General outlined in his report to the Security
Council back in 1998.
The United Nations can and must play an important
role in the efforts to combat violations of international
law where children are drawn into or otherwise affected
by armed conflicts. That is why we support the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General as
well as all other United Nations efforts in this regard.
Their work should be continued and even reinforced.

In this context, my delegation favours the early
adoption of the optional protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflicts. It is also my delegation's earnest hope
that the working group of the Commission on Human
Rights, drafting the optional protocol to the Convention,
will soon finalize its work and submit the results to the
General Assembly through the Commission. It is also our
belief that a strong International Criminal Court (ICC)
would play not only a positive role in prosecuting the
perpetrators of such criminal acts, but a preventive role as
well. Therefore, every effort should be made to strengthen
the ICC and make it operational as soon as possible.

The next century belongs to our children. It is
therefore our responsibility to protect the young
generation and to make their lives more secure and safe.
In a broader context, the most efficient means of
protecting children would be preventing conflict situations
in the first place.

In this context, Mongolia attaches great importance
to the preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping activities and
peace-building measures of the United Nations, especially
in the regions affected by armed conflicts. In this regard,
the United Nations should properly address the various
root causes of armed conflicts and find ways to prevent
and avoid conflict situations.

 

Mongolia believes that the Security Council should not
only strongly condemn the targeting of children in
situations of armed conflict, but also take concrete legal,
political and other necessary steps to combat it. Therefore,
we fully support the measures to be taken as reflected in
the draft resolution on this question. Thus, the Security
Council should unequivocally reaffirm its readiness to
consider appropriate responses to cases in which children
are specifically targeted and it should remain seized of the
matter until there is considerable progress. We agree that,
meanwhile, the Secretary-General should be asked to report
on the situation in a year's time.

In conclusion, allow me to express my delegation's
full support for organizing, when necessary, open debates
on matters that affect international peace and security in
general on issues that could be considered forms of
preventive measures and diplomacy. The consideration of
such issues involving the entire membership of the United
Nations could benefit the Council not only by providing it
with rich experience, but also by thus enlisting the real
practical input and contributions of Member States.

