The President: On behalf of the members of
the Security Council, I should like to express our
condemnation of yesterday's attack on a Protestant
church in Silgadji, Burkina Faso, and of the shooting
that occurred at the Chabad of Poway synagogue in San
Diego, in the United States of America, on Saturday.

I ask those present to now rise and observe a minute
of silence in solemn commemoration of those who lost
their lives in the attacks on their places of worship.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bahrain, Bangladesh, Botswana,
Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, Hungary, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco,
Namibia, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer ofthe Observer State ofPalestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs; Ms. Nada Majdalani,
Co-Director of EcoPeace Middle East; and Mr. Gidon
Bromberg, Co-Director of EcoPeace Middle East.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to
the United Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Cheikh
Niang, Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.


