Mr. Reveyrand de Menthon (spoke in French):
On behalf of the European Union (EU), I would like to
thank the French Presidency of the Security Council for
convening this important debate today. I would also like
to very warmly thank the Secretary-General for closely
associating the European Union in all international
efforts regarding the Sahelian region. That includes his
visit some weeks ago, as well as his constant follow-up
to the very important activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).

The Sahel countries face a number of serious
and interlinked challenges. The crisis in Mali and
the security vacuum after the Libyan revolution have
underscored the political, economic and humanitarian
vulnerabilities that have been long-standing in the
region. The joint high-level visit of the Secretary-
General with the President of the World Bank, the
President of the African Union Commission, the
President of the African Development Bank and the
European Commission for Development demonstrated
the international community's intention to continue
to scale up those efforts so as to help the countries
in the region tackle a crisis that is affecting them all,
especially the lack of security and terrorism, and tackle
their root causes.

We all welcomed the highly relevant United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, whose priorities are
governance, humanitarian and human rights activities
and bolstering security, with a clear definition of
the roles of each at the national and regional levels.
Those priorities are shared by everyone. The mission
also stressed everyone's intention to work using a
comprehensive approach based on the interactions
between security and development. It is now broadly
acknowledged that there can be no lasting security
without inclusive development, and that security is a
sine qua non for sustainable development. The European
Union based its Sahel strategy, adopted almost three
years ago, on that idea and has mobilized its various
tools along that same line in order best to meet the
requirements of that cohesive strategy.

What I also took away from the Secretary-General's
visit is the constant desire for the heads of State of
the region to work for peace and take more fully into
account the needs of the people, including the youth of
the Sahel. In that regard, I think that we should try more
often to deepen our knowledge ofthe local situations by
better including African researchers and intellectuals.
Unfortunately, those players are often insufficiently
recognized, whereas they are essential to completing a
process of genuine ownership.

The European Union enjoys close cooperation with
all its partners and stands ready to enhance its efforts
diplomatically in the framework of reconciliation and
inclusive dialogue. We also stand ready to enhance
our efforts in the operational, developmental and
humanitarian spheres through the preparation of peace
dividends.

The crisis that Mali experienced from 2012 and
2013, and which that country is struggling to overcome
little by little with determination, is yet another
illustration of the security and development crisis that
is afflicting the Sahel-Saharan region at a time when
the terrorist risk remains ever present. The European
Union has provided its utmost support to Mali. During
his visit to the European Parliament in Brussels
last Monday and Tuesday, the new President of Mali
reiterated his intention to quickly tackle the immense
security challenges, so as to bring lasting stability to
his country, reconcile the Malian people and build a
new political governance model by drawing on all of
the lessons from the past.

The efforts of the international community must
not fail. The multifaceted MINUSMA has an essential
role to play in supporting the Malian authorities so
that they can fully reinstate sovereignty and the rule of
law across the country and manage to restore dialogue
and reconciliation, which have been so long awaited,
in particular in the framework of the peace process
opened with the Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement
of 18 June. A strong commitment in the north of the
country is important, because the future of the Sahel
region as a whole today is largely being played out in
the north of the country.

The EU, in close relationship with all its partners,
stands ready to scale up its efforts diplomatically, in
the framework of reconciliation and inclusive dialogue,
to which it is committed. We also stand ready on the
operational and development front, as well as with
regard to humanitarian activities, so as to prepare the
dividends of peace. The high-level Donor Conference
for Development in Mali, organized in Brussels on
15 May, was very important. The EU is fully playing
its role and fully upholding all its promises with the
512 million Euros it has pledged and the €238 million
that will be disbursed in 2013.

Efforts to reinstate peace and security in Mali will
be in vain if the threat shifts and if other countries of
the Sahelo-Saharan region in the wider sense fall victim
to the same crisis, the full effects of which we saw both
in Mali and in Libya.

Today, the European Union is determined to deepen
its implementation of the EU External Action Service
Strategy for Security and Development in the Sahel:
in order to better interlink security and development,
including by using a preventative approach for the most
fragile environments. The EU also intends to expand
the implementation of its strategy to all the countries
that are most exposed to the risks of destabilization,
and to better involve all concerned countries without
whose participation no permanent stability is possible,
particularly countries from north Africa directly
concerned, and of course, those that are also long-
standing EU partners.

Moreover, when we look towards the Sahel from
Europe, we find a huge space, so that geography creates
an inevitable permanent solidarity. We look at that
space and see it initially as an area of risk, but it is
also actually a space for cooperation of multiple types,
including cultural and environmental cooperation. It
is also a space for economic development, again the
only solution for creating business andjobs, which will
reduce the current tensions. That could be achieved
with the assistance of all social actors, enterprises and
civil society.

All of that requires a scaled-up commitment.
During the joint visit, Commissioner Piebalgs
announced that the European Union would provide
€5 billion for its action in the Sahel region for the
next seven years. In a rapidly changing environment,
our collective efforts must respond to requirements of
flexibility and effectiveness. To do that, the Close and
constant coordination of our efforts is essential, both
globally and on the ground. There must also be greater
ownership of the policies undertaken.

Bolstering cooperation and interregional
cooperation between Sahel countries, the countries of
West Africa and the countries of the Maghreb is crucial
in order to develop inclusive and effective strategies to
combat terrorist activities and transborder organized
crime in a comprehensive and global manner. Many
States of the region have committed to developing
bilateral or trilateral coordination mechanisms, or to
working in subregional and continental frameworks, as
regards both development and security. The European
Union fully supports those initiatives. It stands ready
to back them, in particular efforts to strengthen the
administration of the Saharan areas, in particular
border areas, and to work more strongly to increase
resilience.

More broadly, the European Union wishes to attain
the closest cooperation possible with all partners who
have developed strategic approaches for the Sahel. in
the greatest respect for the sovereignty and leadership
of Sahel-Saharan States and subregional organizations.
The Bamako Declaration adopted on 5 November, in
the framework of the high-level joint visit, paves the
way for stronger international cooperation, bringing
together all countries and stakeholders concerned. The
European Union will help with setting it up, which
should take place as soon as possible.

Developments in the Sahel this year have given us
an idea of the scope of the regional crisis. We must act
together in a sustainable manner to combat terrorism
and crime. We must tackle the root causes of the
situation: poverty, inequalities, inadequate institutions
and crime, with, as we well know, a strong constraint
arising in the demographic context. The determination
ofthe peoples ofthe Sahel, linked with the mobilization
of the international community, also demonstrates that
the worst is not inescapable and that the crisis can be
overcome if we are patient and resolute. That is indeed
the spirit that animates the international community
today. It is grounds for great hope for tomorrow.

