Mr. Eitel (Germany): Allow me to express a personal
welcome at this formal debate to the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and Zimbabwe,
who have come to New York to express the concerns of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
countries regarding the Angolan peace process. I believe
that we all are very much appreciative of their contribution
to the work of the Security Council. In addition to their
fruitful direct impact on the work of the Security Council,
their very presence, following the summit of the SADC
Organ on Politics, Defence and Security, which took place
in Luanda on 2 October 1996, is greeted by my
Government as an encouraging sign. It reflects a trend in
Africa that we have recently noted for finding solutions to
political problems in consultations at a regional level. We
hope to see this trend grow. Joint efforts on a regional level

 

might bear solutions to problems which are too complex
to be addressed on a national or global basis.

Allow me also to welcome the presence at this
occasion of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to Angola, Maitre Blondin Beye, and to express
the appreciation of my Government for his relentless
efforts to keep the peace process in Angola on track.

Before I briefly touch on the subject at hand, I wish
to make reference to the forthcoming statement of our
Irish colleague on behalf of the European Union.
Germany has contributed to the statement and subscribes
fully to it.

The lack of progress in the implementation of the
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol is disappointing. The
continuing delays and unfulfilled promises, especially on
the part of UNIT A, in implementing the timetables for the
completion of military and political issues are no longer
acceptable. We therefore call on UNITA to implement all
aspects - and at present particularly the military ones -
of the Lusaka Protocol without further delay. The
remaining four UNITA generals must be sent to Luanda
to take up positions in the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA)
command; the selection of UNITA soldiers for
incorporation into the FAA must be completed; the
quartering process of UNITA soldiers and the handing-
over of all weapons must be completed and declared
completed by UNITA; and the flow of deserters from
quartering areas must be stemmed and those soldiers who
have deserted must return.

Time is short. The mandate of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) expires in
February of next year.

The political issues still have to be addressed. We
hope to see progress in the efforts to determine the
special status of the President of UNITA, Mr. Savimbi; to
extend the state administration to the whole territory of
Angola; to have the seats reserved for the UNITA
members of Parliament assumed; and to build a
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation.

Germany has already contributed significantly to the
efforts exerted by the international community in the field
of humanitarian assistance and will continue to do so. My
Government remains committed to supporting the civilian
population of Angola suffering from the consequences of
the civil war.

 

We are paying particular attention to the grave
problem of landmines in Angola and to the need for
effective demining. As you know, the fight against anti-
personnel mines is one of Germany's political priorities.
Germany has provided up to nine demining experts as
inspectors for demining activities within UNAVEM. III.
They have cleared more than 4,000 kilometres of roads
from landmines in cooperation with the United Nations-
contracted demining company MECHEM. and helped to
assure the high target of 99.6 per cent of mine clearance
throughout this distance. In addition, two German non-
governmental organizations, which have recently been
granted considerable funds by the Federal Government of
Germany, are carrying out mine-clearance activities in the
field. Assistance to the Department of Humanitarian Affairs
Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Clearance is
another aspect of our activities in Angola.

Despite all these efforts, success remains contingent
upon further progress in the peace process. It is therefore
our sincere hope that this peace process will continue and
that the Angolan people will ultimately find the peaceful
environment they are entitled to.

Allow me, finally, to commend the efforts of the three
observer States to the peace process in Angola. My
delegation will contribute in a constructive way to the
consultations in the Council on a draft resolution that has
been prepared by the observer States in consultation with
the delegations of the five SADC member States currently
here. We welcome the draft resolution as a good basis for
the work of the Security Council.

