Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): As in previous years, my delegation
abstained in the voting on resolution 2256 (2015),
for we were unable to find the situation with regard
to the implementation of resolution 1966 (2010) and
the conclusion of the activities of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia as satisfactory.
The latter resolution included clear guidelines for the
conclusion of the work of the Tribunals, which they
have not implemented. Unfortunately, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia has again deferred
the set timetable for its proceedings. The situation has
hardly improved.

It is worth recalling that, in line with a decision of
the Security Council in 2003, the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia was to have completed
its work five years ago. However, since the adoption
of resolution 1966 (2010), practically no instance of
the consideration of the reports of the activities of
the Tribunal has gone by without the Council being
informed of delays in pending cases. The Council
previously extended the mandates of judges and of
the Prosecutor, provided that the Tribunal took all the
necessary steps to speed up legal proceedings. We regret
that such extensions have continued to fail to produce
the desired results. No actionable decisions have been
taken. As a result, the Security Council faces yet
another round of foot-dragging. We expect real action
on the part of the Tribunal's new leadership to speed
up cases. An initial indicator would be the conclusion
of the unprecedented lengthy case of Mr. Seselj, on
which a decision is expected within three months. We
hope that the recommendations of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services with regard to the work of the
Tribunal in meeting its completion strategy will help to
address existing shortcomings.

We take note of the first review of the Residual
Mechanism in the context of resolution 1966 (2010) 7 a

necessary element forthe continuation ofits work during
the next biennium. We call on the Mechanism to take
up the recommendations of the resolution as carefully
as possible.

The meel[ng rose at 10.15 a.m.
