Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to reiterate the Dominican
Republic's commitment to a comprehensive, credible
and inclusive political process in the Syrian Arab
Republic that will open the doors to sustainable peace
in that country once and for all.

We are grateful for today's briefings, including that
of Ms. DiCarlo's, which confirm to us that when we
consider the future of the Syrian Arab Republic, it is
essential to address the issue of detainees, abductees
and missing persons resulting from the conflict in
the country. In addition to having a humanitarian
dimension, we consider it essential to building the
population's trust in the political process, as family
reunification after a conflict touches the deepest
fibres in society. First and foremost, the parties to
the conflict have an obligation to ensure the physical
safety and psychological dignity ofpersons detained, in
accordance with international humanitarian law. In that
context, we would like to highlight a few points.

To begin with, it is paramount to immediately halt
all arbitrary detentions in the Syrian Arab Republic.
It is also fundamental and an obligation of the parties
to prevent disappearances resulting from hostilities
or following any arrest. The unilateral release of
detainees, particularly women, children, the elderly
and persons with disabilities, must take place without
delay, and all forms of protection and access to basic
education and health services that they require must be
restored to them.

As principally responsible for the protection of the
civilian population, the Syrian Government must first
and foremost establish preventive measures that will
enable it to account for persons immediately after their
disappearance and thereby minimize the uncertainty
and vulnerability of the families that they leave behind,
particularly women, children and the elderly.

Secondly, it must facilitate the impartial and
independent establishment of the causes and conditions
by and in which thousands of Syrians lost their lives
after being detained or abducted, including making
the results of such investigations accessible to their
families, including the dignified handling of their
remains. We believe that both the families and civil
society organizations can and should play a significant
role in such matters to safeguard the credibility of the
process, which will undoubtedly take years.

The Dominican Republic shares the genuine

aspiration of the families of the disappeared to find out
the truth concerning the whereabouts of their relatives,
which we believe to be a right. Psychological, legal,
economic and protective support for those families is
crucial to the process of healing and reconciliation.
Failure to address those needs and respect the human
rights of those released and their families will result in
perpetuating feelings of resentment and exclusion for
decades to come.

In conclusion, I reaffirm the importance that, in
every individual case, once those responsible for the
violations perpetrated have been identified, they must
answer for their actions. If we aspire to achieving
sustainable peace, the hundreds of thousands of wounds
must be closed. Impunity is not a viable option.

