The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.

First of all, I would like to thank the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for having
accepted the Security Council's invitation to give us a
briefing today. The previous meeting that the Council
had with the High Commissioner was in 2006, and
France would like to express the hope that such
meetings will occur more frequently in the future, since
we find them to be particularly useful for both bodies. I
would also like to thank the High Commissioner for his
very useful and informative briefing and for his tireless
work and that of his Office in circumstances that are
often difficult.

France is deeply concerned by the increasing
number of refugees and of displaced persons as a result
not only of conflict but also, as indicated by the High
Commissioner, of a number of other factors that give
rise to political tensions, including extreme poverty,
lack of access to natural resources, the food and fuel
crises and the consequences of climate change. The
international community must ensure that these
populations are protected, as is their right.

We are also, along with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
very concerned about the situation of long-term
refugees. More than 5 million refugees around the
world have been living in exile for longer than five
years. The international community must commit to
lightening the burden of the host countries, including
by undertaking efforts for the return of refugees who
are particularly vulnerable. In this regard, France
welcomes the choice of the issue of long-term refugees
as the theme of the upcoming 2009 session of the
UNHCR Executive Committee.

France also welcomes the progress achieved in
finding lasting solutions to the plight of refugees,
whether through voluntary return when the security
situation allows it, as for example in Angola, Liberia
and southern Sudan, or through local integration, as in
Tanzania, Nigeria, Serbia and Central Asia.

France further welcomes the large-scale return of
Afghan refugees that has been taking place since 2001.
But the question of refugees represents a huge
humanitarian, political and security challenge for
Afghanistan and its neighbours. We encourage the
strengthening of regional cooperation in order to create
conditions for the dignified, lasting and voluntary
return of refugees, with the support of the international
community.

We are concerned about the serious obstacles to
the return to Abkhazia and South Ossetia of those
displaced by the conflict in Georgia. We would like to
recall here that the International Court of Justice has
ordered the parties to refrain from any acts that would
impede their freedom of movement and from taking
any discriminatory measures.

In this regard, and more generally, the link
between emergency humanitarian responses and short-
and long-term development and integration strategies
is too often lacking. In order to ensure what is
commonly called transition, France supports the
establishment of comprehensive strategies to ensure
sustainable returns. We also support the adoption by
UNHCR and the lead agencies of a sectoral approach
to protecting internally displaced persons, and we
recall in this regard the importance of the Guiding
Principles on Internal Displacement.

The primary responsibility for the protection of
and assistance to displaced refugees falls, of course,
first and foremost on States, and the international
community must, within the United Nations
framework, assist States in protecting such
populations. When national authorities are clearly not
guaranteeing the protection of their populations, the
international community must intervene. We therefore
attach the highest importance to the effective
implementation of the responsibility to protect. We
have undertaken that commitment and we owe it to
those populations, who are suffering.

In this regard, the Security Council has a specific
role to play, since the displacement of populations is
often the direct result of threats to international peace
and security and could contribute to destabilizing
entire regions, and since displaced people are
vulnerable and could be subjected to grave violations
of international law and of international human rights
and humanitarian law, including in the camps that take
them in. The Security Council has the responsibility to
prevent and put an end to such violations. Who could
forget the acts of sexual violence used as weapons of
war that victimize so many in the Kivus, Darfur and
many other situations?

In this context, the Council has decided to
include in the mandates of peacekeeping operations the
responsibility to protect civilians, in particular refugees
and persons displaced by armed conflict. That is seen
in mandates such as those of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT), the European Union military operation
in the Republic of Chad and in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

While cooperation between peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian actors is essential, we
cannot confuse humanitarian action and peacekeeping.
Like UNHCR, France attaches great importance to
respect for humanitarian space, which is necessary to
ensure access to populations in need and the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel.

With regard to the issue of humanitarian access,
the adoption of resolution 1844 (2008) on Somalia has
allowed us to sanction those who hinder the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. We welcome the partial
reiteration of the text of that resolution with respect to
the sanctions regime for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo defined by the recently adopted resolution
1857 (2008).

The issue of humanitarian access in general is, of
course, critical in helping us better to address the
problems of refugees and displaced persons. We cannot
fail to consider, for instance, the hundreds of thousands
of internally displaced persons fleeing the fighting in
Mogadishu; we cannot fail to consider Darfur, Kivu,
Iraq or Afghanistan; nor, of course, can we fail to
consider the current situation in Gaza.

I wish in general to recall the importance which
the Security Council must attach to the protection of
civilians. That dimension, too, is naturally at the heart
of France's actions, alongside its close partners, with
respect to the situation in Gaza, as demonstrated by the
presence, today and in recent days, of its Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Bernard Kouchner, and several of his
counterparts in New York, and by its ongoing efforts.

Finally, and above all, I would recall that long-
standing population displacements are usually linked to
the fact that the armed conflicts and human rights
violations that have led people to flee remain
unresolved. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
situation of Palestinian refugees and displaced persons
are particularly striking examples of that and testify to
the importance of working for the political settlement
of conflicts, peacebuilding and the implementation of
national reconciliation processes that guarantee human
rights in order to resolve the problem of refugees and
displaced persons. I assure the High Commissioner that
we are highly sensitive to that fact and to the essential
role of the Security Council in that regard.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on Mr. Guterres to respond to the questions
and comments raised.

