Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union (EU) and adds the following remarks
in its national capacity.

We thank China, Angola and Senegal for bringing
this issue back to the Security Council after the debates
in 2011 and 2012 and the adoption of resolutions 2018
(2011) and 2039 (2012) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/l3 in August 2013. We also welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Togo, Mr. Robert Dussey, who represents
one of the countries most affected by this crisis.

Maritime piracy is a deadly threat to the lives of
all men and women working at sea. It is a threat to
the maritime industry and international trade. It has
links with organized and transnational crimes. It fuels
conflicts. Piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea in particular undermine the consolidation of
peace in Western Africa and the economic development
of the region to the benefit of its people. Italy therefore
remains concerned about the continuing pirate and
armed attacks in the Gulf of Guinea and notes with
concern their most recent rise in number, violence and
geographic extension. It is particularly worrisome that
these attacks occur both in international and national
waters, undermining freedom and the security of
navigation, which are essential to trade and economic
development. Italy reiterates its commitment to halting
this trend through a multidimensional approach
based on prevention, diplomacy, training, security
and addressing the root causes. Let me share with the
Council some concrete examples beyond our active
participation in the EU strategy for the Gulf of Guinea
in support of the Yaounde process.

First of all, my country is an active member of the
Group of Seven Plus Friends of the Gulf of Guinea
aimed at facilitating the implementation of the relevant
United Nations resolutions and of the Yaounde Summit
declarations on maritime security and safety in the Gulf
of Guinea. We look forward to the upcoming meeting
under the Portuguese presidency. Italy will be attending
and working to advance the implementation of the
decision to establish, by 2016, a full-fledged maritime
security and safety architecture and to promote police
and judicial cooperation in the region.

In the same spirit of international engagement
and cooperation, my country officially supported
Angola in convening last November in Luanda the
International Conference on Maritime and Energy
Security. Our Deputy Minister for Defence attended
the meeting, which ended with the adoption of the
Luanda Declaration on information-sharing and
raising maritime situational awareness. On this basis,
the Italian and the Angolan navies are negotiating a
technical follow-up arrangement.

Secondly, local ownership and national leadership
are essential to complement international support and
direct it where it is most needed and effective. In this
regard, I stress the important role played by regional
and subregional organizations.The Yaounde Code
of Conduct has chosen three regional organizations
to steer the process - the Economic Community
of West African States, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission - and we look forward to cooperating with
them. We welcome in particular the high-level meeting
held in February and underscore the importance of the
Interregional Coordination Centre on Maritime Safety
and Security for Central and West Africa, based in
Cameroon, which we are actively supporting through a
grant. The United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel can also play a facilitating role as part of its
overall action in the region.

Thirdly, training and capacity-building are
crucial and we have been focusing on this. During the
circumnavigation of Africa in the first half of 2014, the
Italian navy carried out specific training activities on
maritime security and the fight against piracy on our
flagship, the Nave Cavour. Over 20 African countries
and 21 ports were touched during this campaign,
including those in the Gulf of Guinea, and maritime
capacity-building initiatives were carried out very
successfully. In the same spirit, Italy is currently
supporting the maritime programme of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which promotes
capacity-building to address and eradicate crimes
committed at sea, including acts of piracy, armed
robbery and illicit trafficking.

This is part of our comprehensive effort to help
West Africa and Sahel countries enhance their overall
capacities in tackling illicit flows of arms, natural
resources, goods and persons. The Italian navy has
bilateral training programmes with its counterparts
in the Gulf of Guinea and beyond. Through our
Carabinieri and Guardia di Finanza, Italy has developed
a wide range of cooperation activities with the region's
countries in this field. Let me name three examples:
border and custom management programmes;
investigative techniques and counter-terrorism training
courses; and information sharing.

My last point is that, in order to tackle the
phenomenon effectively, we must go beyond piracy
and armed robbery and address their root causes on
land. Socioeconomic development; job opportunities;
inequalities; education; youth engagement; and
women's empowerment must all be factored into our
decision-making on this issue. The implementation ofthe
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) and the African Union's Agenda 2063 will play
a pivotal role to this end. The African Union summit
on maritime security and safety and development in
Africa, to be held in Lome on 15 October, will offer an
excellent opportunity to advance the agenda regarding
the Gulf of Guinea and we look forward to its outcome
and concrete deliverables. We will further discuss the
way to strengthen our joint efforts with African partners
on security and development issues in the Italy-Africa
ministerial conference to be held in Rome on 18 May.

Finally, allow me to make a very short personal
remark. I was born 200 metres from the Mediterranean
Sea in a house that still proudly stands on the shore of
one of the most ancient maritime cities in the world,
Naples. Generations of my family have lived and
prospered with the sea. The sea brings one food, money,
culture and an open-minded future. That is one of the
reasons why we are so active in the Mediterranean to
the point of risking our lives, because we know that the
sea can bring a better life for everyone in the future. We
are really committed to ensuring the pacific use of the
sea in the Gulf of Guinea and in all of the open seas and
oceans in every corner of the world.

