Mr. Carmon (Israel) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me to express my delegation's
satisfaction at seeing you presiding over the Council.

(spoke in English)

Allow me at the outset also to congratulate you
on your able leadership over the sensitive deliberations
of the Security Council as President for the month of
March.
In recent weeks, and as recently as the day before
yesterday, the world witnessed two major political
events in the Middle East: elections for the Palestinian
Legislative Council and Israel's parliamentary
elections. Both the Israeli and the Palestinian peoples,
at this important and decisive juncture, have chosen
who will be their respective leaders.

The results of these elections clearly show that
the Israeli people chose peace. Israel remains
committed to the two-State solution, as envisioned in
the road map, where Israelis and Palestinians will be
able to live side by side in peace and security. The
chosen leadership of the Palestinian people, on the
other hand, is comprised of the Hamas terrorist
organization, leaving much less room for optimism.

We in Israel yearn for a Palestinian partner with
whom we can jointly pursue the road towards peace.
Yet on the Palestinian side, Hamas does not even
recognize Israel and has not renounced terrorism and
violence as a means to achieve its goals. In Israel, the
elections underscore a longstanding commitment to
international agreements. Yet on the Palestinian side,
Hamas has vowed to accept only those agreements that
match its narrow interests.

Israel remains committed to the road map, with
progression based on the fulfilment of successive
benchmarks. We believe it is the best way to advance
towards a peaceful outcome of this conflict.
Unfortunately, as of yet, our Palestinian neighbours
have failed to carry out even the first requirement - to
fight terrorism and begin to dismantle the terrorist
infrastructure.

Acts of terrorism have continued to create a dire
situation in the Middle East. On Tuesday, the very day
of our national elections, the Islamic Jihad fired a 122-
millimetre Katyusha rocket into Israel. That was the
first time such a weapon was ever used by a Palestinian
terror organization, representing what may be a new
stage in their terrorist war against Israel. Since then,
the Islamic Jihad declared that it possesses many more
Katyusha rockets and intends to use them, too. Just
yesterday, security forces arrested a suicide bomber
wearing a five-kilo explosive belt at a checkpoint in
the Jordan Valley. Last week, two additional suicide
bombers attempted to enter major population centres in
Israel for a mass murder of innocent people. Israel's
security forces faced more than 50 daily alerts of terror
attacks in the period prior to the national elections.
Security forces prevented and pre-empted the worst of
these. Ultimately, however, the difference between a
failed attack and the scene of horrific death lies in the
smallest, most miniscule fractions.

Israel has reason to believe that the situation
might deteriorate now that Hamas has assumed the
political helm of the Palestinian Authority, unless
radical change is made to its charter, which is clearly
committed to Israel's destruction, and to its approach
to Israel and what it stands for.

Only last week, Hamas officials stated that they
would not arrest terrorists who attack Israel. One of
Hamas's first public statements after winning the
Palestinian elections was that it would liberate the
terrorists who assassinated Israeli Minister of Tourism
Rechavam Ze'evi, defying the international agreement
reached in April 2002 with the United States and the
United Kingdom. The Palestinian Authority
consistently failed to ensure the safety of American
and British international monitors, violating the
agreement and forcing the monitors to evacuate. Israel,
therefore, was left with no choice but to detain those
terrorists before they were released. We cannot allow
those who are involved in murder and terrorism to
roam free. Nevertheless, Israel will handle the
detainees in accordance with the relevant legal
procedures and appropriate judicial oversight.

We in Israel face a constant dilemma:
safeguarding the security and well-being of our citizens
while at the same time minimizing any humanitarian
hardships that may affect the Palestinians as a result of
terrorism prevention.

Israel was recently forced to close the Karni
crossing - a vital channel for food and goods to enter
the Gaza Strip - as a result of direct threats of
terrorism. These alerts represent an example of
occasions when Palestinian extremists have harmed the
lives of other Palestinians. Israel provided the
Palestinian Authority with names of specific
individuals who had threatened attacks, yet the
Palestinian Authority failed to arrest them. We also
proposed an alternative crossing to be used while Karni
was under threat, yet the Palestinian Authority refused
to fully utilize that alternative, undoubtedly for
political reasons and at great expense to Palestinians'
well-being.

I am glad to report to the Council that, as of
23 March, when the security situation permitted it, the
Karni crossing was reopened. Hundreds of truckloads
of food, goods and commercial items have been
transported to and from the Gaza Strip. Furthermore,
there has been continuous cooperation with our
Palestinian neighbours on many civilian matters, which
can be witnessed even this week as we have worked
together to fight the spread of the avian flu virus.

We are doing everything in our power to ensure
that the Palestinian people receive all needed
humanitarian assistance. There is no starvation policy,
as previously stated. We would like to find a solution
that will end their suffering and improve their economy.
However, we cannot compromise our security. Our
foremost priority - as it is for every single responsible
Government - is to protect our citizens.

That is a glance at the complexity of our relations
with our Palestinian neighbours.

The role of Hamas and Palestinian terrorism is
only one aspect of the situation in the Middle East. The
terror organizations that perpetrate these crimes are
headquartered in Damascus and are financed by the
Islamic Republic of Iran - the same United Nations
Member State whose President recently called for the
destruction of Israel and is attempting to develop the
capabilities to do so. The alliance among Iran, Syria
and Palestinian terrorist organizations - a real axis of
terror - poses grave dangers to security and stability
in the Middle East and beyond. As we sit here today,
the next terror attack against Israel is being financed
and planned and is nearing execution. Today, on
30 March, Israel has registered 69 terror alerts, 13 of
which represent specific threats.

I now turn to Israel's north. Citizens continue to
face a dangerous and persisting existential threat
because of Hizbullah terrorists, who continue to wage
Iran's and Syria's war by proxy along the northern
border. There have been daily alerts suggesting
Hizbullah plans to kidnap more soldiers and fire more
rockets into Israel.

We are deeply concerned by Hizbullah's
continuous presence on the Lebanese side of the Blue
Line, despite Security Council resolutions 425 (1978),
1559 (2004) and 1655 (2006), which call for the
Government of Lebanon to exercise full jurisdiction
over its territory up to the Blue Line and to take
immediate steps to prevent further terrorist attacks
from Lebanon. Almost six years ago, the State of Israel
fulfilled its obligations as set out in resolution 425
(1978), yet year after year Hizbullah operates freely
along the border. This is a matter of great concern.

However, we would like to welcome the
launching of the national dialogue within Lebanon, and
we hope it will lead to the exercise of the sovereignty
of the Government of Lebanon over all its territory,
including the dismantling of the terrorist organizations
active on its soil.

We call on the international community to continue
its fight against terrorism in order to remove this
treacherous component from the complicated relations
with our neighbours. In that regard, Israel appreciates
the international community's continued insistence - as
reflected in various official statements, including those of
the Quartet - that the new Palestinian Government abide
by three basic requirements: recognize Israel, abandon
violence and terrorism, and comply with previous
agreements with Israel. Only after these three conditions
are met can Israel negotiate with the Palestinian
Authority. We call on the international community to
continue to make strict demands on Hamas to comply
with these three fundamental benchmarks that the
international community has itself set.

The Israeli people have great hope in the vision
of the road map, as reflected in this week's elections.
We hope that, through the international community's
help, we will find a genuine partner in the Palestinian
Government so that our peoples can work together
towards fulfilling the road map and living side by side
in peace and security.

