Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks you, Sir, for presiding
over today's meeting. We also welcome Secretary-
General Arman and the participation of representatives
of regional organizations, including the African Union,
in this meeting.

According to the relevant provisions of the
United Nations Charter, while the Security Council has
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the regional
organizations can also play an important role in
promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes. The
efforts of the two are mutually complementary. We
appreciate the fact that the President has scheduled
today's open meeting. We hope and believe that it can
play its due role in strengthening coordination and
cooperation between the Security Council and the
regional organizations.

The African Union and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) have made great
efforts and played very important roles in solving
conflicts in Africa. Since its inception, the African
Union's Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution has regularly evaluated
conflicts in Africa and played an irreplaceable role in
stabilizing the situation there. In addressing significant
issues, such as the situation in the Mano River region
and the achievement of peace in Cote d'Ivoire,
ECOWAS has played a very important role and
achieved significant results, which we praise.

We believe that the African countries and peoples
know Africa best and that they have the first say in the
settlement of African issues. In addressing those issues,
the Security Council must carefully listen to and fully
respect the opinions of the African Union, other
African regional organizations and the African
countries. It must also further strengthen its
coordination and cooperation with African regional
organizations.

In this context, I wish to comment on three
points.

First, prior to taking decisions on African issues,
the Security Council should strive to coordinate with
the relevant African regional organizations so that its
decisions better reflect the opinions and positions of
those organizations and the countries involved. This
will improve the feasibility and efficiency of the
Security Council's decisions.

Secondly, the African Union, ECOWAS and other
African regional organizations have taken the initiative
and undertaken some important actions in addressing
problems in the Great Lakes region and in West Africa.
These have yielded very good results. In the future, the
Security Council and other United Nations bodies
should coordinate their efforts as soon as possible with
the African Union and African subregional
organizations on the measures and actions they intend
to take. If possible, they should extend timely support
and coordination.

Thirdly, one very important experience of the
Security Council in handling the crisis in Sierra Leone
was its creation, in cooperation with ECOWAS, of a
comprehensive and integrated approach to that
problem. An integrated strategy has a very high
reference value in approaching other African issues.
The Security Council and relevant regional
organizations should attach great importance to this.

In brief, the Security Council should prioritize the
summarizing of its experience in strengthening its
coordination and cooperation with regional
organizations. This is a very important factor, which
cannot be neglected, in strengthening the role of the
United Nations.

