Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to express France's gratitude to the
Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004) , as well as to you, Mr. President, and to the
representatives of South Africa and Germany. All three
of you, Sir, have shown your strong commitment over
the past two years, which we welcome.

I wish to associate myself with the statement to be
made later by the observer of the European Union.

The threat linked to Al-Qaida did not disappear
with death of Osama Bin Laden. It has developed today
and become regional; indeed, it remains ever-present.
To cope with that reality, the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee plays an indispensable role. Its decisions,
which must be implemented universally, are a key
barrier against that threat. In order for the system to
continue to be effective, several aspects are key.

First of all, the sanctions lists must follow the
development of the threat. Its regular updating is
therefore crucial, and, for that reason, we would
encourage all States Members of the United Nations
to continue to submit to the Committee requests for
inclusion on the list in order that it may best reflect the
state of the threat. It was in that spirit that the Council
called for the adoption of sanctions against Al-Qaida
in Mali.

Next, in order for the list to be credible, the
delisting system needs to be fair and accurate. In
particular, the processes in that regard must uphold the
fundamental freedoms ofpeople on the list. By creating
and strengthening the Ombudsperson's mandate, the
most recent resolutions have allowed for the bolstering
procedural guarantees. The forthcoming revision of
resolution 1989 (2011) must be an opportunity for us to
continue along those lines.

France attaches particular importance to the work
carried out by the Counter-Terrorism Committee with
all of the States Members of the United Nations and,
in particular, its awareness-raising role. In that regard,
we welcome the holding of a special meeting of the
Committee on 20 November to discuss combating
the financing of terrorism. That topic, highlighted
in resolution 1373 (2001), is a crucial part of any
counter-terrorism strategy. The event will, inter alia,
enable us to implement the best practices resulting
from recommendations by the Financial Action Task
Force on Money Laundering in terms of combating the
financing of terrorism. We would like the Committee
to continue to organize special meetings and we are in
favour of ensuring that the one that takes place next
year look at porous borders, which is something that
has already been raised in the Committee.

I would also like to commend the ongoing efforts of
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED)
to carry out numerous regional workshops on
important topics in combating terrorism, such as
border management, legal prosecution of terrorism and
freezing assets, and capacity-building. It is crucial for
the most vulnerable States to enjoy ongoing support
from the international community.

Given the current situation of the terrorist threat,
it is necessary to strengthen programmes on capacity-
building for countries of the Sahel. I would also like
to remind the Council that the Committee, with the
support of CTED, has thoroughly analysed the way in
which Member States implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions thanks to preliminary assessments.
Revision work on this tool has been under way for some
months now in order to improve it, and we would like to
commend the efforts in that area. We very much hope
that the new format for the tool will soon be available
and operational.

Nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical
terrorism are some of the main threats to our security.
The possibility that weapons of mass destruction may
fall into the hands of non-State actors or terrorists
is a real threat that affects us all. Since the Bashar
Al-Assad regime confirmed in July the presence of
chemical weapons in Syria, we are very concerned
about the safety of those stockpiles and by the risk of
uncontrolled proliferation, which would be catastrophic
for the stability of the region.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is key in preventing those
risks. As the representative of South Africa said in
his statement, much progress has been achieved since
the resolution's adoption, in 2004. Today, most States
have taken measures to implement it, and the work
of the 1540 Committee is being shored up within the
United Nations and elsewhere. With the adoption
of resolution 1977 (2011), complemented recently
by resolution 2055 (2012), the Council endowed the
Committee with the means to fulfil its mandate more
efficiently, in particular by creating a group of nine
experts responsible for supporting the Committee in its
increasing number of activities.

Much remains to be done. Many provisions have
not been fully implemented, for example, the definition
by the Committee of specific priorities for its work,
the sharing of good practices or the strengthening
of cooperation between the Committee and other
organizations, in particular, in the area of assistance.
As the Council knows, my country coordinates the
working group on this issue, and I welcome increased
dialogue with Group of Eight Global Partnership
Working Group in this area.

Combating terrorism must be coordinated. It is
crucial to work to strengthen and coordinate the United
Nations Committees. We also rely a great deal on the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to make
progress in that coordination. Lastly, we support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to create a
post of United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator.
We very much hope that such a post will be set up soon.
It would enable us to strengthen coherence and raise
the profile of the United Nations in terms of combating
terrorism.

