Mr. Barkin (United States of America): I congratulate Belgium on its assumption of the presidency. I would also extend congratulations to Viet Nam for a very successful presidency last month. I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu and Mr. Spleeters for their briefings. In 2001, the General Assembly adopted by consensus the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. In this landmark achievement of the international community, we committed to concrete actions to reduce the illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons. The United States remains fully committed to implementing the Programme of Action, as well as the 2005 International Tracing Instrument. We have worked and continue to work side by side with other countries and international and regional organizations to combat the illicit small arms trade. For example,our conventional weapons destruction programme has provided more than $3.6 billion in assistance to more than 100 countries since 1993. The programme includes assistance to countries to destroy their excess weapons and munitions and enhance their stockpile security through the provision of technical expertise and physical security upgrades. The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/1011) rightly indicates the cross-cutting nature of issues associated with illicit small arms, which span numerous lines of effort, including conflict prevention, crime and human rights. We agree with the conclusion that the international community must focus on the root causes of illicit arms flows, including poor stockpile management of State-owned stockpiles and cross- border trafficking. Additionally, we must remember that, in many of those cross-cutting areas, work is already being done, including by the Secretary- General and the Security Council. We must ensure that there is coordination between those efforts rather than redundancy. That includes items on the Security Council's agenda, such as women, peace and security and the protection of civilians. The Secretary-General's report gives some cause for optimism regarding that important issue. Notably, in 2018 States explicitly acknowledged for the first time the relationship between the implementation of the Programme of Action and combating gender- based violence. In addition, we commend the report's focus on regional and subregional efforts to enhance coordination in small arms and light weapons control, making particular note of the focus on silencing the guns in Africa by 2020 and on the road map 2024 initiative in the western Balkans region. We would like to see future reports address regional issues more comprehensively, such as the ongoing efforts in the western hemisphere. The report also rightly indicates that the international community is struggling to fulfil existing commitments on small arms. For example, it notes that the success rate for tracing seized weapons was less than 13 per cent between 2016 and 2017. Full implementation of United Nations sanctions regimes, in particular arms embargoes, would help to improve record-keeping of government stockpiles, which have long been a source of weapons for armed groups operating in fragile States, particularly in the Central African Republic, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Simply keeping records of weapons is not enough, however. We called for greater efforts to implement existing commitments at the last briefing on this matter in 2017 (see S/PV.8140) and we reiterate that call today. Unfortunately, we do have several concerns about the Secretary-General's report, including with regard to civilian ownership of firearms. We urge the Secretary- General to carefully differentiate between lawful ownership of small arms and the illegal use of small arms in non-conflict settings and the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, which fuels conflict and instability. Despite those concerns, the United States welcomes today's discussion and will continue to lead efforts to reduce the threat that illicit small arms and light weapons pose. We will continue to take concrete steps at the national, regional and global levels to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and urge all countries to join us in strengthening implementation of our existing commitments and obligations to combat the illicit transfer, accumulation and misuse of such weapons.
