Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Allow me first to join
others in thanking Viet Nam, our fellow Association of
Southeast Asian Nations member, for initiating this
very important meeting. We are pleased to see you, Sir,
presiding over this debate and we are certain that,
under your able stewardship, this meeting will arrive at
a successful outcome.

We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Coomaraswamy, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Mullet,
Executive Director Veneman and Ms. Hunt for their
respective important statements. My delegation would
also like to express our support for Ambassador Ripert
of France, Chairman of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, for his statement and his
leadership of the Working Group.

The issue that brings us together today is an
essential tragedy of conflict situations - the tragedy of
the youngest victims. From Palestine to Iraq, from
Afghanistan to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and elsewhere, children are casualties and victims of
war. The plight of children in armed conflict continues
to grip this Council.

With thousands of children bearing arms as child
soldiers and countless others thought to be affected in
other ways, children also suffer from the spread of
diseases and underdevelopment in armed conflicts.
While thousands of children die every year in direct
fighting, malnutrition and disease also claim many
lives. Efforts to protect former child soldiers and child
victims should therefore be conducted beyond the
framework of security or rights-based issues. Indonesia
has been steadfast in its position that this issue should
also be discussed within the framework of the social,
economic and development frameworks.

Often separated from their families and living in
the squalid conditions in war zones, those children are
greatly in need of psychological as well as physical
intervention. Childhood, then, becomes a nightmare in
which they are separated from parents and family, their
homes are destroyed, health and education services are
disrupted and trust is undermined. Watching parents
being murdered, raped or tortured or being threatened
themselves puts extreme pressure on children's' coping
mechanisms, manifesting in extreme anxiety and
insomnia and difficulty functioning in school or
depression.
The international donor community must
therefore continue to provide long-term and sustainable
assistance to facilitate the full recovery of children.
Such assistance should and must be provided without
political preconditions. Wherever and whenever there
are children affected by armed conflict, we should
devote our full energy and passion to assisting them.
Our political aspirations and ideological differences
should not prevent the attainment of our common
objective.

Such assistance will require an approach that
includes development and humanitarian dimensions,
undergirded by the political will of States. In that
regard, the United Nations Development Programme
and its development partners, as well as UNICEF and
the World Health Organization, must be continuously
engaged to increase their development and
humanitarian initiatives that help countries in need.

With the growing complexity and intricacy of
world affairs, the United Nations is surely not in a
position to tackle the entirety of the issue of protection
of children. We therefore recognize the pivotal role that
can be provided by regional organizations in
addressing the multifaceted aspects of the issue. In
addition, we also welcome and commend the
increasing role of non-governmental organizations,
such as the Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict,
and other civil society organizations.

However, we strongly believe that the best
protection from armed conflict is in preventing it and
addressing its sources at their roots. That should be
done in the context of peace processes, as stipulated by
resolution 1612 (2005). Thus the Security Council, as
mandated by the Charter, must continuously promote
peace processes so that those children can be protected.

As a newly established body, the Working Group
must continue to update, refine and strengthen its
working methods. For that reason, we cannot but
commend the efforts of the Working Group to improve
its working methods in order to maintain its
impartiality, transparency, accountability, inclusivity
and constructive cooperation with the countries
concerned.

In addition, the Working Group should provide
clear guidelines on how to define a clear strategy for
countries or parties to be de-listed from the annexes.
While demands to parties to armed conflict must be
fully monitored and reported, it is equally pertinent
that clear, objective and measurable guidelines be in
place.

Finally, let us not, as Special Representative
Coomaraswamy has said, allow children to be the
forgotten and neglected victims of the fighting and put
future generations at risk. Let us work towards a world
in which there is more humanity, more caring and more
gentleness and in which children are valued and
protected, starting here with this Council and its
initiatives. To conclude, allow me to therefore assure
the Council of our full support for the adoption of the
draft presidential statement on this very important
matter.

