Mr. Yoogalingam (Malaysia): Sir, I am honoured to
see you continue to preside over this Council for the month
of December.

I also wish to acknowledge the role played by
Argentina in facilitating the debate before this Council on
the important subject of improving consultations between
the Security Council and the troop-contributing countries.

Malaysia has been at the forefront of this issue, given
our deep involvement in and our commitment to United
Nations peace-keeping in all its aspects.

The subject of consultations between the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries on peace-keeping
operations is not new. Serious discussions on this issue
have been going on within and outside the United Nations,
including with reference to the operationalization of Article
44 which, among other things, provides for a Member State
not represented in the Council, and I quote:

"to participate in the decisions of the Security Council
concerning the employment of contingents of that
Member's armed forces."

The issue of consultations came to a head at a time
when the Security Council was taking decisions pertaining
to the United Nations peace-keeping operations in Somalia,
particularly at a stage when the troop-contributing countries
were all from the South, with virtually no representation in
the Council. Mandates for the operations changed, while
troop contributors had no input to the decisions of the
Council. Although Somalia has been put on the back
burner, the issue of consultations has remained relevant,
continuing to this day.

Following initiatives taken by my own country,
Canada, and the Netherlands, to name but a few, the
Argentine and New Zealand delegations successfully
steered through this Council in November 1994 a
presidential statement which called for consultations
among the Security Council, the troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. Consequently, informal
consultations commenced among members of the Security
Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries
concerning peace-keeping operations.

In our view, the current practice of consultations,
following the Security Council's decision on 4 November
1994, remains ad hoc in nature and unsatisfactory in
practice. What took place was more like a briefing than
a consultation as was originally envisaged. Its ad hoc and
overlapping schedule has resulted in some members with
small missions being deprived of the opportunity to attend
and participate meaningfully and constructively in these
meetings. Often, queries raised by Member States at these
briefings were not responded to with adequate and
satisfactory answers. In short, there are still weaknesses
in the practice of consultations.

Obviously, the shortcomings inherent in the current
mechanism for consultations cannot be left uncorrected.
It was with this point in mind that we stated in the
plenary of the General Assembly on 13 November 1995,
during the debate on the reform of the Security Council,
that it was high time for Article 44 of the Charter, which
provides for troop-contributing countries to participate in
the decisions of the Council, to be put into operation.

The initiative, marshalled by Argentina and other
like-minded countries, including Malaysia, whereby the
institutionalization of a mechanism of consultations was
proposed deserves early implementation. Malaysia fully
supports the call for the establishment of a subsidiary
organ as provided for in Article 29 of the Charter to
facilitate these consultations. My delegation is also open
to other options which would effectively provide for these
consultations.

Only through a formal consultative process could
members of the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries contribute positively to accurate preparation and
assessment before the Security Council modifies, extends

 

and terminates the mandates of existing operations or
decides on the mandates of new missions. The complexity
and multidimensional nature of peace-keeping operations
further reinforces the need for more institutionalized
meetings between the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop contributors. Such meetings could usefully facilitate
the identification and discussion of problems at an early
stage.

While it is understood that troop-contributing countries
will be members of this formalized mechanism, my
delegation is also of the View that resource-contributing
countries should be recognized, in addition to countries in
which operations are being carried out. However, one must
not lose sight of the fact that countries contributing troops
have to undertake even heavier risks than those providing
only financial and material support. In the case of a new
operation, potential troop- and resource-contributing
countries, along with the country where the outbreak of
conflict is impending, must be drafted as members of the
formalized mechanism.

In the case of existing operations, it is worthwhile to
consider the presence of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and/or field commander. Their presence
at these consultations would facilitate members with a first-
hand account of the situation in the field which members of
the Security Council or the Secretariat could not provide.

To enable all the countries involved to participate in
the consultation process productively and constructively, it
is imperative that meetings should be scheduled only
tentatively; more important, the schedule must be
coordinated to avoid overlapping which might prevent the
attendance of the members involved, especially those with
small representation.

It must be emphasized that the effort to have the
consultative mechanism between the Security Council and
troop-contributing countries institutionalized must not -
and should not - be misconstrued as an attempt by troop-
contributing countries to interfere and undermine the
jurisdiction and authority of the Security Council. Nor
should it be seen as a way to overburden the already heavy
work of the Council. It should, however, be viewed in the
context of the willingness of non-members to supplement
and complement the decision-making process of the
Security Council on peace-keeping operations.

