Mr. Riicker (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement to be made on behalf of the European
Union later today.

I thank Sweden for having initiated this timely
and crucial debate, and I warmly welcome Secretary-
General Guterres, wish him success and thank him for
his resolve to put conflict prevention and peace first.

With regard to the United Nations and the Security
Council's role in conflict prevention and sustaining
peace, I would like to make three points.

First, sustaining peace is key. In 2016, the General
Assembly and the Security Council adopted landmark
resolutions (resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly 70/262, respectively) that acknowledged
that sustaining peace should be the goal of all national
and international prevention policies, in order to end
violence, guarantee sustainable development and
allow for the protection of human rights. Sustaining
peace necessitates a comprehensive approach and
is a shared task and responsibility involving all the
relevant stakeholders. That includes new partnerships,
inter alia, with regional organizations - as has been
mentioned - as well as with civil society. And it
entails an inclusive approach in which all members of
society, especially women, have a role to play. In that
regard, resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, should guide our activities. The concept of a
closely linked security, human rights and development
agenda is also reiterated in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and reflected throughout
Germany's chairmanship of the Group of 20 (G-20)
in 2017. In February, the G-20 Foreign Ministers will
therefore be discussing sustaining peace and possible
contributions thereto. Sustaining peace should be our
guide for the next decade.

Secondly, we need sound early warning and analysis.
We need a factual and common understanding of the
current crisis situations, their root causes and drivers.
On the national level, Germany has invested heavily in
conflict prevention and stabilization. We have reformed
our internal structures to align with the realities of
the twenty-first century, sharpened our analytical
tools and refined our stabilization approach in crisis
situations. We are currently developing new national
guidelines on crisis prevention, conflict management
and peacebuilding with the help of international
organizations, all branches of Government, academia
and civil society.

With a View to the United Nations, we strongly
support Secretary-General Guterres's resolve to make
the Organization more effective and more efficient.
We hope that these and further changes will enable
the United Nations to keep conflict prevention and
peace as a top priority. We would also like to see the
development of an integrated policy-planning capacity,
stronger analytical capabilities and enhanced situational
awareness at Headquarters as well as in the field. We
hope for active engagement in scenario development
and mediation throughout the entire United Nations
system.

The Security Council should also prioritize
prevention at every stage of conflict, focusing on
reconciliation efforts, mediation, security-sector reform
and good governance. For example, it could resume
regular horizon-scanning sessions to discuss, prepare
for and respond to emerging crisis situations. The
Security Council should also continue its discussions
on regional and thematic issues that can have a serious
impact on peace and security, such as climate change
and migration. Furthermore, the Security Council
could capitalize more efficiently on work done in the
United Nations system, for instance by the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council, as a wealth of
information is there, or through the work of the United
Nations on sustainable development. In particular, the
Security Council should interact more closely with the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Thirdly, and lastly, we need to move from early
warning to early action. While it is important to have
the analysis and the structures right, none of this can
bear fruit if we are not ready to invest in preventive
tools. Germany is therefore committed to further
strengthening the crisis-prevention capabilities and
overall efforts of the United Nations.

In addition to being one of the largest contributors
to the budget of the Organization, we also tripled our
contribution in the field of prevention in 2016. For
instance, we contributed more than $4 million to the
United Nations Mediation Support Team and more than
$20 million to the Peacebuilding Fund, and we have
also increased our contributions to UN-Women.

On the ground, Germany is also actively engaged
in crisis prevention and peacekeeping. For instance, our
stabilization and peacekeeping efforts in the context
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali support the political
trajectory that will eventually define a sustainable
settlement in Mali. We also encourage others to
invest more in stabilization projects so that legitimate
authorities in precarious situations may be able to
sustain peace in their countries.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm Germany's strong
commitment to and support for the United Nations.
Germany looks forward to working closely with the
new Secretary-General and the Security Council to
advance conflict prevention and sustain peace.

