I would like to thank our briefers for their presentations and to welcome the participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic and express to her our condolences following the terrible attack that just took place in her country. I would like to highlight three points. First, I would like to express France's solidarity with the Government and the people of the Central African Republic in the face of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences. In that context, France has strengthened its bilateral support to the Central African Republic in the health sector and underlines that humanitarian access must remain a priority. That is why we have contributed, jointly with the European Union, to the organization of a humanitarian air bridge to several African countries, including the Central African Republic. France also welcomes the efforts made by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to continue delivering on its mandate, and I take this opportunity to reiterate our full support for the Special Representative, Mankeur Ndiaye. Secondly, I would like to welcome the progress made in the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. The implementation of the agreement must continue, under the leadership of President Touadera and his Government, because it remains the only path to lasting peace in the country. I am thinking, for example, about the continued deployment of the special joint security units, the effective creation of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation and the implementation of the decentralization process. However, France remains very concerned by the violations of the peace agreement committed by some armed groups, in particular attacks against civilians, humanitarian personnel and security forces, grave violations against children, sexual violence and unilateral declarations of withdrawal from the agreement. Our message must be clear: those who engage in such acts must be brought to justice and the measures provided for in article 35 of the agreement must be implemented. On our initiative, the Security Council recently sanctioned Abdoulaye Miskine, an armed group leader; it must continue to sanction those who deliberately hinder the return of peace. I would like to welcome the progress made in the preparation of the 2020-2021 presidential and legislative elections. The elections must be held in a peaceful, inclusive and transparent manner and according to constitutional deadlines. In that context, France calls on all actors in the Central African Republic to engage in an inclusive dialogue on all questions related to the holding of the elections. France also cautions against attempts to destabilize the country's institutions and against disinformation campaigns. Lastly, France calls on the partners of the Central African Republic to contribute without delay to the funding of the elections. In addition to our contribution through the European Union, we will therefore provide an additional €300,000.
