Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. President, we would
like to thank you for convening this meeting today with
regard to the grave events in Kosovo. We are grateful
for the presence of the Secretary-General and for the
eloquent statement he made to the Council this
afternoon. I would like also to welcome warmly the
participation of Foreign Minister Fischer of Germany
and of Foreign Minister Svilanovic of Serbia and
Montenegro at this meeting.

Pakistan condemns the violence in Mitrovica and
other parts of Kosovo in the strongest terms, especially
the loss of human life, including the death of innocent
children. We condemn also the attacks against the
personnel of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and of KFOR and against
religious sites, and demand that such acts be stopped.
Like others, we call for legal investigations to ascertain
the origins of these alarming events and to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

Pakistan fully supports the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri,
and the call made by the Secretary-General to help
restore calm and stability.

The disturbing events in Kosovo underscore the
urgent need to uphold the rule of law, ensure proper
security for all ethnic communities and bring to justice
all those involved in criminal acts. We join others in
urging all the people of Kosovo to work through the
recognized legitimate channels, including UNMIK and
the Provisional Institutions, to address their grievances.
We also agree that the establishment of a multi-ethnic,
tolerant, democratic and peaceful society in Kosovo
remains a fundamental objective in the implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999).

The present disturbances are the worst that
Kosovo has experienced since 1999. We must reflect
deeply on the reasons for this. We must evaluate
whether our approach so far requires any adjustment.
We must note the perception, brought to our attention
today, that the international community is not being
seen in Kosovo as taking credible steps towards a final
and durable solution.

Our fundamental aim must be to address the root
causes of the tensions and conflict in Kosovo. In that
regard, I wish to conclude by offering some
observations on what steps should be taken to address
the challenge, which I would like to submit for the
Council's consideration.

First, there is a need to press all parties to rein in
their respective extremists and to ensure that such
violence, especially against innocent civilians,
including women and children, is no longer tolerated.

Secondly, there is a need to intensify security
efforts against those extremist elements as well as
against organized crime, which feeds them, including,
as far as possible, the securing of Kosovo's borders.

Thirdly, it is necessary to seriously prepare the
ground for the peaceful, legal and democratically
rooted process of resolving Kosovo's final status.
Without movements towards this, the solution to the
problems in Kosovo may continue to remain elusive.

