Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The Secretary-General's
report (S/ 1995/444) provides a candid and honest
assessment of the latest developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We have noted in particular, and carefully
studied, the options that he outlined and the analysis of
their implications. The crisis in Bosnia has indeed put the
reputation and credibility of the United Nations on the line,
and it is right for the Secretary-General to alert the Security
Council to the wider ramifications of the situation in that
country.

Botswana has never been attracted to the option of
withdrawing the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) from Bosnia. Botswana has in the past
resisted the withdrawal of the United Nations peace-
keeping operations elsewhere, and we are not about to
accept the abandonment of the people of Bosnia in their
hour of peril. The international community has a moral
responsibility to help in any way possible the innocent
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, the actions
of the parties, particularly those of the Serbs, have not
inspired confidence in us in the past, and there is no
reason to expect them to behave differently in the future.
They have made no fresh, credible commitments to
cooperate with UNPROFOR, and, even if they did, would
we really believe them? Yet this is absolutely necessary
if UNPROFOR is successfully to execute its mandate.
The onus to make peace or wage war rests with the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina - both Bosnians and
Serbs - and not with the Security Council. If they
choose war, as they increasingly seem inclined to do, they
should know that the United Nations presence in their
country is incompatible with the ends of war.

The spectacle of United Nations peace-keepers taken
hostage, some of them tied to poles like sacrificial lambs,
has outraged my delegation beyond belief. It has always
been unacceptable to us that UNPROFOR troops often
have been targeted for attack by the parties to the conflict
in Bosnia and openly criticized and condemned by those
they are supposed to be helping maintain peace, but for
the Serbs to actually chain them to poles, bridges and
other objects was the worst humiliation of United Nations
personnel and a callous demonstration of total disrespect
for the authority of the United Nations. The Bosnian
Serbs should unconditionally release the United Nations
peace-keepers they are still holding hostage and remove
all the restrictions they have placed on those they have
blockaded.

The pertinent question to raise concerning this issue,
as does the Secretary-General in paragraph 60 of his
report, is:

"whether UNPROFOR is to be a peace-keeping
operation, conducting itself in accordance with the
established principles and practices for such
operations, or an enforcement operation"
(5/1995/444, para. 60).

This question is central to the continued presence of
UNPROFOR in Bosnia. We had hoped that the debate on
this rather intractable question would have featured more

 

prominently in the draft resolution before us, given that the
Mission, as presently configured and operated, does not
enjoy the full cooperation of the parties to the conflict - an
indispensable condition in peace-keeping. Unfortunately, the
situation on the ground seems to have dictated differently.
We have decided to increase the number of troops in the
field, complete with a rapid reaction capacity, and to put at
their disposal enough fire-power to defend themselves more
robustly.

The basic complicating factor in the Bosnian conflict
is the absence of a cease-fire. There can be no peace-
keeping without a cease-fire, because if there is no cease-
fire, there is no peace to keep.

We have nothing against strengthening the United
Nations force in Bosnia. We are, however, a little
concerned about the possibility of UNPROFOR getting
engulfed in that senseless and wasteful war. We have taken
note of the fact that the rapid-reaction force will operate
under peace-keeping rules of engagement. There are still,
however, lingering questions begging to be asked. A simple
one is: have we drawn any lessons from the troubles that
have brought us to this terrible pass? And under what
circumstances exactly would the rapid-reaction force be
called in? Is NATO air power still relevant, or has it been
superseded by the rapid-reaction force? How are we going
to treat the parties if they continue to behave in the way
they have behaved in the past? Are we now going to
engage them militarily? And are the UNPROFOR troops
going to be quartered in large camps a la Somalia in order
to afford them protection?

Here are some more questions: what will be the
parties' perception of this rapid-reaction force? Have we
ascertained their perceptions? Will they treat it as impartial?
In his report, the Secretary-General has attributed the
current crisis in the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations mission in Bosnia to attempts to make it
serve the purposes of both peace-keeping and peace-
enforcement. In our present efforts to enhance the capacity
of UNPROFOR to better implement its mandate, we should
guard against creating the perception in the eyes of the
parties to the conflict that UNPROFOR is a peace-
enforcement mission, which it is not and should not be.

All these questions and the concerns we have raised
cannot detract from our sympathy with the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, a Government we recognize. We
have voted in favour of all Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions condemning the Serb forces. We are
also very much aware - painfully aware, in fact - that
the Government of Bosnia has accepted the Contact
Group peace plan and that the Serbs have rejected it. Had
the Serbs accepted the plan, it is likely that Bosnia would
not be in the kind of terrible situation in which it is today.

We wish the new-look UNPROFOR were operating
under different conditions than those that currently obtain
on the ground. I must repeat: a cease-fire is a must,
because you cannot keep peace where there is no cease-
fire, where hostilities continue unabated. If there is no
cease-fire, our efforts in Bosnia will continue to be futile.
We wish the men and women of UNPROFOR success in
the tasks ahead. Theirs has thus far been an impossible
task.

