Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
It is not enough to try to eliminate existing conflicts
in the world or to create mechanisms designed to
prevent them; it is necessary that the root causes that
induce them and nurture them be eradicated. Many
conflicts result from the interests of hegemonic and
imperialist domination, acts of aggression, the struggle
to control natural resources, persistent colonialist
and neocolonialist strategies and practices, today's
unfair and exclusionary international order, unequal
exchange, discrimination, xenophobia, interventionism
and violations of the right to self-determination of
peoples. What is required to prevent conflicts is
solidarity, international cooperation and assistance,
and joint action to eliminate poverty, unemployment,
hunger, inequality and their root causes.

The Security Council certainly has an important
role to play with regard to conflict prevention, but it
must perform those functions in accordance with the
powers granted to it under the Charter of the United
Nations. The members of the Security Council should
advocate peaceful solutions and show a strong,
effective and clear resistance to the recourse to war.
They should take every opportunity to adopt courses
of action that safeguard the lives of people involved
or affected by conflict. They should never promote
armed confrontation, much less be champions of
the philosophy of regime change, which in practice
contradicts the pacifist essence of the Organization.

However, we do condemn Council inaction before
prolonged conflicts, such as that between Israel and
Palestine. How are we to understand the Council's
passivity and ineffectiveness faced with the killing of
innocent Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip, who
are victims of an excessive and indiscriminate use of
force? It is undoubtedly a question that has no answer,
given how much remains to be done by the Security
Council and the international community on conflict
prevention.

Cuba reiterates its call for an end to all acts
undermining the sovereignty and the right to self-
determination of any State. We therefore reiterate here
our resounding rejection of the recent plan funded by the
United States Agency for International Development,
which runs contrary to the Cuban people's exercise
of their right to self-determination. The plan seeks
to make young Cubans into agents of destabilization,
promotes measures contrary to the constitutional order
endorsed by the Cuban people and has used, beginning
in 2009, young Latin Americans recruited to that end.
American officials, who have condoned the authorship
and implementation of the plan, are showing the hostile
and intrusive nature of their policy towards Cuba, the
goal of which is to destabilize the country in order
to overthrow the political, economic and social order
established by the Cuban people. Cuba demands the
cessation of all subversive, interventionist, illegal and
covert actions by the United States.

In conclusion, I would like clarify for the
representative of Israel that the over 1,000 Jewish
people living in Cuba enjoy every right and privilege,
including the right to emigrate to Israel, which is a right
that they exercise freely. What does not exist in Cuba
today is the concept of Judaism as a bellicose cause or
a pretext for indiscriminate attacks against innocent
civilians. In Cuba, the Jewish people are Communist
while at the same time practicing their Judaism, as their
own religion, and enjoying the exercise of their full
rights. In Cuba, the Jewish people do not participate
in indiscriminate bombings against innocent civilians.
