Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Luis Moreno-
Ocampo, for presenting his interim report pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).

Togo welcomes the presentation of the report,
which takes stock of the actions taken, in particular
regarding the arrest and trial of those suspected of
having committed crimes against humanity on Libyan
territory from 15 February 2011 until the supposed end
of the conflict. We welcome the cooperation that has
been established between the Office of the Prosecutor
and the Libyan Government to that end. The meetings
held from 18 to 20 April between the Office of the
Prosecutor and certain Libyan authorities are a tangible
expression of that cooperation, the main objective of
which is to gather sufficient evidence to establish the
truth with a view to defending the rights of the victims
of the crimes alleged.

To that end, we note the commitment of the
Libyan authorities to carry out fair and impartial
investigations and prosecutions in line with
international standards in cases against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. The former is
still being detained in Zintan by members of the militia
that arrested him, and the former is still being detained
in Mauritania, where he was apprehended.

We hope that the discussions between the Libyan
authorities and the Office of the Prosecutor will
provide a unique opportunity for the judicious
implementation of the principle of complementarity in
order to ensure fair trials in those cases. Togo hopes
that after the 4 June deadline, the Court will have
appropriate information to rule on the admissibility
challenge that has been brought before it by the Libyan
authorities.

My country is still concerned by the allegations
of gender-based crimes, inter alia, wide-scale rape
committed even in detention centres and hospitals
during the conflict. It is clear that those crimes and
gross violations of human rights were not solely
committed by forces loyal to Al-Qadhafi. The
successive reports of the International Commission of
Inquiry on Libya impute those acts to militias and
revolutionary groups as well, as was underscored, once
again, by High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi
Pillay during her briefing to Council on 25 January
(see S/PV. 6707). We hope that the Libyan authorities
and the Court will shed all possible light on those
violations and identify the perpetrators so that they
may account for their actions and justice may be
rendered to the numerous battered victims.

On 10 May, during consultations on Libya, Togo,
like many other countries before it, expressed its
concern regarding the existence of numerous secret
detention centres run by revolutionary brigades where
acts of torture are apparently being committed against
detainees. That information, which was already
included in the report of the Commission of Inquiry
(A/HRC/19/68), must prompt the competent Libyan
authorities to take urgent action to find and dismantle
those illegal centres. We would once again urge the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya to assist the
Libyan authorities in efforts along those lines.

Togo would like to take the opportunity afforded
by today's meeting to welcome the cooperation that
exists between the Court and the State parties and
non-State parties to the Rome Statute, as well as with
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations, as part of the investigations of alleged
crimes. With regard to the crucial question of
cooperation between the ICC and African States, we
hope that the recent visit from 8 to 11 May of
Ambassador Tiina Intelmann, President of the
Assembly of States Parties, to Addis Ababa, where she
met senior officials of the African Union, will enable a
strengthening of ties so that the shared goal of
combating the impunity of the perpetrators of heinous
crime can be met.

Quality cooperation between the ICC and African
States will allow for ambiguities regarding the
principle of complementarity to be clarified.
Discussions under way in order to possibly grant
criminal jurisdiction to the African Court of Human
and People's Rights can only be enriched by this.

