Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Takasu for his report.

Unfortunately, we have witnessed several
significant developments on this critical issue over the
past 90 days. First, the latest report of the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) on Iran has once again underscored Iran's
refusal to comply with its international nuclear
obligations and to cooperate with the IAEA. I should
like to highlight a few of the major points today.

Iran continues to expand its enrichment and
heavy water-related activities. It conducted a multi-
year effort to construct a clandestine enrichment
facility near the city of Qom, in contravention of its
Security Council obligations. The IAEA has requested
clarifications from Iran about several aspects of this
facility. The IAEA secretariat concluded that Iran's
failure to inform the IAEA of its construction of an
undeclared enrichment facility near Qom was
inconsistent with Iran's IAEA safeguards obligations
and reduces confidence further about the absence of
other nuclear facilities that have not been declared to
the IAEA.

The IAEA Board of Governors responded to the
report by adopting a resolution on Iran by an
overwhelming majority on 27 November. The
resolution underscores the international community's
09-64217

increased, serious and unified concern that Iran
continues to defy its requirements and obligations
under IAEA and Security Council resolutions. The
resolution urges Iran to immediately suspend
construction at Qom and to cooperate fully with the
IAEA in order to comply.

Secondly, the United States condemns the serious
and repeated sanctions violations reported to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). In the past year, there have
been three reported incidents. All three involved the
transfer of arms or ammunition from Iran to Syria; all
three involved the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping
Lines; and all three are clear violations of paragraph 5
of resolution 1747 (2007). Iran has now been caught
breaking the rules repeatedly.

In today's briefing, the Committee expressed its
grave concern about the "apparent pattern of sanctions
violations involving prohibited arms transfers from
Iran". The Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) has documented in great detail
Iran's habit of violating this Council's resolutions.
Such violations are unacceptable. The illicit smuggling
of weapons from Iran to Syria is not just a sanctions
violation; it is also an important factor in the
destabilization of an already fragile Middle East.

We applaud the responsible actions that States
have taken to detect and disrupt sanctions violations. In
the two cases that occurred during the 90-day period,
involving two vessels, the Hansa India and the
F rancop, two Member States took action in the face of
suspicious cargo originating from Iran. In both cases,
the Member States offloaded the arms-related materiel
to ensure that it would not reach its intended
destination or be returned to its place of origin. The
Committee has also already called attention to its July
2009 Implementation Assistance Notice, which urged
Member States to "exercise extra vigilance" with
respect to the role of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Shipping Lines role in violations of these resolutions.

The scope of these violations is alarming. On
board the Francop were found 36 containers of arms
and related materiel, including 690 122-millimetre
rockets, around 12,000 anti-tank and mortar shells,
more than 20,000 fragmentation grenades, and more
than half a million rounds of ammunition. Tons of
bullet casings were found on board the Hansa India.
We commend the Committee for the diligence it
has shown in carrying out its mandates. The
effectiveness of Security Council sanctions depends on
the follow-up of the Council, the Committee and,
ultimately, all Member States. We must ensure that
these sanctions are rigorously enforced to ensure that
destabilizing weapons are not allowed to flow from
Iran to other parts of the Middle East and elsewhere.

As the cases we have discussed here today amply
demonstrate, all States should give extra scrutiny to all
shipping between Iran and Syria, especially if the
Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines is involved.
States should also report any information about
sanctions violations to the 1737 (2006) Committee. We
look to the Committee to consider options for effective
action to prevent new incidents, and we look forward
to its ideas on ways that Member States can better
implement those measures.

My third point is to note that these recent events -
the discovery of the Qom facility, Iran's announced
intention to build new enrichment plants, and its
prohibited arms transfers - underscore the renewed
urgency of full and robust implementation of
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008).
Member States need to redouble their own enforcement
efforts, and the 1737 Committee should be even more
vigilant, engaged and active.

More rigorous implementation of those sanctions
will make it harder for Iran to acquire the technology
and assistance to support its prohibited proliferation
activities. It will make it harder for Iran to smuggle
weapons to extremists and non-State actors. It will
make it harder for Iran to abuse the international
financial system to fund its proliferation activities. And
full implementation will make it harder for Iran to
build any more covert nuclear-related facilities, such as
the site near Qom, beyond the gaze of international
inspectors.

The United States, along with our P5+1 partners,
continues to pursue a dual-track approach of
engagement while increasing the pressure on Iran to
fulfil its obligations to suspend all proliferation-
sensitive nuclear activities and to cooperate with the
IAEA. We have repeatedly expressed our strong
preference for resolving concerns over Iran's nuclear
programme through diplomatic negotiations to build
confidence and to respond to Iran's request to meet its
own humanitarian and medical needs.
The IAEA, with support from Russia, France and
the United States, made a proposal to respond
positively to Iran's request for nuclear fuel for the
Tehran research reactor, despite Iran's continuing
violation of the Council's resolutions and
non-compliance with IAEA requirements on its nuclear
programme. Iran's failure thus far to take advantage of
that opportunity raises serious questions about its
nuclear intentions - questions that deserve urgent,
international attention.

The United States remains firmly committed to a
peaceful resolution with respect to international
concerns of Iran's nuclear programme. We also remain
willing to engage Iran to work towards a diplomatic
solution to the nuclear dilemma it has created for itself -
if Iran will only choose such a course.

But engagement cannot be a one-way street. Iran
must conclusively demonstrate a similar willingness to
engage constructively and address the serious issues
associated with its nuclear programme. The
international community stands firm in its conviction
that Iran must comply with its international
obligations. Should Iran continue to fail to meet its
obligations, the international community will have to
consider further actions.

