Mr. Al-Ahmed (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from Arabic): It gives me pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency for this month, and I
wish you every success in the discharge of your
responsibilities, I should like also to thank your
predecessor for his outstanding performance as President
of the Security Council during the past month.

Holy Jerusalem is the crux of the Arab-Israeli
conflict and the most pivotal issue for the Arab Muslim
world. The way in which this issue will be resolved will
decide the future of the peace process as a whole. We are
concerned to see the Israeli authorities continuing to
commit certain acts that are intended to change the Holy
City's demographic and institutional character in order to
Judaize Arab Jerusalem and alter its legal, historical,
religious and cultural reality. This is a violation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the Hague
Convention of 1907. It will also prejudge the negotiations
on the final status of that city.

The Holy City of Jerusalem is of the utmost
importance to the Arab and Muslim worlds, to the world
community as a whole and to the three monotheistic
religions. That is why the illegal Israeli policies and
practices in Jerusalem are of an extreme gravity.

The announcement by the Israeli Government that it
intends to build a new settlement comprising 6,500
housing units in East Jerusalem, in the area of Jabal Abu
Ghneim, is but the latest in a series of policies and acts
aimed at expanding the settlements, notwithstanding the
fact that the international community and the Security
Council have issued clear resolutions declaring such
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

 

policies illegal, null and void. In addition, the international
community has demanded that Israel desist from such
policies and practices. Despite all these clear signals, the
Israeli authorities continue their dangerous practices and
policies in the occupied Palestinian territories, disregarding
every convention and recognizing no right, as if no
deterrent could bring them back to legal norms.

Some of the most continually destabilizing factors in
the occupied territories are the Israeli settlements in the
West Bank and the Gaza strip and their constant expansion.
One can only imagine how dangerous this would be within
Holy Jerusalem. The city is the first kiblah and the third-
holiest place for Muslims, and the center of Muslims'
attention. They will not be satisfied until all their rights are
restored to them in this Holy City. The announcement by
the Israeli Government that it intends to build a new
settlement in East Jerusalem despite all Arab, Islamic and
international warnings constitutes a new challenge to the
international community and threatens the return of tension
to the region, where violence and instability will prevail
once again.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia affirms that no lasting
peace will be achieved in the Middle East without a just
solution to the issue of Holy Jerusalem in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
which demand Israel's withdrawal from the Arab territories
occupied in 1967, and resolution 252 (1968), which deals
with Jerusalem. Accordingly, the future of the Middle East
and peace in that region are in the hands of the
international community. Unless the _ international
community moves to save this peace by demanding that
Israel cease its settlement practices and policies in the city
of Jerusalem, the peace process in the Middle East and the
integrity of the agreements already signed between parties
to the conflict will be seriously threatened.

The Government of the custodian of the two holy
mosques considers that the decision of the current Israeli
Government to build new settlements in Holy Jerusalem is
illegal and constitutes a dangerous violation of international
conventions and agreements. This decision reaffirms the
continuation of the Israeli Government's plans to Judaize
the city of Jerusalem and efface its Arab and Islamic
character. Saudi Arabia also believes that such policies and
practices contribute to increasing tension; in addition, the
Israeli Government loses its credibility in the context of the
peace process and thus threatens to destroy that process.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, under the leadership of

the custodian of the two holy mOSques, rejects the continual
Israeli attempts to build new settlements. We also
emphasize the extreme gravity of this decision and ask
the Security Council to make every necessary effort to
ensure that Israel, as the occupying Power, will desist
from these policies and practices, and in particular will
completely stop any settlement activity in Arab J erus alem,
Failure to achieve this will push the region back into a
spiral of conflict, tension and instability.

We hope that the Security Council will discharge its
reaponsibilities in connection with events in Holy
Jerusalem to prove to the whole world that it is on the
side of righteousness and legitimacy.

