President Ahmed: It is my pleasure to be here at
this special meeting of the Security Council. I am
grateful to those who brought about our gathering here
today to debate the important issue of strengthening the
relationship between the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council.

Let me take this opportunity to reaffirm
Somalia's appreciation and its approval of the Security
Council, which has taken a consistent and laudable role
at each juncture of Somalia's civil strife and State
failure. The Security Council, as all may remember,
had the resolve and the political will to invoke the
morally compelling doctrine of humanitarian
intervention, thereby successfully reversing a
disastrous famine that could have potentially wiped out
millions of Somalis.

It is my considered judgement that Somalia once
again needs courageous intervention of this body to
intervene in the situation in Somalia by urgently
sending an international force to assist the Transitional
Federal Government in implementing its peace and
stabilization plan.

The conflict in Somalia, which was once among
clans, is today about extreme ideology and predatory
economic and commercial interests. The conflict is in
fact between those who want to live free in peace and
harmony under democratic governance and those who
espouse violence and want to keep Somalia in the
status quo of lawlessness and anarchy.

The solution to the problem in Somalia therefore
has three basic but important ingredients, namely,
re-establishing the collapsed Somali State, furthering
the reconciliation process and stabilizing the situation
and providing security.

On reconciliation, we conducted the largest
reconciliation congress in the history of Somalia. The
National Reconciliation Congress, which was held in
Mogadishu, was attended by close to 3,000 delegates
and attracted many more peace-loving Somalis to the
city. The National Reconciliation Congress produced
corrective solutions in government affairs and a road
map to a fair and free election that would lead Somalia
to a democratic transition in 2009. In addition, the
Transitional Federal Government has time and again
shown a willingness to talk to those who oppose our
Government.

Furthermore, I would like to formally restate at
this meeting of the Security Council that I am for peace
and reconciliation in Somalia. My only purpose in
leading Somalia during this critical period of our
history is to bring peace and lawfulness back to my
country. I would like to state categorically that I want
to witness the renaissance of Somalia as a progressive
democratic State at peace with itself, with its
neighbours and with the rest of the world. I am willing
to do whatever it takes to promote peace and stability
in my country.

The third basic and important ingredient of
providing security is where we have not performed
well, and it is where we cannot make progress without
significant support from the international community.
Security is of paramount importance to any country of
the world, and it is a prerequisite for the rest of the
priorities to which I have referred. The lack of security
in Somalia is compounded by the continuation of the
United Nations embargo.

The Security Council must assist the efforts of
the Transitional Federal Government in the
stabilization of the country by, first, reviewing the
merits of the arms embargo on Somalia and promptly
lifting it; secondly, authorizing the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping force with a mandate to
help Somalia to achieve fuller reconciliation,
stabilization, disarmament and durable peace; and,
thirdly, helping Somalia in the formation of the
security organs of the Government, such as the police,
military and other security forces.

Finally, the prevalence of pirates off the Somali
coast is hampering international trade and international
marine safety and navigation. As Somalia cannot at the
moment guard its long coastline, we would want to
authorize the international community to take action to
combat piracy on Somalia's high seas until we can
effectively undertake the security of our territorial
waters.

