Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my gratitude to
Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo for his briefing. We
highly appreciate his efforts and those of his Office,
which contribute to the protection of Libyan civilians
and the implementation of the rule of law.

Lebanon recalls that, on 22 February, in a special
emergency meeting, the Council of the League of Arab
States condemned the acts committed against Libyan
citizens as constituting grave violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. We also
recall the letter dated 26 February from the Permanent
Representative of Libya to the United Nations, in
which he requested that those responsible for killing
Libyan civilians be held accountable to the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

Lebanon is deeply concerned over the
deteriorating situation in Libya and the ongoing
behaviour of the discredited and delegitimized Libyan
regime, especially in Misrata, Zintan and elsewhere.
The regime is also involved in the use of heavy
weapons and cluster bombs against civilians. We were
even more alarmed by what we heard recently from
Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.

Lebanon welcomes the report on the activities of
the Office of the Prosecutor over the past two months
concerning the situation in Libya. We commend the
cooperation of Member and non-Member States, as
well as other organizations, as mentioned in the report.
That cooperation, extended in response to Security
Council resolution 1970 (2011), sends a clear message
from the international community concerning the
protection of Libyan citizens from the violations to
which they have been subject since 15 February.

Lebanon also commends the work of the Office
of the Prosecutor in protecting witnesses and ensuring
that their contributions and revelations of fact do not
place their lives in danger. The conduct of the Office
has been characterized by a high level of professional
responsibility.

Lebanon emphasizes the importance of holding
accountable those responsible for horrific crimes
against the Libyan people, who are eager to win their
freedom. We also believe that the success of the ICC in
those efforts will act as a deterrent in the future and
serve as a tool to end the era of impunity in Libya.
Here, we commend the Prosecutor's comments on the
imminent issuance of arrest warrants.

In conclusion, Lebanon looks forward to justice
that will help to lessen the frustration and grief of the
families of the martyrs in Libya, reduce the suffering
of the injured and tortured, return internally displaced
persons and refugees to their homes, and restore peace
and security in Libya.

