Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Israel
continues to build the separation wall inside the
occupied Palestinian territories. It is now 720
kilometres long and 90 per cent of its length falls
within the West Bank, at a depth of 22 kilometres in
some places. It isolates the Palestinian population and
violates their basic rights.

The completion of the wall will entail the
annexation of approximately 1,000 square kilometres
of West Bank territory, as noted in one of the
Secretary-General's reports. Thus, it is not accurate to
claim that the wall separates Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories, for the majority of its sections
separate Palestinian lands from other Palestinian lands
that have been usurped and annexed by Israel.

Israel advances security reasons to justify the
construction of the wall. If those reasons were genuine,
why should it not be built along the armistice lines of
1949? The construction is a unilateral measure that
totally disregards the recommendations contained in
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) on achieving a
peaceful settlement through negotiations and, of
course, with the agreement of both parties.

In pursuing its construction of the separation
wall, Israel is violating both the legal principle that
establishes the illegality of acquiring land by force and
the relevant General Assembly resolutions calling on it
to cease building the wall in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. The construction
also contravenes the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, which ruled that the wall
violates international law and is an obstacle to the
establishment of a contiguous Palestinian State, and
that Israel must cease construction forthwith, dismantle
the completed sections, and offer compensation for the
damage resulting from the construction.

The Security Council is required to take all
necessary measures to put an end to the illegal
situation resulting from the construction of the
separation wall, pursuant to the provisions of
international law and to paragraph 160 of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on that
issue.

