Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): My delegation wishes to
explain its position before the voting on the draft
resolution on the special tribunal for Lebanon.

Impunity must not be tolerated; justice must
prevail. Those who are found responsible for the
assassination of the late Prime Minister Hariri and for
other related assassinations must therefore be brought
to justice. Indonesia is committed to support the
pursuit of truth and justice. We support the work of the
International Independent Investigation Commission
and the extension of its mandate. We also have a strong
commitment to making a constructive contribution to
the efforts to promote peace and stability in Lebanon.

We take note of the Lebanese Prime Minister's
request for the Council to take a binding decision on
the establishment of a special tribunal for Lebanon.
The draft resolution before us today has been based on
that request. However, the Council should not fail to
take into consideration that there is no unified voice
among Lebanese leaders. The domestic political
situation in Lebanon has created difficulty for the
international community to act further on that request.

On the draft resolution, my delegation considers
that it has changed the legal nature of article 19 of the
agreement, which clearly states that the agreement
shall enter into force on the day after the Government
of Lebanon has notified the United Nations that the
07-36208

internal legal requirements for its entry into force have
been met. If the draft resolution is adopted, it will
bypass constitutional procedure and national processes.

There are no legal grounds for the Security
Council to take over an issue that is domestic in nature.
Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter of the United
Nations stresses that nothing contained in the Charter
shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in
matters that are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any State. Although that provision does
not prejudice the application of enforcement measures
under Chapter VII, the Security Council should not be
involved in an exercise of interpreting, let alone taking
over, the constitutional requirements that a State should
comply with in the conduct of its authorities.

Before taking action on the draft resolution,
which is intended to uphold justice, the Council should
fully consider the domestic situation in Lebanon. The
forceful interference by the Security Council in the
national constitutional process as regards the
establishment of the tribunal will not serve the greater
interests of the Lebanese people, namely,
reconciliation, national unity, peace and stability. The
search for justice should neither create new problems
nor exacerbate the already intricate situation in
Lebanon.

In the light of the foregoing considerations, my
delegation will abstain on the voting on the draft
resolution.

