Mr. Assaker (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset, I would like to thank you
for inviting me to address the Council on behalf of
Lebanon. I also wish to express our thanks to the
Security Council for its concern at and close follow-up
of the terrorist crime that took place on 14 February
2005, which resulted in the martyrdom of former Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri, parliament member Basil
Fleihan and several others.

This crime threatened Lebanon's security and
stability and targeted a figure who had played a major
role in its reconstruction and renaissance after years of
war. The Lebanese people and their Government were
united in condemning this crime and showed
determination and persistence in uncovering all its
aspects and in punishing its perpetrators. In this
context, we are grateful that the Security Council
responded favourably to Lebanon's unanimous request
by forming the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission, as called for in
its resolution 1595 (2005).

Lebanon expresses its appreciation to the
International Investigation Commission and to its
Head, Mr. Detliv Mehlis, for the important work
performed and for the great efforts deployed, which
have culminated in the report before us. This report
constitutes a solid basis that will help complete the
requested investigation by revealing all aspects of this
terrorist crime. It will establish justice by punishing the
criminal murderers, whoever and wherever they are.

In this regard, we welcome the extension of the
mandate of the Commission to 15 December 2005, and
we reaffirm the continued cooperation of the State of
Lebanon and all of its concerned institutions in order to
attain the noble objective to which we all aspire.
Lebanon is pleased with the contents of the
Commission's report pertaining to the role played by
the Lebanese judicial and security institutions,
underscoring the positive cooperation of those
institutions with the Commission throughout the
various stages of the investigation. We are of the view
that strengthening the performance of these institutions
is a crucial step in the reform process currently being
undertaken by the Government of Lebanon. In this
context, the Government requests the support of
brotherly and friendly States to help this reform
process.

Lebanon calls on all parties concerned to
cooperate sincerely and effectively with the
International Independent Investigation Commission,
in compliance with Council resolution 1595 (2005).
Uncovering the complete and absolute truth and
punishing all the criminal murderers, wherever they
are, corresponds to the aspirations of the Lebanese
people, as expressed by the Government of Lebanon,
with the support of the international community.

At the same time, the Lebanese Government,
reflecting the convictions of the Lebanese people in all
their policies, affirms that establishing justice by
uncovering the truth and punishing all the murderers
will help to enhance stability and security in Lebanon
and throughout the region. This is a matter of great
importance and concern for us.

Finally, Lebanon would like to thank those
brotherly and friendly States that have provided
support at this critical stage and continue to do so.
Lebanon also thanks the Security Council and
Secretary-General Mr. Kofi Annan for their continued
follow-up of the Commission's work and their interest
in the situation in Lebanon. We also reiterate our
thanks to the International Independent Investigation
Commission and to its Head for their important and
promising work. We hope that it will continue and that
it will contribute to the establishment ofjustice, which
remains our primary demand.

