Mr. Chuasoto (Philippines): My delegation joins
others in thanking Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland for his comprehensive briefing today.

Africa is facing huge political and humanitarian
challenges. Continuing conflict in Africa has caused
immense suffering. Civilians are often the main targets
in conflict situations and have been denied
fundamental peace and security. The outgrowths of
humanitarian crises usually have potentially disastrous
consequences for peace and security. However, efforts
to respond to such emergencies have often not been
given proper attention, nor have adequate resources
been provided to aid vulnerable populations in need.

Ensuring peace and security is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council. Although the
Council is the most responsive body of the United
Nations system, addressing humanitarian crises is an
endeavour that is best handled through the coordination
and cooperation of all United Nations bodies and
agencies. However, through the attention given to those
crises, the Council's leadership can spur action, ensure
sustained engagement and garner the support of
regional actors and donors. In particular, Council
action can provide the onus for achieving effective
protection against violence on the ground and for
addressing the root causes of conflict. In addition, the
Council's support for initiatives aimed at strengthening
local and national capabilities in humanitarian crises
greatly increases the chance for success.

With the impending establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we believe that the
opportunity has arisen for the Council to find ways to
contribute to strengthening the linkages between
humanitarian action and integration, rehabilitation and
peacebuilding. That will enable the Council to
strengthen its approach to humanitarian crises within
the larger framework of peacebuilding efforts.

The humanitarian crises in Africa are of serious
concern to my delegation, as are the obstacles that arise
in meeting humanitarian needs. It is clear that serious
challenges still lie ahead, especially in securing
predictable funding in order to respond to humanitarian
emergencies in a timely, efficient and effective manner.
International responses to crisis situations in Africa
need to be more forward-looking in their approach and
should be based on coordinated and integrated
partnerships between African Governments, regional
organizations, development partners and local non-
governmental organizations (NGOs).

We would like to take this opportunity to
recognize the untiring efforts of NGOs and the media
in raising the international community's awareness
about these crises. Their advocacy continues to be an
important contribution to addressing the humanitarian
crises in Africa.

Lastly, my delegation reiterates its appreciation to
Mr. Egeland and his team. We assure him of our
continuing support for his humanitarian efforts in
Africa.

