Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation wishes to express the following
views in connection with the important draft resolution on
security assurances on which the Council is about to vote.

The progress achieved on disarmament and non-
proliferation since 19 June 1968, when this body adopted
resolution 255 (1968), has been both significant and
decisive.

Today we are considering a new draft resolution on
security assurances. It constitutes a commitment to
establishing effective measures and arrangements to
guarantee the non-nuclear-weapon States that are parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) against the use, or threat of use, of
nuclear weapons by those possessing them.

This new draft resolution - along with the recent
unilateral declarations made by nuclear-weapon

 

States, which are closely, directly and perhaps even
causally linked to the draft resolution - will contribute to
the consolidation and strengthening of hope in the
international community, and will even generate newer and
greater hopes, as we go through an effective process of
nuclear disarmament. Moreover, the nuclear-weapon States
will be making a firm commitment to providing broader
security assurances, both positive and negative: they will
have committed themselves, on the one hand, to taking
certain specific actions and, on the other hand, to refraining
from other actions.

It should be stressed that this draft resolution will be
in keeping with what was initially established in this regard
in Protocol II of the Treaty of Tlatelolco. However, in our
opinion, that Protocol is more in line with the needs of non-
nuclear-weapon States.

The draft resolution is linked to an understandable
historical aspiration on the part of the non-nuclear-weapon
States signatories of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Through
the draft resolution, those countries will receive new
security assurances from those possessing nuclear weapons.

Unlike what happened with regard to resolution 255
(1968), with the adoption of the draft resolution under our
consideration, the five permanent members of the Security
Council will have offered - for the first time, as we have
already stated - a set of positive and negative assurances
to those signatories of the Non-Proliferation Treaty that do
not possess nuclear weapons.

This draft resolution, the significant advances being
made in the Conference on Disarmament and the unilateral
declarations of security assurances that I have mentioned
can be considered milestones - very important ones, in our
View - marking paths begun in 1968.

My delegation welcomes the opportunity to reaffirm
the Security Council's important role of jurisdiction and
assistance in respect of this issue.

The adoption of the draft resolution before us will also
encourage hopes for a forthcoming indefinite and
unconditional extension of the nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty, which is one of the main pillars of peaceful
coexistence in our times. With such an extension, nuclear
disarmament can become a reality of the twenty-first
century, and the cause of peace will thus be strengthened.
We therefore welcome this action.

