Ms. King (Australia): Allow me to begin by
condemning this morning's appalling attack on the
United Nations compound in Mogadishu. We convey
our condolences to the families of the victims and
express our solidarity with the United Nations and with
the Somali Government and people.

Mr. President, we are grateful to you for having
convened this important debate today, and we thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Annan, Ms. Anstey and
Ms. Grynspan for their informative briefings.

Since the last Council debate on natural resources
and conflict, held in 2007 (see S/PV.5705), good work
has been done, including by the Council's sanctions
Committees and their expert groups, to understand and
address the impact of natural resources management in
countries prone to conflict. But it is timely that we look
again at this link and at the Council's role in ensuring
that natural resources benefit rather than destabilize
countries.

The continued demand for commodities and energy
is driving growth, trade, investment and job creation
in resource-rich countries. For developing countries,
revenues from natural resources can, as Mr. Annan has
said, lead to sustained high growth and thereby ensure
development. In 2009, Africa's natural-resource exports
were worth $246 billion, six times more than the total
aid inflows. Putting in place the proper systems to
manage natural-resources revenues can deliver benefits
well into the long term.

As we all know, however, there can be a correlation
between natural resources and conflict. In 2007,
the Council recognized part of this equation: the
destabilizing impact of the illegal exploitation of
and trafficking in natural resources. That can fuel
armed conflict, weaken State institutions and set back
development.

Beyond illegal activity, though, failure to manage
natural resources transparently and sustainably can be
a factor in exacerbating conflicts or provoking new
ones. Mismanagement of extractive industries can
entrench corruption, undermine governance and State
institutions, and exacerbate tensions over revenue
distribution, employment opportunities and land rights.

Effective and transparent resources management
should be part of the international community's
assistance to resource-rich developing countries.
Australia's 2011 Mining for Development Initiative
was created in response to requests from our partner
countries to share our experience and support them in
maximizing the economic benefits from their extractive
sectors in a socially and environmentally sustainable
way.

The Security Council has a role in reducing the
risk of conflict and instability where natural resources
exploitation and management are a factor. It has taken
targeted Chapter VII measures to prevent funds derived
from the illegal exploitation of such resources from
fuelling existing conflicts, for example in Liberia,
Somalia and Cote d'Ivoire. However, it needs to
broaden its understanding of this issue and take a more
proactive approach.

I will focus on three areas.

First, the Council needs to work more strategically
with the regional and global initiatives that have
been effective in helping countries to establish well-
regulated and transparent natural-resources industries.
The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI), which already works in partnership with several
Council-mandated missions, is a prime example. The
EITI Global Conference, hosted by Australia last
month, launched new, stronger standards to enhance
the consistency and quality of the information reported
by implementing countries.

Another such initiative with a long-standing
relationship with the Council is the Kimberley Process.
That scheme has successfully curbed the flow of
conflict diamonds to rebel groups in a relatively short
period of time, since 2003.

Regional organizations are also taking forward
important work. The African Mining Vision, with
its framework for transparent, equitable and optimal
exploitation of natural resources, is a strong example.

The Council needs to forge partnerships with
those initiatives. It should seek to reference them in the
relevant statements and mandates so as to ensure that
United Nations actors in the field work with others in
assisting national Governments build transparent and
accountable institutions.

Secondly, the Council needs to have more
confidence in using the sanctions tools already available
to it to prevent, or at least limit, the abuse of natural
resources to fund conflict. Through the careful design,
implementation and monitoring of such measures, the
Council has gone some way towards minimizing the
misuse of resources to fund conflict. That experience
proves that those measures can enhance security.
The Council should apply those measures where
circumstances warrant.

Thirdly, the Council must provide peacekeeping
and political missions with the appropriate mandates
and tools to assess potential threats associated with
natural resources, assist Governments to build their
capacities to manage their resources effectively, and
work with the private sector and civil society to bolster
their efforts. Security Council resolution 2098 (2013),
which extended the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, provides a strong model.

There are, of course, other United Nations
actors that play a vital role in this area, including the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The Council should
listen to the PBC's advice with respect to country-
specific situations where natural resources are driving
destabilization.

The private sector, too, must undertake its business
in a manner that not only respects human rights but
also establishes mutually beneficial arrangements
with national Governments and local communities
to promote development and employment, which
contribute to conflict prevention.

Finally, we are disappointed that the Council
was unable to agree on a presidential statement
which could have advanced our consideration of this
issue. We regret the lack of flexibility in our efforts
to achieve a consensus outcome. Looking ahead, the
Council should continue to focus on the nexus between
natural resources and conflict prevention. We thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for making clear the
commitment of the United Nations to addressing this
also, and we encourage the Secretariat to deepen its
own understanding and analyses of these links so it can
inform the Council's deliberations.

