Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French):
France associates itself with the statement that Belgium
will make later on behalf of the European Union. I will
merely make a few comments in my national capacity.

First, I wish to thank Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello
and Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta for the clarity and the
precision of their statements. With them we can take
stock of the absolutely outstanding work accomplished
by the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) and of the progress in the
transition towards independence and in particular of
the Administration's continuing "Timorization" -
Iuse that term even though Mr. Vieira de Mello does
not consider it appropriate; it is the word one must use.
I wish to pay tribute once again to the personnel of
UNTAET. The progress achieved brings us closer to
our ultimate common goal, which is the building of an
independent and viable Timorese State.

We welcome the upcoming election of the
members of the Constituent Assembly on 30 August.
We need to work together with Timorese officials to
make that consultation a success. We should especially
mention the quality of the preparation of this timetable,
in particular the conclusion of the national pact signed
by the majority of political parties. These elections will
clearly be a critical stage in the political transition. The
international community, for its part, will see its role
thoroughly changed. There will be less need than in the
past of replacing Timorese authorities. Rather, it will
be a question of accompanying them on their road
towards independence.

We welcome, moreover, the creation on 20 June
2001 of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. The
process of discussion with the militias must also be
supported, and we thank Mr. Ramos-Horta for the
clarifications he gave us in this respect. We believe that
only the attainment of political power by the Timorese
will make it possible to progress in the reconciliation
process. To ensure the stability of the country, we
believe it is essential to promote the rapid recognition
of Timorese political power and the earliest possible
accession of East Timor to independence, once the
presidential elections have been held.

Indonesia, for its part, also has a role to play in
the issue of disarmament and the dismantling of the
militias. We welcome what was indicated by
Mr. Ramos-Horta concerning relations with Indonesia,
particularly since the designation of the new president
of Indonesia. We call upon the Government of Jakarta
to implement appeal procedures concerning the murder
in September 2000 of the three staff members of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in Atambua, and to bring to trial the
perpetrators of violations of human rights in East
Timor. The problem of violence linked to traffic in the
border zone is a legitimate reason for concern. In order
to deal with the roots of this phenomenon and control
this violence, a strategy for harmonious development
with West Timor must be developed.

We have taken due note of the report of the
Secretary-General, which clearly recounts the work and
missions of UNTAET and presents more clearly what is
to come. We note that the Secretary-General envisions
a substantial reduction in the international presence,
and we await with interest the specific figures in his
next report, in October, on the pre- and post-
independence periods.

We would like to thank Mr. Vieira de Mello for
the clarifications he gave us in his introductory
statement, particularly regarding security. In this
respect, I associate myself with the question Mr. Vieira
de Mello was asked by Ambassador Hume on one of
the paragraphs of the report.

The next report should allow us to obtain broader

indications on the expected duration of maintaining the
international presence and on the distribution of roles
between, on the one hand, the United Nations mission
to follow after UNTAET, and on the other, the United
Nations funds and programmes such as the United
Nations Development Programme, the international
financial institutions and the regional organizations,
whose role is called on to grow rapidly as the country
progresses towards independence. I have indeed noted
what Ambassador Mahbubani indicated regarding the
role that could be played by the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and he also
referred to the very recent meeting of the ASEAN
ministers at Hanoi.
