Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2004/907) and Mr. Jessen-Petersen for
his additional information. I have listened attentively
to the important statement of Mr. Covic'. I wish to take
this opportunity to express appreciation to Mr. J essen-
Petersen for his active efforts since his appointment. I
am confident that, in the future, he will continue to
carry out with distinction the mandate entrusted to him
by the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Kosovo has entered a crucial phase. How the
situation evolves there will affect the future direction
Kosovo takes and stability in the Balkans. We have
always believed that a comprehensive and satisfactory
resolution of the Kosovo issue must be predicated on
the full implementation of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). We welcome the positive steps already
taken by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to deal with the
aftermath of the March violence and to implement the
standards.

We note, however, the lack of progress in some
key areas, including returns, the protection of
minorities and freedom of movement. We hope the
Kosovo leadership will, in active cooperation with
UNMIK, make further efforts in the areas mentioned
above in order to effectively enhance trust and
reconciliation among the communities, which will in
turn lay down a solid foundation for their harmonious
coexistence. We also hope that direct dialogue between
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
Belgrade will soon resume. This is of great importance
for a positive evolution of the situation in Kosovo.

We note the Secretary-General's proposed
comprehensive and integrated strategy for the way
forward. We agree with the importance given to the
implementation of the standards and the need to focus
on the economy and security in the interest of bringing
real improvements of all communities in Kosovo. We
look forward to concrete recommendations by the
Secretary-General in this regard.

