Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. I thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, and
the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Mr. Sma'il Chergui, for their statements.
Rwanda aligns itself with the African Union position
on this subject matter.

Let me also convey our condolences to the people
and the Governments of the Republic of Malawi and the
United Republic of Tanzania for the recent tragic loss
of their gallant peacekeepers, who lost their lives in the
pursuit of peace.

This debate could not have come at a more
opportune time. In Addis Ababa, the African Union
has just concluded an extraordinary session of the
African Union Assembly, which focused entirely on the
institutional reform of the African Union. It is of central
importance to note in this debate that those reforms are
aimed at ensuring the effectiveness of delivery in the
area of peace and security, among other priorities. It
should be encouraging to us all, including the Security
Council, that the African Union is taking greater strides
towards better efficiency and delivery of services.

Africa currently hosts the largest number of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, which, combined,
account for 75 per cent of all peacekeeping personnel,
the majority of whom are African troops. In addition,
over 60 per cent of all Security Council resolutions
concern Africa. Africa is clearly a central part of the
business of the Council. That should be a wake-up
call for a more substantive involvement of the African
Union in matters of peace and security concerning
our continent.

Rwanda has made a long-standing contribution
to sustainable peace across the continent. As a troop-
and police-contributing country, we believe that, if
regional peace arrangements are adequately supported,
then we can make more progress. I will make my
statement from the vantage point of a country that is
fully committed to global peace and security. In that
regard, my remarks will focus on two key issues: first,
enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in the realm of peace and security
in Africa; and secondly, funding for peace operations
in Africa.

I think that we can all agree that the partnership
between the United Nations and the AU is indispensable
with regard to sustainable peace and security on the
continent. Our partnership must be based on regional
peace frameworks and mobilize further support for
regionally led peace processes and initiatives. Such
initiatives have yielded positive results, including
a number of contemporary cases of which we are
all aware.

Rwanda would like to reiterate its position in support
of the United Nations-AU partnership framework. The
need for cooperation among international and regional
organizations is crucial in the context of contemporary
global challenges. The unprecedented role of regional
organizations in achieving security and stability has
arisen from a mutual understanding that the most
effective method for peace attainment is the joining of
efforts and resources.

Moreover, Rwanda recognizes the importance of
close coordination and cooperation, based on strategic
assessment, planning and reporting that are, in turn,
based on respective comparative advantages, as well as
burden-sharing on the basis of collective responsibility,
to handle conflict in a timely manner.

Rwanda acknowledges the progress of the
cooperation between both institutions and supports the
idea of increased mutual engagement, as spelled out in
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. It is our
belief that, over time, with a spirit of trust and support,
this would allow for greater mutual understanding
and synergy, ultimately leading to more effective
peacekeeping operations.

We reaffirm our support for the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, particularly concerning performance and
accountability. We need to build effective peacekeeping
operations that are based on strong partnerships in
building predictable readiness capabilities in terms
of the skills and logistics required that are tailored to
mission-specific challenges.

Regarding funding for peace operations in Africa,
Rwanda welcomes the launching of the African Union
Peace Fund at the just-concluded AU Extraordinary
Summit. This is a critical step towards realizing the
African commitment to financing peace and security
operations on the continent.

Rwanda also welcomes the initiative taken by the
three African Security Council members in proposing a
draft resolution on the stable financing ofAfrican Union
peace operations, which we hope will be adopted very
soon. It is our understanding that the draft resolution
will provide a framework that will enable the Council
to further consider the financing of AU-led peace
operations from United Nations assessed contributions
and that such a decision would be made on a case-by-
case basis. If such an agreement were to be reached,
we believe that we would be closer to resolving the
issue of the sustainable and predictable funding of AU
peace operations.

In this regard, supporting the Peace Fund initiative
and the adoption of the Security Council draft resolution
on the funding of African peace operations is a great
stride that needs the support of the United Nations
and the Security Council in particular. The African
Union is also committed to enhancing accountability
in its partnership with the United Nations and
other partners. The ongoing institutional reforms
of the AU are also geared towards putting in place a
transparent accountability framework for the Union's
effective performance.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Rwanda's firm
commitment to global peace and security. We have
demonstrated time and again that our commitments are
matched with action, be it through the performance of
our peacekeepers or our political support to strengthen
the peacekeeping activities of the United Nations and
the African Union.
