The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Rwanda in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mataboba
(Rwanda) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ingvar Carlsson,
Chairman of the Independent Inquiry into the actions of the
United Nations during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Carlsson to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1999/ 1257, which contains a letter dated 15 December
1999 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council, transmitting the report of the
Independent Inquiry into the actions of the United Nations
during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. I wish to express
appreciation to the Secretary-General for having
commissioned the Independent Inquiry, with the approval
of the Security Council.

In this connection, I should like to recall that in a
statement issued on 16 December 1999, following the
receipt of the report of the Independent Inquiry, the
Secretary-General stated that he fully accepted its
conclusions. In that statement, he also welcomed the
emphasis which the Inquiry had put on the lessons to be
learned from the tragedy and the Inquiry's careful and
well-argued recommendations, which, he noted, were
aimed at ensuring that the United Nations could and
would act to prevent or halt any other such catastrophe in
the future.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Carlsson. May I, on behalf of the
Council, take this opportunity to express our deep
appreciation to Mr. Carlsson and to the other members of
the Independent Inquiry, Professor Han and General
Kupolati, for the manner in which they discharged the
important responsibility entrusted to them.

I now give the floor to Mr. Carlsson.


