Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): We are delighted that
the Indonesian presidency has convened this debate. As
we mark 20 years of the protection of civilians agenda
in the Security Council and 70 years since the signing
of the Geneva Conventions, my country, Ireland,
sincerely welcomes the culture of protection that has
been brought to the work of the Security Council.
We also welcome the strides that have been made in
increasing adherence to and, importantly, respect
for international humanitarian law. Drawing from
the Indonesian presidency's very useful concept note
(S/2019/3 85, annex), I want to make four brief points.

First, let us recognize the threshold issue - we must
listen to the voices of civilians themselves. Enabling and
listening to local stakeholders ensures the development
of strategies that are actually responsive to local need
where they are. Put simply, such strategies stand the
greatest chance of success. We welcome the focus ofthe
Secretary General's report (S/2019/373) on the ways in
which conflict affects people differently, with specific
focus on the protection needs of women, children,
persons with disabilities, internally displaced persons
and refugees. I am reminded of the powerful words of
Ms. Nujeen Mustapha, when she spoke in this Chamber
just last month (see S/PV.8515), urging the Council to
make "no one left behind" more than a mere slogan.
That is our responsibility, both in language and in law.
Let us get on with that job.

How do we do that? That brings me to my
second point - we must work to ensure respect for
international humanitarian law. Importantly, we have to
strengthen accountability for all violations. Violations,
including attacks by both State and non-State actors on
schools, medical facilities and personnel, are utterly
unacceptable. The Security Council must step up
and step in to play its role in ensuring accountability
and referring violations to the International Criminal
Court. It must also work to ensure that any referral is
accompanied by support for the Court, particularly
with respect to the execution of arrest warrants
and the critical issue of the provision of adequate
financial support.

Thirdly, the humanitarian impact of urban conflict
and the effects of explosive weapons in populated
areas is increasingly worrying and addressing it is
increasingly urgent. We welcome the focus of the
Secretary-General has put on this in his Agenda for
Disarmament, and we are proud to champion Action
14 of the Agenda. We support the Explosive Weapons
in Populated Areas Talks initiative undertaken by
Germany last year, and Austria's decision to host a
conference on this important topic in October.

Fourthly, with regard to the need to ensure that our
peacekeepers are equipped with the necessary skills
and capabilities to effectively carry out their mandates,
I agree that we have seen great strides in the normative
framework for the protection of civilians, but there
is a "but". We consider that challenges remain in its
operationalization. Collectively, we have agreed to
a range of principles and codes, including the Kigali
Principles, but to be very frank, they are meaningless
if they are not implemented or delivered on the ground.
Mandates must match the realities of conflict on the
ground, while training and resources must in turn match
mandates. Concretely, in the past six months, Ireland
has provided two training sessions on the protection
of civilians, bringing together troops from more than
a dozen countries. Like your country, Mr. President,
Ireland is a peacekeeper nation. As a country with
more than 60 years of continuous participation in
peacekeeping, we are aware of our responsibility and
willing to play our part. We hope to continue to do so
if we are elected to sit at this table for the term from
2021 to 2022.
In conclusion, protecting civilians is a complex
task, requiring collaboration across the political,
development, humanitarian and civil-society spheres.
It demands the involvement of women and men, young
and old, and it demands collaboration at the local,
national and global levels. In the long term, the best
way to protect civilians is of course to address the root
causes of conflicts, promote human rights and build
sustainable peace. That is the ideal. But until then, the
Security Council simply must ensure that parties to
armed conflict respect rules that apply even in times
of war and seek accountability where they are not
respected. We must keep people accountable for their
violations. We surely owe that to the countless innocent
victims of conflict.

