Viet Nam expresses its deep appreciation to the Nigerien presidency and its leadership for convening this timely debate. I would like to thank the briefers for their insightful contributions. Climate change is one of the greatest threats to humankind. The adverse effects of climate change, including frequent extreme weather events, water scarcity, drought, land degradation, sea-level rise, among others, can lead to food insecurity, large-scale displacement and social tension. They are also linked to the degradation of the ecosystem as a result of poor management and destruction in armed conflicts. These humanitarian impacts of climate change and ecosystem degradation have become increasingly visible in many corners of the world. In the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel region, the availability of and access to life-saving resources are diminished, and therefore millions of lives have to depend on annual emergency humanitarian assistance. Unless addressed or mitigated, the adverse effects of climate change can aggravate vulnerable political and security situations, prolong, exacerbate and even instigate conflicts and instabilities. We are convinced that managing the adverse effects of climate change, ecosystem degradation and their humanitarian and security risks should be part of our efforts to maintain international peace and security. My delegation would like to stress the following points. First, our response must gather cooperation across borders. In the competitive global situation that is emerging, the importance of consolidating international cooperation cannot be overemphasized. Special attention must be paid to countries in conflict or post-conflict situations, countries in humanitarian need, least-developed countries and small island developing States, as they are particularly prone to the adverse effects of climate change but often lag behind in response capacity. Secondly, climate resilience can and should be integrated into humanitarian, conflict prevention, peacebuilding and post-conflict strategies. We welcome the progress the Council has made in recognizing the adverse effects of climate change in 13 country-specific resolutions. We note that 8 out of the 10 largest peace operations are deployed in countries with high exposure to climate change. It is crucial that the Council base its deliberations and actions on science and ample evidence and tailor its approach to the conflict-affected States. United Nations peacekeeping and special political missions can contribute to strengthening the Council's analysis of climate change security and humanitarian risks in situations on its agenda. Thirdly, the Council's response to climate change needs to be coordinated with other parts of the United Nations systems and all its partners. In this connection, we wish to highlight the strengthening of cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in building regional resilience and adaptation capabilities. In the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), we set the strengthening of human and institutional capacity in implementing climate change adaptation and mitigation as one strategic measure of the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community Blueprint 2025. Cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN in this regard can be further explored. Last but not least, international efforts to address the humanitarian and security risks of climate change, including ecosystem degradation, must fully respect the Charter of the United Nations and its principles and other rules of international law, including international humanitarian law. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change must continue to guide national and global responses and it is crucial that our commitments under these agreements be fulfilled. Viet Nam is among the countries most heavily affected by the adverse effects of climate change. We support all efforts to address climate-related challenges, including here in the Security Council. We firmly believe that the fight against climate change cannot be won or the consolidation of peace and security achieved by any single country. It is time we all came together, joined our efforts and built inclusive partnerships to address this global challenge.
