Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our condolences to the
delegation, the people and the Government of France
following the loss of 13 of their soldiers in Mali.

I would also like to congratulate the United
Kingdom on assuming the presidency of the Council
for the month of November. We thank Mr. Karim
Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD), for his valuable briefing and
excellent efforts.

We also thank Mr. Kachi for his briefing on
behalf of the Yazidis and the rest of components of the
Iraqi people.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2490
(2019), approving the request of the Iraqi Government
to extend the UNITAD mandate for an additional year,
until 21 September 2020. We look forward to further
efforts to expedite work to identify perpetrators and
hold them accountable so that we can do justice for the
victims of the crimes perpetrated by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant.

Following the military defeat of Da'esh in my
country, we need intensive and tireless efforts, as well as
international cooperation, to rebuild what the terrorists
destroyed; to ensure the prosecution of perpetrators,
supporter and financers of terrorist acts through
international legal mechanisms so as to guarantee the
complete elimination of these terrorist groups; and to
thwart any terrorist schemes aimed at destabilizing
international peace and security. Such international
cooperation shall include measures and procedures to
coordinate the efforts of countries and international
organizations in an efficient way, monitor airports, cut
off sources of terrorist financing, track and exchange
information on the movement of terrorists and identify
their nationalities, control borders to stop the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters, and monitor and dismantle
means and networks used by terrorist groups.

We also look forward to concluding the appointment
of Iraqi experts to UNITAD in order to facilitate its
work and allow it to carry out its functions fully, as
well as well as to build the technical capacities of
Iraqi experts.

The Government of Iraq reiterates its commitment
to cooperating with and providing all possible assistance
to UNITAD through the relevant Iraqi authorities,
and to supporting and assisting it in implementing its
mandate, provided that the work of UNITAD is based
on full respect for Iraqi sovereignty and its jurisdiction
over crimes perpetrated on its territory and against
its people. The Investigative Team should collect
evidence and deal with this matter from a purely legal
perspective with the exclusive purpose of submitting
evidence that Iraqi courts in accordance with Iraqi law
and jurisprudence. Any use of this evidence outside
Iraqi jurisdiction must be pursued in coordination with
and following the approval of the Iraqi Government and
judiciary on a case-by-case basis and at the discretion
of the Iraqi judiciary, pursuant to paragraph five of
Security Council resolution 2379 (2017).

We also refer to the need for continuing coordination
with the Iraqi Government and its competent authorities.
Evidence must be submitted to relevant Iraqi authorities
to complete judicial proceedings.

Justice must be swift to redress the victims of
the crimes committed by ISIL. Ensuring that those
terrorists will be held accountable and providing
criminal evidence to the Iraqi judiciary will reassure
the families of the victims of crimes that are tantamount
to war crimes and crimes against humanity, perpetrated
by that brutal terrorist group.

Prolonging the duration of investigations would
have a negative impact on the condition and clarity of
evidence from crime scenes due to natural factors or
reconstruction efforts in the liberated areas or other
factors. The passage of time could thus lead to the
disappearance or destruction of evidence. This could
undermine UNITAD and the joint efforts of the Iraqi
Government to do justice to the victims.

My country looks forward to positive change and
reconstruction following the dark chapter of Da'esh. We
must turn this page as soon as possible by identifying
the perpetrators of these heinous crimes against the
Iraqi people and bringing them to justice.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the need to fully respect
the sovereignty and jurisdiction of Iraq. We also call
on the international community to provide all the
support and assistance to UNITAD so it can carry out
its functions fully.

