Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to welcome Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma and
express our gratitude to him for his presentation of the
report (S/2002/1223) on the activities of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). Through him, I also wish to congratulate
the members of his team; the very important start of
their activities and the success they are having will
guarantee a very promising outcome for the Mission.

It has been five months since the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste declared its independence and
less than two months since it was admitted as a full
Member of our Organization. The new Government has
been steadily consolidating itself, and has been
promoting participative democracy, in keeping with the
expectations of the international community.

The dissatisfaction of certain sectors of the
population, as noted in the report, highlights the
difficulties and challenges the Government faces in
achieving the development and well-being of the
population. We welcome the Government's efforts to
establish good relations with the other States of the
region and its participation in the Association of South-
East Asian Nations (ASEAN) as an observer.

I would like to make a few comments on the
objectives set by the Security Council in resolution
1410 (2002). Regarding the programme on stability,
democracy and justice, we underscore the work being
done by the Civilian Support Group in addressing gaps
within the administration in key areas, including
finance, the legal system and the management of
administrative and governmental affairs. As already
mentioned in this Chamber, the insufficient technical
and substantive capacity of the public administration is
a serious obstacle to stability.

The justice system remains perhaps the weakest
link in the new State. The Secretary-General's report
points out the need to strengthen the various
components of that system. It is clear that an effective
system for the administration of justice is not
something that can be achieved in a short time. It is
necessary to continue and to redouble efforts, since the
proper functioning of the justice system impacts on the
stability and the development of the State.

The need to bring to trial those responsible for the
grave crimes committed in 1999 has been raised on
several occasions in the Security Council. We
appreciate information on action that has been taken
thus far by the Special Panels for Serious Crimes and
the envisaged date of completion, 31 December 2002,
although the Panels will continue to assist prosecutors
even after that date.

We are concerned about the assertion in
paragraph 22 of the report regarding the emergence of
additional cases of serious crimes different from those
provided for in the implementation plan. These might
involve crimes against humanity and might go
uninvestigated. The fact that the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation has begun its
activities is also positive. My delegation has already
underscored the importance of the work that needs to
be done by that body, since, as is well known, there can
be no reconciliation without justice.

Regarding the internal security and law
enforcement programme, while we note that the
security situation is normal and the fact that the
UNMISET civilian police have already transferred
control of four of the 13 districts to the Timor-Leste
Police Service, it would be important here to echo the
appeal made by Ambassador Sharma at the end of his
statement regarding terrorism. It seems that the region
has been selected for terrorist action, at least according
to a large number of reports and much information.
Therefore, this is a warning that I would like to echo,
because it is clearly reflected in the report.

We have also taken note of the fact that the
UNMISET police component has been reduced by one
third, in keeping with the plan, and that training is
proceeding satisfactorily. Nonetheless, we also attach
importance to the joint assessment mission soon to take
place, in which the Government, the United Nations
and donor countries will participate, to assess the level
of training and logistical support needed and to identify
resource difficulties.

Regarding the programme on external security
and border control, although the report indicates that
external security and border control have continued to
improve - in particular, control of militia activities
and criminal activities at the border - the risk of
terrorism, to which we have already referred, is also a
concern. We associate ourselves with all those who
have expressed their solidarity with the families of the
two officers of the peacekeeping component who were
killed in the Bali attack.

The return of refugees from West Timor, which
continued following independence and which reached
its highest level in June and July, has declined. It may
be that this could be dealt with in the short term, as the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees has indicated.

The security situation is also very encouraging.
As scheduled, by the end of November, the first phase
of the programme for downsizing the military
component of UNMISET will be complete. Future
progress will depend on maintaining security in Timor-
Leste and on the successful development, through
sufficient donor and bilateral support, of the national
defence force and the Border Patrol Service.

Let me say in conclusion that capacity-building
and empowering the local population in all areas -
security, economy, justice and governance - continues
to be the main work to be done. We are pleased that, to
date, the situation is evolving within the envisaged
parameters, including the plan to downsize UNMISET.

