Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I would like to thank you, Sir,
for organizing today's debate. Our thanks also go to the
briefers for their presentations.

We align ourselves with the statements delivered
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
today. I shall speak in my national capacity.

Unfortunately, despite all the efforts of the
international community, terrorists continue to
perpetrate deadly attacks. Terrorist organizations
continue to recruit, deploying a morbid rhetoric of
hatred. In that regard, we strongly condemnt the heinous
terrorism attacks committed today in Baghdad, extend
our sincere condolences to the families of the victims,
and reiterate our support for the Government and the
people of Iraq.

Every terrorist organization produces its own
narrative and uses different ideologies in order to recruit,
attract sympathy and support, and legitimize violence.
Common to all of them are their attempts to inflict
pain and instil fear on our citizens, to create chaos and
polarize societies, and to weaken Governments. A case
in point is the counter-terrorism experience of Turkey.
Today, my Government is fighting simultaneously three
different terrorist groups: the Devrimci Halk Kurtulus
Partisi-Cephesi, an extreme leftist terrorist group; the
Partiya Karkeren Kurdistane/Yekineyen Parastina Gel,
a Marxist-Leninist organization trying to exploit ethnic
differences in Turkey and the turmoil in Syria; and
Da'esh, which manipulates religion. The latest bomb
attacks in Ankara and Istanbul took the lives of 184
innocent people and left hundreds wounded. In recent
days, more than 20 of our citizens in the town of Kilis
lost their lives as a result of rockets fired by Da'esh
from Syria.

It is counter-productive to adopt a selective
approach to global-counter terrorism efforts, focusing
only on one form of terrorism, group or cluster of
terrorist groups. This weakens our collective stance and
will not defeat the scourge. The best way to counter the
hateful ideologies of terrorists is to make our societies
more resilient against extremist narratives. Preventing
young people from being attracted by the lure of
terrorist groups is a key factor. Terrorist groups exploit
frustrations, feelings of grievance, discrimination,
social and political exclusion and socioeconomic
marginalization, and target more vulnerable groups,
such as women and youth. Protracted conflicts nourish
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. The
lack of rule of law and good governance and violations
of human rights also contribute to creating such
conditions.

Therefore, we should focus our energies on
preventive efforts to counter violent extremism and
radicalization that lead to terrorism. In this regard,
we agree that a broader approach is needed in order to
effectively counter terrorism, as stated by the Secretary
General in his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, which will be given further consideration
by the General Assembly in the upcoming review of the
United Nations Global Counterterrorism strategy.

Turkey's own experience reveals that enhancing
fundamental rights and freedoms, strengthening the
criminal justice approach, reforming law enforcement
and the judiciary, and enhancing a lively public debate
have a direct impact and an added value in this regard.
On the other hand, specific counter-messaging is
also essential. As terrorists increasingly exploit new
information and communications technologies, our
global counter terrorism responses should also have a
stronger communications component.

A communication strategy is therefore part of my
Government's overall counter-terrorism efforts against
Da'esh and other groups. A two-tier strategy is being
implemented in this regard, consistent with human
rights obligations. The firstpart ofthe strategy is to deny
terrorist groups space for their propaganda, including
measures to disable their communication networks.
To date, we have closed down dozens of Da'esh-linked
Internet sites, and in cases where the server is located
outside Turkey we have banned access to online terrorist
content. We are also conducting extensive operations
against Da'esh facilitators, radicalizers and networks.

More subtle strategies are also needed. We conduct
content-specific counter-narrative policies against each
terrorist group. With regard to Da'esh, we encourage
voices of reason and knowledge to speak up on the true
meaning of religion, and we promote role models who
can speak about alternatives to violence and terrorism.
The role of religious leaders in contributing to these
efforts is important. In Turkey, the Office of Religious
Affairs, along with various Government agencies,
plays a special role in ensuring that correct information
on religion reaches the public and that religious
teachings are interpreted appropriately. It endeavours
to disseminate messages of non-violent and peaceful
coexistence, dialogue and unity among peoples.

The focus on the role of religious leaders should not
lead us to assume that religions are part of the problem.
Terrorism and violent extremism cannot be associated
with any religion, ethnicity or nationality. Any attempt
to the contrary is wrong and dangerous, as it plays into
the hands of terrorists. Victims of terrorism also cannot
be treated selectively. Singling out the victims of a
specific group and ignoring others also bears the risk
of creating divisive perceptions. We believe that these
messages should be embraced in words and in deeds
by the United Nations system, including its Member
States.

Protecting our societies from toxic indoctrination
requires conveying messages of peace and tolerance as
part of our common struggle against discrimination,
intolerance, racism, xenophobia, Islamophobia,
anti-Semitism and discrimination against Christians and
members of other religions. It is in that understanding
that Turkey has co-sponsored such initiatives as the
Alliance of Civilizations and Mediation for Peace in
order to promote dialogue, tolerance and religious and
cross-cultural understanding to create an environment
of mutual respect.

It should not be forgotten that the suppression of the
democratic aspirations of the Syrian people, divisive
sectarian policies, war crimes and massive violation
of human rights that have been and continue to be
committed by the regime have created a fertile ground
for radicalization, extremism and the recruitment of
foreign terrorist fighters by Da'esh. In that regard, the
representative of that regime, which is also responsible
for the flourishing of Da'esh and cooperates with that
terrorist organization, is not in a position to lecture
anybody on counter-terrorism. It is regrettable that this
platform has once again been misused to distort facts.

Turkey is actively supporting global efforts in
countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism,
including within the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum,
and the Forum-inspired Hedayah Institute. Turkey is
part ofthe Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, which has a separate Strategic
Communications Working Group.

In conclusion, Turkey is determined to maintain its
approach to combating terrorism and violent extremism
in all forms and manifestations. Only with an open-
minded and just approach and cooperation at the global
level, and, most importantly, by upholding the rule of
law, human rights and fundamental freedoms can we be
successful. These considerations should be taken into
account as we prepare ourselves to review the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

