Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I wish to begin,
Mr. President, by extending the appreciation of our
delegation to you for convening this pertinent and
timely meeting on such an important subject. I wish
also to join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his important briefing.

My delegation would like to offer due recognition
to the recent International Conference in Support of the
Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza,
held in Sharm el-Sheikh on 2 March 2009, at which
some $4.5 billion was pledged by members of the
international community. Indonesia is encouraged by
the determined commitment of the members of the
international community to make a significant
contribution to the cause of reconstruction and
rehabilitation in the Gaza Strip. The scale of the
devastation in the Gaza Strip and the urgency of the
needs of the Palestinian people and Palestinian
institutions simply cannot wait.

We welcome the 12 February decision of the
Secretary-General to set up a Board of Inquiry charged
with investigating specific incidents concerning United
Nations premises or United Nations operations during
the Israeli military attack on the Gaza Strip between
27 December 2008 and 19 January 2009. My
delegation looks forward to the wide distribution of the
report of the Board, once it has been completed.

Indonesia is of the view that, in addition to the
Board of Inquiry, which has an understandably limited
mandate, an independent commission should be
established with the mandate to look into possible
crimes against humanity committed during the Israeli
military assault and to bring the perpetrators to justice.

While we await that investigation, it is important
to draw fresh attention to the horrendous humanitarian
challenge existing in Gaza, which cries out for our
emphatic response. Regrettably, the level of assistance
being allowed into the Strip by Israel falls far short of
expectations, given the needs of the people. This
situation is being complicated by the lengthy clearance
procedures for aid workers, as well as by a variety of
items having been banned by Israel. We call on Israel
to grant unrestricted humanitarian assistance to all
Palestinians who need it. The blockade should be lifted
immediately and unconditionally, to permit the
movement of people and goods.

Let me also take this opportunity to reiterate once
again our outrage at the continuation of Israeli
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory.
With the construction of settlements in the West Bank
having nearly doubled since 2007, and the Israeli-
authority-backed initiative of carrying out new
construction in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, the prospects for the two-State solution are
steadily declining.

As the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories continues and as Israeli settlers keep
encroaching further into the territories, Palestinians
will watch their land claims disintegrate before their
eyes, making a viable Palestinian State very difficult to
achieve.

Israel's settlement policies and practices, which
are aimed at altering the demographic composition,
physical character and status of the Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, are nothing but a
blatant violation of international law. The transfer of
civilians to occupied areas, whether or not in
settlements that are under military control, is contrary
to the sixth paragraph of article 49 of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, which clearly states that "The
Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of
its own civilian population into the territory it
occupies." Furthermore, settlement activities are also
in contradiction with the principle of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter. As
such, they contravene the commitment of Israel to be
faithful to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

If Israel has a genuine commitment to peace, it
must stop all settlement construction, expansion and
planning in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and dismantle the
settlements built therein, in compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

In 1980, through its resolution 465 (1980), the
Council called on Israel to "dismantle the existing
settlements and in particular to cease, on an urgent
basis, the establishment, construction and planning of
settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem" (resolution 465 (1980), para. 6).
We believe that the Council could take a similar step
by pronouncing itself collectively, and with a single
voice, to once again urgently demand that Israel
dismantle the existing settlements and cease the
construction and planning of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory.

We would also like to underline the importance of
inter-Palestinian dialogue and reconciliation. In that
regard, we commend Egypt for hosting the inter-
Palestinian dialogue. Indonesia wishes to encourage
the Palestinian parties to ensure that their national
reconciliation talks become an unqualified success. As
we have stated in the past, Palestinians have much to
gain by coming together. A unified platform will grant
them the opportunity to negotiate the future from a
position of strength and to meet their objectives. We
encourage them to seize that historic opportunity.

Our commitment to an independent, viable and
democratic Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security with its neighbours, is absolute. A just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East,
based on the relevant resolutions of the Council, must
prevail. For its part, the Security Council, in
shouldering its Charter-mandated responsibilities,
must, and indeed can, exert a positive influence on the
Middle East peace process.

The President (spoke in Arabic); I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.

