Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I,
too, wish most particularly to thank Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta for their very
comprehensive and enlightening statements. We also
wish to thank the Secretary-General for the report that
is before us.

The excellent and highly appreciated work of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) can largely be attributed to the
experience, dedication and personal and professional
qualities that Mr. Vieira de Mello has brought to his
difficult task.

The Security Council is entering a decisive period
for the future of East Timor. The elections scheduled
for 30 August to elect a Constituent Assembly are an
essential step in the construction of an independent
State in East Timor. The United Nations has no choice
but to accompany the Timorese to the very end, that is,
until they have developed local capacities that will
allow the emerging State to create the conditions for
adequate and sustainable development. The Security
Council, the United Nations system and the Timorese,
in particular, all face the challenge of contributing to
the establishment of a system of government in which
law, institutions, respect for human rights, tolerance
and respect for diverse ideologies and viewpoints
prevail and in which, we must say yet again, full,
complete and due justice is essential.

Colombia, as a member of the Security Council,
wishes actively to contribute to the construction by the
Timorese of a promising future in peace. We want
favourable results in the political, economic and social
spheres and therefore believe that our exchange today
marks the onset of a strategic debate that should lead to
defining an appropriate role for the United Nations in
East Timor. Colombia feels that, in determining the
future of UNTAET, the sole valid criterion is one that
will surely be simple to define: the specific conditions
and needs of East Timor and its people. Any other
criterion that may be brought to the debate 4 such as
budget, the needs of other peacekeeping operations,
current or potential, and so on - could lead us to draw
inappropriate conclusions. This is not a simplistic
assertion, but a realistic one, given the situation in East
Timor.

We must first decide what East Timor needs from
the United Nations and then define how to provide
what the Timorese need. In this context, it is quite
obvious that paragraphs 52 through 60 of the
Secretary-General's report require very careful study.
The Security Council will keep abreast of the elections
to be held on 30 August; once the Timorese have
expressed their political will, the Council must ensure
that its opinion is given due weight in the definition of
UNTAET's mandate and of any other mandates that
might be agreed.

I should like to ask the Secretariat a few general
questions in order to obtain an up-to-date
understanding of certain aspects of the report. First, I
should like to be a little clearer on how the presence of
other United Nations agencies in East Timor is to be
coordinated with any future decision of the Security
Council concerning UNTAET. For example, paragraph
54 refers to certain ideas relating to the Resident
Coordinator of the United Nations Development
Programme, which would surely be of interest to the
Executive Board of that Programme. How is
coordination to be established between the efforts of
such boards and the Security Council's proposals on
the future of UNTAET?

Secondly, I should like greater specificity on the
status of the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF), which, according to paragraph
22 of the report, is scheduled to be completed by the
end of the year. How will those who have been elected
participate in UNDAF? Will they be in a position to
define development priorities by the end of the year or
will they maintain UNDAF as a process focused
exclusively on the United Nations vision?

Finally, I must emphasize the great importance of
the inter-agency security assessment mission that
visited West Timor from 6 to 14 July under the
guidance of the United Nations Security Coordinator,
as mentioned in paragraph 46 of the report. When will
we receive the results of that mission and, above all,
when can action be taken on them? It is clearly
indispensable to proceed as quickly as possible on this
security issue, hopefully before the elections.

