Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would like
first of all to thank your country, Madam President, the
Argentine Republic, for holding this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also take this
opportunity to thank His Excellency Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs; Ms. Navi Pillay,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their statements.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
remains for my country, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, a subject of great concern. That is why
my delegation welcomes the interest that the Security
Council attaches to this issue, which is central to its
peacekeeping missions.

As the Council knows, in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as in other conflict situations around
the world, thousands of people continue to suffer
every day of the war. As stated here in the Chamber
last past month (see S/PV.7011)by Mr. Raymond
Tshibanda N'tungamulongo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Cooperation and Francophone
Affairs of my country, owing to repeated conflicts, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has lost more than
six million people, a tragedy that is, in terms of scale,
without equal in the history of humankind.

The war situation prevailing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly in North Kivu and
its surroundings, has led to a resurgence in violence
and new forms of crime. The massive violations of
human rights there include extrajudicial and summary
executions, the forcible recruitment of child soldiers,
abductions, rape and sexual violence, looting of public
and private property and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources.

To give the Council an idea of the magnitude of the
tragedy, Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, who visited the
region two months ago, noted in her report an increase
in the number of displaced persons, which has increased
from 1.8 million in early 2012 to 2.6 million today. She
also highlighted the 300 cases of rape recorded by the
Panzi Hospital every month.

A Government press release of 22 July reported
that serious abuses had been committed in the city
of Kiwandja, in North Kivu, by terrorists from the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23). The toll of the violence
included 10 houses and 15 shops looted, 13 young
people killed, 7 women raped and 13 people injured.
Moreover, those of us who have seen the most recent
report by Human Rights Watch, published on 22 July,
also on the situation in North Kivu, are no doubt aware
of the many unspeakable crimes committed by the
M-23 forces.

Besides the M-23 terrorists, 30 armed groups are
active in North Kivu province. I will not list all those
armed groups, but will just mention the single case of
the Allied Democratic Forces - National Army for the
Liberation of Uganda. That group, which is associated
with Al-Shabaab fighters, recently committed a number
of abuses against the civilian population in the area
of Beni. During the month of July, they temporarily
occupied the town of Kamango and looted several public
buildings, the town hospital, pharmacies, the offices of
international non-governmental organizations and all
motorcycle taxis. Several people were also kidnapped,
including the town chief, and nine of them were
executed. The thugs even attacked a contingent of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on patrol.

The situation I just briefly outlined shows the
magnitude of the tragedy inflicted on the people of North
Kivu. That is why my country is determined to shoulder
its responsibilities by investing in the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
As we have stated before, my country has made a great
effort in the conflict areas, and significant progress
has been made in terms of mitigating the threats to the
population's security and improving the Government's
management of the security situation.

However, because of the M-23 terrorists, North
Kivu continues to experience violence and instability.
Despite calls for order by the international community,
M-23, which is bolstered by the well-known outside
support it receives, continues to cut down human lives
and forcibly displace the people of the province.

My delegation would like to highlight that, in
legal terms, progress has been made in the field
of international law, in particular international
humanitarian law, international criminal law and
international human rights law. It is dismaying to note
that, despite that progress, civilians are still the primary
victims of armed conflict. My delegation believes that,
in order to more effectively protect populations, those
laws must be respected by all parties to a conflict.
In that context, the responsibility of the perpetrators
of atrocities, whether domestic or foreign, must be
clearly laid out, in accordance with the basic rules of
international humanitarian law, and sanctions against
them must be considered.

My delegation therefore endorses the conclusions
and recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/376) on ways to translate
the Council's commitment to protection into tangible
results for people in danger. In the same vein, my
delegation appreciates the relevance of the findings of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and Human Rights Watch.

My country welcomes the exemplary efforts
undertaken on our behalf by the United Nations through
the Framework Agreement and resolution 2098 (2013),
which authorized the deployment of the Intervention
Brigade. We believe that, through those actions, peace,
which is the main condition on which all security is
based, will quickly return and thus put an end to the
suffering endured by the people in the east of my
country.

My country also welcomes the most recent
declaration of Goma as a weapons-free area for
armed groups. We believe that to be in line with the
Intervention Brigade's assigned tasks, one of which
is to keep all harmful forces, without exception, from
being able to cause any damage.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that the substantial
flow of arms throughout the Great Lakes region,
particularly in North Kivu, deserves our attention.
We believe that the protection of civilians in times
of conflict can be effectively ensured only by also
fighting against the proliferation of weapons. My
delegation therefore calls for sanctions to be imposed
on States that, in violating arms embargoes, promote
human rights violations by providing weapons to armed
groups.

