Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would first like to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. I join in the tribute
you paid to the presidency of Ambassador Alfonso
Valdivieso during the month of December and to the
important contribution of the five members of the
Security Council whose mandate ended in December:
Colombia, Ireland, Mauritius, Norway and Singapore.

Bulgaria thanks you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting of the Security Council to examine
one of the most painful problems on our agenda. The
Secretary-General has submitted to us an important
report (S/2002/1299), which should become a
milestone. Bulgaria fully associates itself with it. I also
pay tribute to the extremely vigorous and effective
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu. I thank him for his presentation of the report. I
also thank Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF).

The Greek Presidency of the European Union will
shortly make a detailed statement in the course of this
meeting. Bulgaria, as an associated country of the
European Union, fully associates itself with that
statement.

Today's meeting is a decisive stage in the efforts
to end the recruitment of children in armed conflicts
and their use as soldiers. The role of the Security
Council is fundamental to those efforts, and Bulgaria
welcomes that role.

In your introductory remarks, Sir, you used the
word "scandal". You were right, for it is indeed a
scandal. We are dealing with a violation of the most
elementary of human rights: the right of all children to
live in peace and security. It was shocking to hear
Ms. Bellamy state that 300,000 children are currently
serving as soldiers.
Beyond the statements that we can make today in
the Security Council Chamber, what is important for
the Council to do is, above all, to continue its efforts on
this very important subject. One cannot overestimate
the importance of a solid framework of norms, which is
starting to be established and which has an impact on
the ground.

The report of the Secretary-General took an
innovative approach on this issue by exposing those
who violate humanitarian laws. The report includes a
list of parties to armed conflicts that recruit or use
child soldiers, in violation of relevant international
obligations with respect to the issues on the Council's
agenda. We hope that this approach will make it
possible to better identify responsibilities and to have
more precise information. Individuals guilty of
exploiting children during conflicts should not enjoy
impunity or benefit from amnesty provisions.

Bulgaria welcomes the entry into force of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflicts and of the International Criminal Court,
which constitute a cornerstone in our collective efforts
to put an end to the use of child soldiers. Those two
important treaties, ratified by Bulgaria, are a good
basis for reinforcing the responsibility of those that
commit crimes against humanity, including the
conscription and recruitment of children under the age
of 15 into armed forces and the use of children in
hostilities.

Arria formula meetings with representatives of
non-governmental organizations have also contributed
to the Council's debates on the peace process. They
indicate the need for close cooperation on this issue
between the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the various partners of the United Nations system,
particularly the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and UNICEF. I take this opportunity to
thank the delegation of Mexico, and Ambassador
Aguilar Zinser in particular, for organizing the latest
Arria formula meeting.

Bulgaria recognizes the great importance of
Security Council resolution 1379 (2001) and its
specific role in making progress, particularly with
regard to raising public awareness and the integration
of child protection questions in peace programmes and
peace agreements. Bulgaria is aware of the important
role of child protection advisers. However, the outcome
of the resolution is not entirely satisfactory. Despite the
progress made, the overall situation of children
exposed to war remains serious and totally
unacceptable.

Accordingly, we must respond to Mr. Otunnu's
appeal for ongoing Council monitoring of this issue in
line with the modalities he outlined. We share the
common concern expressed by Council members about
how to have an impact on children on the ground. The
normative framework has been more or less
established. The challenge now is to find ways to
implement it and make sure that it is complied with.
The Secretary-General said earlier that it is time to
usher in an era of application and respect for norms,
and Bulgaria supports this appeal.

We welcome the very important role played by
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in combating
the use of child soldiers in armed conflicts. The report
prepared by the coalition of NGOs is a valuable
document; it is important that the Council draw on the
wisdom and ideas contained in that report.

Bulgaria believes that the draft resolution
prepared under the guidance of the French delegation is
a decisive step. By adopting that draft resolution in due
course the Council would reaffirm its resolve to keep
the question of children affected by armed conflict as a
priority issue on its agenda. The draft resolution is
another effective step to make the world a safer place
for all children. My delegation would like to thank you,

Mr. President, for the extremely useful work of the
French delegation in preparing it.

