Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): (spoke in Russian): We very much regret having to start with this
very sad duty. I would like to offer our very sincere
condolences to our Russian friends in connection
with the tragic death of an outstanding diplomat,
Mr. Andrey Karlov, We strongly condemn this barbaric
act, which has taken place in such a tense period for
international relations.

(spoke in English)

As per your request, Mr. President, I will skip the
complimentary part of my statement. However, the
briefers deserve special respect for their performance.

We commend the Government of Afghanistan
for its tireless efforts to advance an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace process. The signing of the peace
agreement between the Government and Hizb-i Islami
(Gulbuddin) set a good example of negotiating peace
to other armed groups. The permanent members of the
Security Council, Afghanistan's neighbouring countries
and regional partners play a crucial role in this process.
We express our appreciation for their efforts to genuinely
contribute to the peace process in Afghanistan. We also
hope that the Organization of Islamic Cooperation's
Islamic Summit Conference, which will be held in
Mecca, can make its own contribution.

The illicit production and trafficking of drugs,
which is a key source for financing terrorism,
poses another great threat not just to Afghanistan,
but beyond. Therefore, we will have to adopt a
comprehensive approach that encompasses actions in
countries of origin, transit and destination with respect
to drug consumptiopn. Providing market incentives for
cultivating other agricultural products in Afghanistan
can lead to a substantial decrease of opium production.
We count on the support of the international community
in that regard, together with the support of donor
countries, to the Central Asian Regional Information
and Coordination Centre, in its measures to combat
illicit narcotics.

Trade, economic and technical cooperation among
countries of the region, as well as with regional
organizations, is a prerequesite for the economic
revival of Afghanistan. The various different transport
and infrastructure projects undertaken on a bilteral or
multilateral basis have proven to be most valuable. It
is important to fully implement assistance programmes
and commitments laid out at the Brussels Conference.
Likewise, the full implementation of recommendations
and commitments emerging from the meeting of the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process on Regional Security
and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan,
held in Amritsar, India, will be equally critical.
The humanitarian situation, which has been
aggravated by the recent increase of Afghan refugee
returns, poses another grave threat. Therefore, the
greater assistance of donor countries, countries of the
region and international organizations will be vital to
meeting such challenges. Kazakhstan is committed to a
peaceful Afghanistan and provides humanitarian aid and
technical assistance, as well as an extensive scholarship
programme for thousands of Afghan students to study
medical science, engineering and public administration
in Kazakhstan. In cooperation with Japan and the
United Nations Development Programme, we launched
the Gender Equality Project, which provides policy
support and capacity development for gender equality,
in Afghanistan in August. As a new non-permanent
member of the Security Council, we will promote
security in Afghanistan and the wider region of Central
Asia. Kazakhstan will work closely for the effective use
of sanctions mechanisms for the benefit of the peace
process in Afghanistan.

Finally, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan's
consistent support for Afghanistan and its determination
to continue along the path of stability, security and
sustainable economic development.

