Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would first like to
extend my thanks to Egypt in its capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004). Japan appreciates your
leadership and proactive engagement, Sir, including
with regional States and organizations.

We join our colleagues in welcoming the final
report (see S/2017/672/Rev.l) of the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo extended
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2293 (2016),
whose tireless efforts have been vital to the Committee's
work. That informative report will play an important
role in reviewing and shaping the Democratic Republic
of the Congo sanctions regime going forward.

We especially appreciate the dedication of the
Group of Experts despite the extremely challenging
environment following the loss of two of their
colleagues, Zaida Catalan and Michael Sharp. Zaida and
Michael's professional and insightful work contributed
significantly to the work of the Group of Experts.
Japan would like to once again pay tribute to Zaida and
Michael and to extend its deepest condolences to their
families, some of whom are here today.

We continue to believe in the importance of a prompt
and thorough investigation to bring the perpetrators
of those killings to justice, as noted in the Council's
recent presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/ 12). We
call on the Secretary-General, in his official capacity,
to establish a special follow-up investigation without
delay. We must avoid the recurrence of any such
tragedy in the future. Ensuring the security of experts
working for the sanctions committees is indispensable
for sanctions regimes.

I would underscore that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo today stands at a critical juncture,
with profound and interlinked political and security
concerns. We reiterate to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo the importance of
holding peaceful and credible elections, leading to a
democratic transfer of power by the end of this year, in
line with the 31 December political agreement.

We are also deeply alarmed by the deterioration of
the situation in Kasai and the persistence of insecurity
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including grave human rights violations
and intercommunal violence. The political leaders of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo must urgently
address those concerns.

As Japan stated at the Security Council briefing
on United Nations sanctions two weeks ago (see S/PV.8018), sanctions are not tools for punishment, but
rather a means to support national efforts to maintain
and consolidate peace and stability. Given the political
challenges and worsening security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, sanctions have
a particularly important role to play in helping to
deter, mitigate and end violence. The full and faithful
implementation of the sanctions regime, including
the recommendations made previously by the Group
of Experts, is in the interests of all stakeholders in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the
international community, including States in the region.
Today, 14 years after the establishment of a sanctions
regime in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
are still struggling with its lack of implementation.
It is therefore essential to ensure that the Committee
can revitalize the engagement of all stakeholders and
continue working on concrete measures to improve
compliance and efficiency. In that regard, we urge the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other relevant
countries to continue and enhance their cooperation
with the Committee and the Group of Experts.

As the deadline for holding elections by the end of

this year approaches, the political and security situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is growing
increasingly volatile, and may also have a major impact
on the entire Great Lakes region. Japan is confident
that the Security Council will continue to follow the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region closely. We will remain ready to act promptly
if necessary.

