Mr. Annabi: I am pleased to brief the Council on
the latest developments in East Timor, having recently
returned from a Visit there. On my previous visit to
East Timor, in November 1999, I was struck by the
enormity of the destruction and the task that lay ahead,
both for the East Timorese and for the international
community. Since then, enormous progress has been
achieved, but there is, of course, still much that needs
to be done.

In the two months that have elapsed since the
adoption of resolution 1338 (2001), which extended the
mandate of United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET), there have been a number of
significant developments, including the adoption of a
regulation on the establishment of a Constituent
Assembly and the modalities for its election, the setting
of a date for the election, the establishment of the East
Timor Defence Force and an increase in refugee
returns. There have also been a certain number of
unfortunate internal disturbances in East Timor. I will
now cover these various developments in greater detail.

First, a major milestone in East Timor's path
towards independence was passed on 13 March when
the National Council endorsed a regulation on the
election of the Constituent Assembly. In promulgating
that regulation on 16 March, the Transitional
Administrator, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, announced
that the election for the 88-member constituent
assembly would be held on 30 August 2001. Each
district will elect one representative on a majority basis
and 75 members will be elected on a proportional basis
in a single nationwide constituency. The Assembly will
be expected to draft and adopt the constitution of an
independent and democratic East Timor within a period
of 90 days.

After a lively discussion, the National Council
ultimately rejected - unfortunately, if I may say so -
a proposal to impose mandatory quotas for women.
However, a preamble was included in the regulation
which encourages the equal participation of women in
the electoral and constitutional process. The regulation
also provides for the establishment of an independent
electoral commission with exclusive electoral
authority. The commission will be composed of a Chief
Electoral Officer, who has already been designated.
The Chief Electoral Officer will be Mr. Carlos
Valenzuela, who is a respected expert and a veteran of
United Nations elections. The commission will also
include five voting commissioners, who will be
appointed by the Secretary-General. Two of them will
be East Timorese and three will be internationally
recognized electoral experts.

Also on 16 March, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello
promulgated a regulation on the establishment of the
Central Civil Registry for East Timor. As a result, a
nationwide drive to register East Timor's residents has
now begun. I was able to observe personally the
registration process in both Oecussi and Suai districts.
The registration campaign will provide the basis for the
preparation of the electoral roll. To be eligible to vote,
refugees in the camps in West Timor who wish to cast
their ballot in this election will have to register before
24 June, when the registration process will be
completed, and they will have to be present in East
Timor on polling day. I should emphasize that the
schedule for the election is rather tight and that it can
be kept only if the electoral registration process can be
completed as foreseen by 24 June.

We will be able to speak of a date for
independence only once the constituent assembly has
begun its work. There is a broad range of views among
the East Timorese regarding the possible structure of
the future State. It is expected that those views will
crystallize as the Timorese prepare for the actual
drafting of the constitution to be adopted by the
constituent assembly.

On 27 March, the National Council narrowly
rejected a draft regulation that provided for the
establishment of commissions to undertake a broad
process of consultation on the future constitution.
Following that decision, Mr. Xanana Gusmao, citing
his disquiet with the proceedings of the National
Council, decided to resign from the Council. Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta has been appointed by Mr. Vieira de
Mello as a Council member in Mr. Gusmao's place and
has consequently resigned from the Cabinet, where he
was the Minister for Foreign Affairs. As members of
the Security Council are aware, members of the
National Council cannot be Cabinet members. The
National Council is expected to elect a new Speaker
next week.

In View of the National Council's decision, Mr.
Vieira de Mello, with the support of the Cabinet, has
decided to support initiatives by non-governmental
organizations to engage the people of East Timor and
to hear their views all across the territory as to how
their nation's founding charter should be framed.
District commissions will be established to
complement the process and the work of the constituent
assembly.

I would like now to turn to the East Timor
Defence Force (ETDF). A ceremony was held in Aileu
on 1 February to mark the disbanding of the former
fighters of the Armed Forces for the National
Liberation of East Timor (FALINTIL) and the
establishment of the ETDF. As we had previously
reported to the Council, the new Force will consist of a
light infantry force of 1,500 regular soldiers and 1,500
reservists. Recruitment will take place over a period of
three years and an Office of Defence Force
Development has been established within the
Transitional Administration to oversee and coordinate
all activities related to the development of the Force, as
well as bilateral and multilateral relations.

The former Commander of FALINTIL, General
Taur Matan Ruak, has been appointed by Mr. Vieira de
Mello as Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force
and 650 former FALINTIL members have been
selected to form the first battalion. The training of the
first 250 of these 650 officers began on 19 February,
with the assistance of Portuguese instructors. Australia
has agreed to construct a permanent training centre,
which will be located at Metinaro, a city in Dili district
on the coast to the east of Dili. Australia has also
loaned rifles for the training of the Force. Work on this
training centre has begun - in fact, it began this week.
However, additional resources are required,
particularly weapons and training equipment, to pursue
this training.
Some 1,100 former FALINTIL fighters who were
not selected to join the Defence Force are returning to
civilian life with the assistance of a programme
established in cooperation with the International
Organization for Migration and which is financed by
the World Bank and the United States Agency for
International Development. The former combatants
participate in retraining and education programmes that
prepare them for civilian life. They also receive short-
term cash payments to help their resettlement.

Turning now to the situation of refugees in West
Timor, I would like to say that another positive
development among recent developments has been the
recent increase in the number of refugees returning to
East Timor. To date, over 180,000 refugees have
returned, but it is estimated that up 100,000 -
according to some estimates - remain in West Timor.
We continue to receive reports that East Timorese
refugees are subject to intimidation and that they lack
access to information on the real conditions inside East
Timor. The International Organization for Migration,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and UNTAET, with the cooperation of the
Indonesian task force on refugees, have recently
undertaken three rounds of organized repatriations. To
encourage reconciliation among the East Timorese and
further refugee returns, UNTAET also facilitated the
visit of a group of five former pro-autonomy East
Timorese leaders to East Timor from 28 to 30 March.

Early last month, on 6 March, the Secretary-
General met with Indonesian Foreign Minister Shihab
to discuss the situation of the refugees in West Timor.
Minister Shihab proposed that a security assessment
proceed to the area with a view to downgrading the
current phase V security level, which would enable the
return of United Nations agencies. The Secretary-
General expressed the Security Coordinator's concern
over the likely negative outcome of a security
assessment in West Timor at this time, but undertook to
keep the matter under review.

As regards the security and law and order
situation, until recent weeks the border with West
Timor had been relatively quiet. However, over the past
several days this situation has changed, and multiple
incidents have occurred. On 1 April, UNTAET troops
observed two suspected militia members approaching a
junction point with West Timor, west of Maliana in
Bobonaro district. When one of them pointed his
weapon in the direction of the border post and ignored
a warning from UNTAET, UNTAET troops fired three
shots at them. No injuries were reported.
On the same day, an UNTAET platoon at a
junction point with West Timor, southwest of Tilomar
in Covalima district, was fired at and returned fire. The
Indonesian armed forces in the area attributed the firing
to an accidental weapon discharge. These incidents are
being investigated. UNTAET reports that cross-border
smuggling activities, including by militia, are
continuing, which makes it difficult sometimes to
determine the underlying causes of these recent
incidents.

There have been two more incidents over the past
two or three days. On 2 and 3 April incidents occurred
along the border again, including a shooting incident
on 3 April that resulted in the death of a young woman.
Today, Fijian soldiers who are part of the New Zealand
contingent were fired upon at the southern end of the
border between East and West Timor.

Inside East Timor itself the overall crime rate
remains low, but nonetheless a number of serious
incidents occurred last month. This is a cause for some
concern in UNTAET. On 7 March members of the
CPD-RDTL, the so-called Popular Council for the
Defence of the Democratic Republic of East Timor,
disrupted a student meeting in central Dili, at which
Xanana Gusmao was present. On the same day a series
of violent incidents occurred in Bacau district, which
resulted in the burning of the local mosque and an
attack on the East Timorese district administrator and
other United Nations staff, as well as the burning of
their vehicle. Among the crowd were members of the
CPD-RDTL, as well as former members of FALINTIL.
On 12 March, in another incident in Viqueque, a fight
between youth groups and a subsequent riot resulted in
two deaths, the burning of almost 40 houses and the
displacement of some 600 people. On 17 March a
group of youths attacked two Villages in Dili district,
and during sporadic unrest over the following two days
a civilian police patrol was fired upon.

An investigation has determined that the incident
in Viqueque sprang from a quarrel between students at
a secondary school, each belonging to a martial arts
group - these martial arts groups, by the way, are
quite popular in East Timor. Until this incident in
Viqueque, the district had been largely quiet. However,
in the case of the Bacau incident it is evident that
individuals with political affiliations sought to take
advantage of discontent, which is especially prevalent
among the unemployed youth.

Community meetings have been held in the
affected districts. Among the lessons learned from
these incidents are the importance of the role of the
local communities in maintaining order and the need to
build confidence with these communities, while
making it clear at the same time that violence will not
be tolerated. Clearly, stable employment opportunities
will also be key to reducing the risk of violence.

When he briefed the Council last January, Mr.
Vieira de Mello suggested that the effectiveness of
civilian police in general in complex operations could
be enhanced. Accordingly, the civilian police in Bacau
district have undertaken a trial deployment along the
lines followed for peacekeeping troops, which means a
deployment by national contingents. In this case the
Filipino national contingent will operate alone in the
Bacau district. As I said, this is a test that will be
carefully assessed before we consider extending it to
other districts.

During my Visit to East Timor I was impressed by
the progress made in the establishment of the Timor
Lorosae Police Service. Some 450 East Timorese
police who have graduated from the police college are
currently deployed throughout the country with the
UNTAET police. Their relations with the local
communities have greatly facilitated more effective
policing. From now on, 100 new officers per month
will graduate from the academy, which is double the
previous rate. The full strength of 3,000 Timorese
civilian police is expected to be achieved by April
2003. The process of "Timorization" has also started in
the leadership of the local police, where an experienced
East Timorese police officer has been appointed as
director of the police college.

At the same time, as we have learned in other
theatres - especially in Kosovo - progress with
policing can be effective and sustainable only if there
is a commensurate development of the day-to-day
functioning of the judiciary and penal system. Since
January three trials related to serious crimes have
resulted in convictions. The rate at which the Special
Panel for Serious Crimes can bring cases to trial is
severely hampered by a lack of personnel, but in
particular by a lack of qualified translators. Similar
delays have been caused by the lack of funding to meet
the expenses of witnesses.

Before concluding I would like to say a few
words about the planning process for the follow-up on
the United Nations peacekeeping presence in East
Timor. The success of East Timor as a nation will
depend in part on its capacity to acquire at every level
the practical skills needed to run a State and to provide
essential public services. This work has begun, but we
need to continue well after independence with the
objective of transferring the necessary skills to the East
Timorese and phasing out the international personnel
now serving in the administration.

However, we must be realistic and acknowledge
that this process will take time. To give just one
example, until recently the Royal Australian Air Force
was running Dili Airport, but then this task was
handing over to a civilian company. In the absence of
the requisite East Timorese capacity, the Government
of Portugal has assumed this task and will meet the
estimated cost of $4.2 million for running the airport
and training East Timorese to take over some of the
functions in due course.

Mr. Vieira de Mello has established a working
group on post-UNTAET planning. The working group
has begun its work in East Timor to develop
recommendations on the specific estimated level of
international staffing and technical assistance that will
be required to support the Government of East Timor
after independence. The group will also determine
strategies for training and the duration for which those
positions are considered necessary. The working group
will consult closely with the East Timor leadership and
other development partners, including the international
financial institutions.

Here at Headquarters we are considering ways to
support this work. In this connection, we are exploring
the possibility of setting up a mission task force to
draw up specific recommendations on the complete
international presence in East Timor after
independence. As we have said previously, there will
be a need for troops, for a meaningful military
component, for a civilian police component, and for a
civilian component.

Overall, my visit has reinforced my impression
that significant progress is being made on most, if not
all, fronts to prepare the East Timorese for
independence. Subject to the continuing assistance of
the international community, the East Timorese should
be able to realize their aspirations for a democratic and
sustainable State. Morale in UNTAET is generally
good, and United Nations and East Timorese staff take
pride in what they do in this historic challenge that
they are engaged in.
Finally, I would like to appeal to members of the
Council for their continued support to ensure that the
population of East Timor can build upon the
investment made by the international community to
date.

