Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Mr. Annabi, whose detailed and
comprehensive briefing will help us in our exchange of
views on the development of the situation in Kosovo.

Four years after the temporary freezing of
Kosovo's status, the record of the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in that province appears mixed,
despite Mr. Holkeri's praiseworthy dedication. We
must welcome the progress made at the political and
administrative levels, but the recovery of the economy,
the return of refugees and the restitution of property, as
well as the establishment of the rule of law and the
problem of security, remain sources of concern.

At the economic level, despite the improvement
of the legislative and administrative framework, greater
attention must be devoted to job creation and to
promoting regional exchanges.

With regard to the return of refugees, the
restitution of property and the issue of disappeared
persons, we call for a strengthening of ongoing efforts
aimed at the proper functioning of established
mechanisms. In addition, the absence of dialogue
among communities and the increase in inter-ethnic
violence, crime and insecurity affect the long-sought
restoration of the rule of law. The murders of civilians
this summer, which we condemn and deplore, indicate
to us that the situation is still not stable. Measures such
as strengthening police and judicial structures are a
priority. The reorganization and transformation of the
Kosovo Protection Corps into a multi-ethnic body
specializing in emergency interventions is also in
keeping with that obligation.

Furthermore, my delegation notes that, in the
framework of improving the current situation
prevailing in Kosovo, other elements of key importance
must be taken into consideration. Those are, inter alia,
the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade; the
regional approach; cooperation among UNMIK,
Kosovo's elected officials and the Serbia and
Montenegro authorities; extending UNMIK's authority
throughout the province and, finally, mobilizing the
resources essential for Kosovo's harmonious
development.

We urge the parties to do their utmost to facilitate
the opening of the negotiations planned for this fall
between Belgrade and Pristina.

Direct dialogue between the Serbian and
Albanian communities must not remain wishful
thinking; it must become a reality on the ground and be
the driving force for peaceful development of the
Balkans region.

I cannot conclude without emphasizing the
paramount role that the various Kosovar components
must play in the quest for solutions to the problems of
the province. The effectiveness of the international
community's support - which remains necessary -
depends on that.

