Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like, at the outset, to express our sincere pleasure at
seeing the President of the Argentine Republic preside
over the Council's debate this morning. We congratulate
Argentina on assuming the presidency of the Council
this month. We also thank the Argentine delegation for
convening today's open debate on a very important topic
and for providing the concept paper before us (S/2013/446, annex), which highlights the important of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

I furthermore commend the importance attached to
the ongoing discussion of this important issue by the
Security Council and the Secretary-General.

We take this opportunity to welcome Ms. Samantha
Power as she takes up her new post and to wish her
every success. We look forward to cooperating with
her in order to achieve the goals and objectives of the
United Nations.

The continued discussion of this topic in the Security
Council and the submission by the Secretary-General
of various initiatives in that context is a reaffirmation
of the fact that the discussion on the importance and
usefulness of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations is no longer
academic or theoretical; it is a fact based on experiences
witnessed by the entire world. It is therefore clear
that such organizations play a significant role in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Our delegation therefore deems it very important
that specific mechanisms and norms be established
in order to enable regional organizations to fulfil
their mandates in accordance with the Charter. Such
mechanisms and norms must also be implemented in
order to help prevent conflicts and to resolve them in
keeping with international law, wherever they may take
place and without discrimination, in order to achieve
the primary objective of the United Nations: to maintain
international peace and security, as set out in Article,
paragraph 1, of the Charter.

Experience has shown that with the growing
number of armed conflicts and the increasing obstacles
and difficulties confronting the United Nations in
certain cases, the efforts of the United Nations require
support from regional organizations in accordance with
the mandate set out in Chapter VIII of the Charter. It is
clear that regional organizations are the best and least
costly option in terms of material and human resources
for gaining an understanding of what is happening in
some of those conflicts. They are the most capable of
analysing information relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security in each region. That
regional role has been very important in the prevention
or resolution of several conflicts.

We must therefore devote greater attention
to cooperation between regional and subregional
organizations and the United Nations in order to
strengthen the relationship between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations.
That requires the creation of an international
atmosphere that is conducive to enhancing the
capabilities of such organizations, thereby enabling
them to operate effectively on the basis of Chapter VIII
of the Charter. If such organizations avail themselves
of those resources, they will then become the front line
of the United Nations in dealing with and resolving
regional problems and preventing their spillover, as
well as in countering threats to international peace and
security. That would save the United Nations a great
deal of effort, and it could then devote greater attention
to other regions, especially in the area of development.
All of the foregoing will require the full implementation
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, specifically Article 52,
paragraph 1.

The Security Council and the General Assembly
have adopted a number of resolutions on supporting
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. They have welcomed the efforts of such
organizations in connection with the maintenance of
international peace and security and in furtherance
of the objectives of the Charter. In addition, many
important partnerships have been created between the
Security Council and various regional organizations.
Also, as noted by previous speakers today, regional
and subregional organizations have helped to prevent
and resolve conflicts as well as in post-conflict
peacekeeping, and to implement Security Council
resolutions in that regard.

However, we are still awaiting the implementation
of several relevant resolutions. Here I would specifically
mention the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council and the General Assembly on the Middle
East, where the failure to implement them has led to
continued instability and threats to international peace
and security.

Cooperation between the Security Council and the
League of Arab States on various occasions during
the past two decades has led to positive results in the
context of regional and global stability. The Council
was keen to work closely with the League of Arab
States on the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter, and
several dangerous crises in the region and elsewhere
were addressed.

The Council has relied in several of its resolutions
on the vision and perspective of the League of Arab
States, which, in turn, was also keen to implement
those resolutions. However, today we are seeing a lack
of responsiveness to the resolutions of the League of
Arab States concerning the great dangers that threaten
our region and its stability as a result of the inability
of the Security Council to reach agreement on those
issues. Here I would specifically mention the conflict
in Syria, although it poses a great danger and has
immediate effects on international peace and security.

The League of Arab States, based on its role as
a regional organization, as mandated in its charter,
and in keeping with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, has adopted several resolutions
aimed at resolving the conflict in Syria on the basis
of international law and respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights. However, despite
the fact that those resolutions demanded that the Security
Council fulfil its role as mandated by the Charter of the
United Nations and the fact that the League expressed
its readiness to cooperate with the Council in order
to achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflict, the
Council, unfortunately, has been unable to carry out
its duties. That is despite the fact that the conflict
has resulted in more than 100,000 civilian deaths
and several million refugees and internally displaced
persons, and that external militias have now entered
the fray. That has led to further sectarian tensions in
the region, threats to its security and stability, and
Violations of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Resolving that conflict will require the Council to
fulfil its responsibilities and cooperate directly with
the relevant international organizations.

The Syrian regime, instead of respecting the will
of the Syrian people and abiding by international
resolutions, has attempted to divert attention from the
war crimes and crimes against humanity that it has
committed by making desperate accusations. However,
League of Arab States resolutions are based on
international law, and we hope for further cooperation,
such as existed in the past between the League and the
United Nations, in line with the Charter and in order
to help support the Council in its efforts to preserve
international peace and security.

I should like to conclude by reiterating the
commitment of Qatar, as a member of the League of
Arab States and a State Member of the United Nations,
to further support the United Nations in all efforts
aimed at promoting the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations and at addressing
crises and achieving peaceful settlements. The Council
is aware of the efforts made by the State of Qatar in
recent years to ease tensions in several countries and to
avert and settle conflicts, including dangerous military
conflicts, that could have posed a threat to international
peace and security.

Madam President, we are proud of the fact that
the Security Council has acknowledged the role of
our country in its resolutions, and we welcome the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/12) prepared by
your country.

