First, I would like to welcome the signing of normalization agreements between Israel, on the one side, and the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and the Sudan, on the other. These developments are an important step towards more stability and peaceful relations between Israel and the Arab world. As the Israeli Ambassador said today, these developments offer new opportunities for further agreements. From our perspective, they also provide unique momentum to stimulate the resumption of cooperation and peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians. We remain convinced that sustainable peace, security and stability in the Middle East can be reached only through a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of international law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and internationally agreed parameters. Just because international law and Security Council resolutions are well-established, it does not mean that they are less important or less relevant. This conflict can - and must - be resolved once and for all, not just managed; otherwise, we will see only a continuation of enmity, violence and bloodshed, as evidenced by the recent missile attacks from Gaza against Israel. Let me reiterate Germany's condemnation of all attacks and threats against Israel by Hamas and other terrorist groups, including the repeated firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel. I regret that the Palestinian Foreign Minister has not criticized that, nor said anything about hate speech against Israel, who has the right to defend itself against such acts in a proportional manner. We are deeply concerned about the most recent decision taken by the Israeli authorities to advance and grant permits for the construction of more than 4,900 settlement building units in the occupied West Bank. That is a counterproductive move. Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under international law. They severely undermine prospects for ending the occupation and for a viable and contiguous Palestinian State within the framework of a negotiated two-State solution. I very much regret that the Israeli Permanent Representative did not mention anything about that regrettable illegal development. As we have emphasized directly to the Government of Israel, that step also undermines efforts to rebuild trust between Israelis and Palestinians in order to resume dialogue. We call on Israel to immediately halt all settlement construction, including in East Jerusalem and sensitive areas such as Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and Area E-1, as well as all confiscations, evictions and demolitions of Palestinian structures in East Jerusalem and the West Bank. We trust that Israeli annexation plans are truly and permanently suspended and call upon Israel to end the expansion of settlements. We emphasize that we will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, unless agreed to between the parties. Germany remains committed to a negotiated two-State solution, with two sovereign, democratic and independent States - Israel and Palestine - living side by side in peace, within secure and recognized borders, on the basis of the 4 June 1967 lines. That is the only viable path to fulfil the legitimate aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis for a life of peace, dignity and equal rights. We call on both sides to refrain from unilateral actions, recommit to their signed agreements, restore cooperation and resume credible dialogue. We are convinced that confidence-building measures on both sides would provide a path towards a credible dialogue and, eventually, towards serious, meaningful and effective talks on all final-status issues. Together with Egypt, France and Jordan, we will continue our efforts, and we offer our active support and good offices in facilitating a path back to cooperation, credible dialogue and a negotiated, peaceful settlement. Serious, meaningful and effective negotiations must be based on international law and agreed parameters, and either be conducted directly between the parties or under an international umbrella, such as the Middle East Quartet. In that regard, the Palestinian proposal to convene an international conference is worth exploring. We invite Special Coordinator Mladenov to consult with all relevant parties and to inform the Council about the feasibility of such a conference. We also call on both sides to fully implement resolution 2334 (2016), with all its provisions. We welcome the agreement among Palestinian factions to hold parliamentary and presidential elections in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem and Gaza. We hope that such elections take place soon. We offer our support and call on Israel to enable the holding of such elections in East Jerusalem and the occupied West Bank. In conclusion, I would like to commend the Hadassah Medical Center in Jerusalem for treating the Secretary General of the Palestinian Liberation Organization Executive Committee following a life-threatening coronavirus disease infection. We wish Mr. Erekat a full and speedy recovery. We are grateful to Hadassah for living up to its declared mission to "extend a hand to all, without regard for race, religion or ethnic origin" - a spirit that is so sorely needed in the Middle East and, indeed, in the whole world.
