Mr. McNee (Canada): I am pleased to speak
today on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand
(CANZ).

Let me first thank Under-Secretary-General
Holmes, the Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
very helpful presentation earlier today. His leadership
as an advocate for the protection of the displaced and
dispossessed is more critical than ever before. We also
wish to express our thanks to Belgium for having
convened this important debate today.

The protection of civilians is not simply an
abstract or theoretical debate for the Security Council.
Rather, it remains an essential objective in the context
of contemporary conflict. The death and displacement
of men, women and children is a deliberate objective
of warring parties and terrorist groups. Girls and boys
are recruited as combatants; civilians become
unwitting targets of suicide bombers; families are
displaced from their homes; sexual violence is a
deliberate weapon of war; and civilian infrastructure
and economies are often shattered.

The consequences of such actions play out daily
in the Darfur region of the Sudan and in Afghanistan,
Iraq, northern Uganda, Lebanon, Somalia and Sri
Lanka, to name just a few. The Council's focus,
therefore, on ways in which it can effectively respond
to protection challenges remains critical.

CANZ applauds the role that the Council has
played to advance international understanding of
protection issues and international action on behalf of
people at risk. The Council's decisions, in both
thematic and country-specific resolutions, have made
clear that the plight of civilians must be addressed
effectively as part of any comprehensive international
response. But it is vitally important that we continue to
bridge the gap between words and deeds.

In Darfur and in Chad, for example, we all have
seen an escalation of violence in recent months. CANZ
partners condemn the persistent culture of impunity
and the increasing attacks on civilians, African Union
and United Nations personnel, and humanitarian
workers perpetrated by all parties to the conflict. The
situation is further compounded by the obstacles to
humanitarian access which continue to be imposed by
the Government of the Sudan.

We are encouraged by the Government of the
Sudan's acceptance of the AU-United Nations hybrid
operation and urge all parties to implement an effective
ceasefire and facilitate the rapid implementation of that
force, which should include a robust mandate for the
protection of civilians. We also urge the Sudan to take
measures to prevent further violations of human rights,
to ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice in
accordance with international law, and to facilitate
urgently needed humanitarian assistance to vulnerable
populations.

CANZ joins other delegations in calling upon the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court. Steps must be taken
immediately to secure the arrest and appearance of two
named suspects before the Court. We call on the
Council to ensure full implementation of existing
resolutions, including resolution 1591 (2005), which
stipulates that the Sudan must cease conducting
offensive military flights over Darfur, and we call upon
all parties to the conflict immediately to cease
hostilities and actively seek a political solution under
AU and United Nations leadership.

In places such as Afghanistan, non-State actors
continue to deliberately target civilians, including aid
workers. Respect for international humanitarian law
and the protection of civilians must remain the priority
of the international community. Our resolve to augment
civilian protection in the face of such violence must
IlOt wane.

Insurgents, warlords and criminals continue to
terrorize and victimize civilian populations. In the face
of that, CANZ partners are encouraged by the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to adopt more strategic and coherent
approaches to civilian protection. Ongoing planning by

UNAMA and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to convene a protection
of civilians workshop can help create a better
understanding of the protection challenges Afghans
face and of how actors on the ground can work
together better. Clear and mutually reinforcing
protection strategies remain an important element of
the international efforts to assist Afghanistan in
achieving long-term stability and security.

Identifying and addressing the needs of the most
vulnerable, ensuring that State and non-State actors
fulfil their responsibilities towards affected populations
and are held accountable when they do not, and
developing the tools and strategies needed to help
guide international responses stand out as key
challenges. There are, however, no quick fixes to those
complex problems, but there are practical actions that
all Member States can support and where long-term
Council leadership is required. I would like to
highlight three areas in which strategic and mutually
reinforcing investments must be made as part of an
international protection strategy.

First is enhancing the evidence base. The 2005
report of the Secretary-General noted that future
reports on the protection of civilians would ensure a
greater emphasis on empirical information to reflect
the effect of conflict on the quality of life and
wellbeing of civilian populations. CANZ
wholeheartedly supports that approach. We look
forward to an indication of progress in the Secretary-
General's next protection of civilians report in
December.

Monitoring and reporting activities can provide
reliable data which assist the Council, in partnership
with other actors, to respond to crises with the right
tools and in a timely manner. In that regard, and
speaking for a moment in my national capacity, let me
say that my delegation warmly welcomes the call made
this morning by John Holmes for a comprehensive
assessment of the impact of protection of civilians
mandates on the ground, as well as his proposal more
systematically to track instances of internationally
restricted humanitarian access and to create an
incident-reporting mechanism so that Council members
are informed in real time of cases of gravest concern.

CANZ acknowledges, however, that it is risky to
collect and report on violations in the field - both for
the collectors of that information and for victims. It
can have implications for humanitarian access to
affected populations and it can put the safety of United
Nations and associated personnel at greater risk of
violence. Thus, for monitoring and reporting
mechanisms to be sustainable, the Council must be
willing to act decisively on the reports it receives and
demonstrate that there will be no impunity for attacks
against civilian populations.

A second point is that monitoring and reporting
can be truly effective only if civilian and military
actors have sufficient knowledge of and experience in
addressing protection concerns and priorities. Resident
and humanitarian coordinators, special representatives
of the Secretary-General, and military and civilian
personnel deployed as part of international peace
support operations all need to understand their roles
and responsibilities and the tools at their disposal if
they are to ensure that protection needs are being
addressed.

Finally, in resolution 1674 (2006) on the
protection of civilians, the Council stressed the
importance of developing clear guidelines for civilian
protection mandates. CANZ urges OCHA and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to make
progress in that area and to update Member States on
how resolution 1674 (2006) is being implemented in
the next Secretary-General's report. Resolution 1674
(2006) also refers to the Council's unique
responsibility to protect civilians from the most acute
threats to their personal security - genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity - including
through enforcement action under Chapter VII.
Operationalizing the concept of the responsibility to
protect must be the focus of further work by the
Council.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, when it comes to the protection of
civilians, transforming international legal norms into
practice and commitments into action is no easy task.
We must therefore be prepared to work diligently and
over the long term to achieve those ends. Critical to
that effort will be our capacity to maintain momentum
within the most senior levels of the United Nations and
within the Council to keep this issue at the front and
centre of our work. Later this year, the Secretary-
General will report to the Council on the protection of
civilians. The report will be an important tool to ensure
that our collective momentum is maintained and to
promote tangible and practical strategies to address
emerging protection challenges.

Collectively, we must ensure that populations at
risk have access at all times to the greatest protection
possible, that perpetrators of abuse will be held
accountable for their actions, and that advocacy,
monitoring and capacity-building deliver real results
and make a positive difference in people's lives. This
Council, and indeed the international community as a
whole, will be judged on its ability to protect the most
vulnerable. It is a challenge that we simply must meet.

