Mr. Costa: I appreciate the concern that the
Security Council continues to show for the situation in
Guinea-Bissau and am honoured to be invited to
participate in its deliberations. On today's agenda is
not only a serious drug issue in one country, but also
the acute threat that transnational organized crime is
posing to regional security in West Africa.

The first manifestation of this threat was in Cape
Verde a few years ago; this was blocked by rapid
intervention. For a couple of years now, the threat has
metastasized to Guinea-Bissau and could soon spread
elsewhere in the region. This Security Council meeting
will reassure the people of Western Africa that the
international community has not abandoned them. This
impression of being abandoned was shared with me by
the most senior Government officials in the region
recently. Next week, in the Republic of Guinea, Mali,
Mauritania, Nigeria and Senegal - countries I intend
to visit - I hope to hear a more positive commentary
as a result of this meeting of the Security Council. And,
of course, we will be offering to deliver to them an
even greater degree of assistance.

Today's Security Council deliberations will
motivate the entire world community to assist
West Africa in withstanding the onslaught of drug
trafficking - the trafficking of drugs, but also of arms
and people - and associated crime, corruption and
violence. The Council had already imparted a sense of
urgency late last year, and we all have acted.

Based on decisions taken at by the Council and
subsequently by a conference on Guinea Bissau, held
in Lisbon last December, UNODC has moved quickly
to provide assistance: our project office has been
established, staff are on the ground and last week we
signed a project to disburse European Union funds, a
point to which Mr. Omoregie has already referred.

The Government of Guinea-Bissau has responded
in kind and proactively. It has strengthened the legal
basis for fighting drugs and crime by ratifying the
United Nations Conventions against Transnational
Organized Crime and against Corruption. It has put in
place management structures for the oversight and
implementation of the anti-narcotic and organized
crime emergency plan. As Guinea-Bissau is still
lacking suitable criminal and procedural codes, we
shall concentrate on those areas with immediate
intervention.

What about the future? In the near term, those
measures will enable the implementation of the
operational plan prepared by the Government of
Guinea-Bissau, with our assistance, to combat illicit
trafficking through its land, air and sea corridors and
strengthen the administration of justice and the rule of
law.

A year ago, in a similar briefing to this Council, I
reported on the state of disarray of the Guinea-Bissau
prison system. We are grateful to the Peacebuilding
Commission, particularly to Ambassador Viotti, for
dealing with the most urgent needs of the Ministry of
Justice of Guinea-Bissau. The Peacebuilding Fund has
approved an urgent project on prison rehabilitation.
Thanks to that and the support of Portugal, Germany
and the United Kingdom, the central prison in Bissau
and three provincial detention centres are being
refurbished. The reform of the penitentiary
administration through the modernization of its data
management system, proper legislation, the training of
staff and the improvement of the human rights culture
in the country, is under way.

Also under way are the training and equipping of
a special counter-narcotics task force of the judicial
police, with resources provided, through my office, by

Italy and the European Union, in addition to bilateral
support from Brazil, Portugal and the United Kingdom.
That will help tackle the drug trafficking problem by
mainstreaming it into the wider security sector reform
process and generally into the work of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNOGBIS), ably led by the Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Omoregie. That is a good
example of the United Nations delivering as one.

Like anywhere else, organized crime can best be
neutralized by a strong and efficient judicial system. I
invite those present to help strengthen the capacity of
the Guinea-Bissau judicial system to prosecute
organized crime, particularly drug trafficking, with the
aim of having a core group of good and honest
prosecutors and judges.

Before closing, I would like to say a few words
about the medium term. Programmes for a more distant
future are to be planned after the new Government is in
place, following the November elections.
Representative Omoregie spoke at length about that.
With the assistance of INTERPOL, we are developing a
counter-narcotics intelligence-sharing platform for the
region and between West Africa and Europe. The model
being applied is one we have tested with excellent
results in other geographical theatres, for example in
West Asia, and for other forms of crime, modelled for
example, on the European Commission/European
Police Office regional programme against the
smuggling of migrants by organized crime groups.

In general, whether bilateral or multilateral
assistance is provided, we need to act together and
address the problems of the country and the region
together. A priority is to strengthen international legal
cooperation in the whole of West Africa through
extradition, mutual legal assistance and the
confiscation of the proceeds of crime. That is the
message we have all heard from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa, Ambassador Djinnit. His call is another alarm
bell, and it is loud and clear.

In that perspective, together with the Economic
Community of West African States and the United
Nations Office for West Africa, we are preparing for a
ministerial conference on narcotic trafficking and
organized crime in West Africa, scheduled to be held in
Praia next October. It is meant to establish a regional
platform to strengthen border controls and the judicial
7

system's resistance to drug trafficking. It will raise the
threshold of risk for criminals, money launderers and
corrupt officials.

In conclusion, the drug trafficking problem
through Guinea-Bissau is still relatively small by the
standards of West Asia, the Caribbean or Central
America, but it is growing exponentially and
threatening to turn the region into an epicentre of
lawlessness and instability. That is the last thing that
Africa needs. By working together now, we may still
act in a preventive mode. Any day or week lost may
have dramatic consequences for the future of the
region, adding a security crisis in a part of the world
already facing mass poverty, hunger and despair.

