Mr. Dauth (Australia): Madam President, let me
immediately join you and others in both condemning
the barbaric terrorism demonstrated in the beheading of
a Korean citizen in Iraq today and in extending to our
Korean colleague, the victim's family and all Koreans
the heartfelt condolences of all Australians. As close
friends of Koreans, we will feel this act of barbaric
terrorism very keenly.

But let me also thank you very much, Madam
President, for convening this meeting and offer you
what you will know are my most sincere and personal
congratulations. You are a wonderful advertisement for
your country, as you have demonstrated over many
years in mine.

I wish also to welcome today the participation in
this debate of our friends from the International Centre
for Transitional Justice and from CARE.

On the basis of our own first-hand and recent
experience, Australia very much welcomes the
opportunity to address the Council on this important
subject. Through our involvement in peace-building
efforts in Timor-Leste, Bougainville and the Solomon
Islands, Australia has seen and encouraged the crucial
role that civil society plays in post-conflict situations.

An important example is the role civil society has
played in post-conflict peace-building in Timor-Leste
since the earliest days of the international response to
the 1999 humanitarian crisis. Such cooperation was
identified as a major objective of the Australian
Government's interim country strategy for
development cooperation with Timor-Leste. Through
its development assistance programme Australia has
provided support to local organizations in Timor-Leste
to build their capacity to deliver essential services to
the people. We have assisted in the development of
civil society advocacy and watchdog groups, for
example, through the key civil society coordination
body established after the crisis, the NGO Forum. That
we see as an essential part of building and maintaining
stability in the young State. A well-informed and
dynamic civil society helps to ensure that societal
tensions and conflicts can be resolved in constructive
and non-violent ways.

We welcome the fact that strategic dialogue on
the role of civil society is a regular feature of the
planning and review of implementation of the Timor-
Leste Government's core multidonor-funded
transitional support programme. A recent World Bank
study on governance issues in Timor-Leste reconfirmed
the importance of developing the role of Timor-Leste's
civil society as a critical element of a system of checks
and balances to ensure good governance and prevent
public corruption.

Bougainville is a less well-known example.
Australia is a strong supporter of both the Bougainville
peace process and the role that civil society has played
in successful peace-building there. Through our
leadership of the four-country regional Peace
Monitoring Group (PMG) and, more recently, the small
civilian Bougainville Transition Team (BTT), Australia
has been closely involved in peace-building efforts,
working closely with the United Nations Political
Office on Bougainville.

In Bougainville, with the encouragement and
support of the PMG and the BTT, representatives of
civil society were able to promote peace and
reconciliation at the grassroots level. Members of the
Bougainville Constitutional Commission - a broad-
based body that included representatives of women's
groups, churches, traditional leaders and youth - were
among those responsible for developing a draft
constitution for the autonomous government. The
involvement of civil society brought a perceived
neutrality, shared experience and local knowledge to
peace-building activities such as reconciliation and
trauma counselling.

The Solomon Islands is an even less well-known
example, but it is every bit as important as Timor-Leste
and Bougainville. Australia, through its involvement in
the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands
(RAMSI), has been engaged with civil society there
from the outset. There is a broad range of well-
organized civil society groups in Solomon Islands
comprising all sections of the community, including
churches - crucially, women - and youth. Many are
well organized in regional areas. RAMSI regularly
consults with these groups.

A striking example is RAMSI's relationship with
the National Peace Council, an important indigenous
organization striving for peace and reconciliation for
the benefit of all Solomon Islanders. The National
Peace Council has worked tirelessly throughout
Solomon Islands with RAMSI. It facilitated the
removal of guns from communities across the country,
which resulted in the hand-in or confiscation of some
3,700 weapons, which have now been destroyed.

Our experience is, of course, not unique. As we
have heard today, the critical contribution of civil
society to post-conflict situations is well documented
in other examples around the world - indeed, often
better documented, frankly, than the three of which I
have spoken today. The challenge before the Council is
how to apply lessons learned, how to incorporate them
into the design of mandates and how best to involve all
the United Nations agencies more closely with civil
society organizations. Our experience and that of our
neighbours provides important textbook material.

