Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish):
Ukraine welcomes the adoption of resolution 2325
(2016) and appreciates the efforts of the Spanish
presidency on the comprehensive review on the status
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Ukraine fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union and would like
to make the following remarks on its own behalf.

The Ukrainian delegation would like to stress that
the statement to be made on behalf of the Community
of Independent States at today's meeting does not apply
or refer to Ukraine in any way whatsoever.

We are very grateful to the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and his team for their active leadership
on that issue. We are also grateful to the Group of
Experts for their fundamental work in preparing the
report on the comprehensive review, a document that
describes the progress made in the implementation of
the resolution during the past five years and clearly
identifies areas for improvement. It also includes
recommendations for further action to be taken in order
to achieve full compliance with the requirements of
resolution 1540 (2004).

I must note that the results thus far have been
achieved under extremely difficult conditions. On the
one hand, there is threat of access to and the use of
weapons of mass destruction and related materials by
non-State actors, which has today become a complex
reality. On the other hand, Member States have varying
interpretations of resolution 1540 (2004) and differing
approaches to strengthening the existing tools under
the resolution.

Since the beginning of its participation in the
Security Council, Ukraine has supported Spain's
ambitious objective to enhance the effectiveness and
efficiency of resolution 1540 (2004) and strengthen its
unique ability to adapt to new challenges and threats
in the field of non-proliferation. We congratulate our
Spanish colleagues on successfully completing that
historic process.

Ukraine is among the majority of States in both the
Security Council and the United Nations that recognize
the need to take urgent measures to strengthen the
existing system for halting the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Resolution 1540 (2004) plays a key
role in that regard in preventing the use of chemical,

biological and nuclear materials by non-State groups,
in particular by terrorists.

Today the potential use of weapons of mass
destruction is the greatest threat facing humankind.
Nevertheless, many significant challenges remain that
must be addressed in order to avoid a situation in which
the world's most dangerous materials might fall into
the wrong hands, either intentionally or as a result of
underestimating potential risks.
Resolution 1540 (2004) complements existing
international regimes for the non-proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery by providing a new dimension to the
issue in the context of combating illicit trafficking in the
relevant materials and by prohibiting their acquisition
by non-State actors. In that regard, we welcome and
commend the conclusions of the comprehensive review,
which clearly demonstrate various areas of progress
made in implementation, both with respect to the
various types of weapons of mass destruction and with
respect to the various obligations set out in resolution
1540 (2004). That approach will assist in defining the
specific areas for each stakeholder in which national or
regional efforts should be intensified.

Ukraine was once a nuclear-weapon State, while,
at the same time, a full State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention, as well as all export-control regimes. In
those capacities, Ukraine remains fully committed
to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
exerts every effort to that end. We reaffirm our strong
support for resolution 1540 (2004), as we did at the
2016 Nuclear Security Summit, held in Washington,
DC. There, we joined the initiative of the Republic of
Korea, Canada and Spain entitled "Promoting Full and
Universal Implementation of United Nations Security
Council Resolution 1540 (2004)".

At the same time, despite measures taken by
Member States to reduce proliferation risks, the world
is witnessing increasingly complex threats in that area.
Risks can arise not only as a result ofinadequate national
legislation, but also owing to the rapid development of
science and technology and electronic commerce, along
with a lack of understanding of such threats among
those in academia, industry and civil society.

Moreover, international legal prohibitions have
little relevance to terrorists and criminals. Unlike
States, non-State actors pursue their hostile intentions
and are prepared to take unconventional and highly
unpredictable actions. In addition, the erosion of
the existing world order, continuing and unresolved
violations of international law and ongoing conflicts
in various parts of the world continue to weaken the
overall chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
security architecture.

Over the past decade we have heard that chemical
and biological components are potential weapons for
terrorists, other non-State actors and so-called rogue
States. Regrettably, that statement turns out to be true,
as in recent years there have been reports of cases of
the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria. In that
respect, Ukrainejoins others in vigorously condemning
any use of weapons of mass destruction.

The deepening ofeffective interactions among States
and the building of synergies among all stakeholders,
including the relevant international, regional,
subregional and non-governmental organizations and
civil society, represent a crucial and urgent task on
the international agenda. In that context, we believe
that the Council's 1540 Committee will redouble its
efforts in accordance with the recommendations of the
comprehensive review and with resolution 2325 (2016),
which we have just adopted, in order to improve the
mechanism for providing assistance to States and to
facilitate prioritizing the needs in that area.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our intention
to engage constructively with all concerned partners so
as to ensure fruitful results from the comprehensive
review and further strengthen the global architecture
regarding the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.

