Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand
believes that it is right for the Council to meet today to
discuss the human rights situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. The situation there
demands our continuing attention because it remains a
threat to regional peace and security.

Two years ago, the commission ofinquiry on human
rights in the Democratic Republic of Korea, established
by the Human Rights Council, brought the gravity of
the violations in that country to the attention of the
global community. Violations were described as gross,
systematic and widespread. The commission found
that, in many cases, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea had committed crimes against humanity
based on State policies. We see little evidence that the
country's regime shows respect for international law,
including international human rights law. Respect for
the rule of law is intimately linked with international
peace and security.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
engaged in an exercise of extreme militarization
under its Songbun - "military first" - policy. That
policy is predicated on the repression of North Korean
citizens. The commission of inquiry estimated that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea devoted up
to 25 per cent of its gross national product to defence
spending. Even a minor redistribution of that amount
would significantly alleviate suffering in the country.

This time last year, the Security Council added
the question of the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to its agenda.
With no discernible improvement in the country over
the year, it is appropriate for the Council to discuss the
situation again.

I thank High Commissioner for Human Rights Al
Hussein and Under-Secretary-General Feltman for their
briefings. New Zealand is deeply concerned about the
situation they have outlined.

According to the Special Rapporteur's report
issued earlier this year (see A/70/362), 1,382 people
were publicly executed between 2010 and 2014. Some
of those victims were alleged to have done nothing
more than challenge State policies or have their loyalty
to the regime questioned. As we have heard today, the
commission ofinquiry estimated that prison camps hold
up to 120,000 political prisoners. There are violations
of freedoms of thought, expression and movement.

New Zealand concurs that North Korea's threats
of merciless punishment for the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) in Seoul are completely unacceptable. The
safety and security of United Nations staff must be
respected. New Zealand shares the concerns of other
Council members on reports of abductions, forced
labour, refoulement, human trafficking and much more.

New Zealand acknowledges certain positive
developments over the past two years. Pyongyang
has invited High Commissioner Al Hussein to visit
and to follow up on his Office's interest in technical
cooperation. There have been positive signs of
improvement for persons with disabilities, including
free medical care and specialized education.

Over 200 recommendations were made during
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's second
Universal Periodic Review, with Pyongyang accepting
close to half of them. We were pleased that the
country accepted New Zealand's recommendation to
work closely with humanitarian agencies to ensure
their free and unimpeded access to all populations in
need. Humanitarian assistance must be distributed
transparently and reach the most vulnerable citizens.

We require a collective effort to ensure that the
human rights situation genuinely improves. New
Zealand makes the following three calls for action.

First, we call on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to put an immediate end to human rights
violations, deliver on the promises made in the Universal
Periodic Review, sign, ratify and implement key human
rights instruments, open the door for discussions on
human rights and unconditional visits by the Special
Rapporteur and the United Nations leadership, engage
in the newly established contact group on human rights,
in which the country is a welcome member, and resume
the discussions with OHCHR on technical cooperation.

Secondly, we call on Member States to continue
to engage the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
on human rights, where possible. We need to do what
we can at the human level to bring North Koreans out
of their enforced isolation. At the same time, Member
States should continue discussions on accountability.

Finally, we call on the Security Council to remain
seized of the human rights situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. We should be ready to
explore options to ensure that we are getting accurate
information. The frequency of our meetings should
correlate with the country's progress in addressing the
situation.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
centrality of the Korean peninsula to the security of
the Asia-Pacific region, of which New Zealand is a
part. Addressing the militarization of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, as it manifests itself in
Pyongyang's nuclear programme and the treatment
of its citizens, is a task to which the Security Council
and the wider international community must remain
committed. To that end, we welcome the inter-Korean
dialogue scheduled for 11 December in Kaesong.

