Mr. Bourisly (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank our briefers, Mr. Alexander Zouev,
Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, the Police Commissioners of the
Missions in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Haiti, and Ms. Reitano, of the Global
Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime.
Today I would like to address three topics, the protection
of civilians, the rule of law and peacebuilding.

First, with respect to the protection of civilians, the
work of United Nations Police is an essential pillar in
the implementation of peacekeeping mandates. Most
peacekeepers, including police, work in missions in
order to protect civilians where there is a mandate to do
so. They communicate with communities with a view
to strengthening and promoting political settlements,
and their work is first and foremost people-centred
and designed not to undermine States' primary
responsibility to protect their citizens.

Where the presence of uniformed personnel is
concerned, the United Nations Police spend the longest
periods of time on the ground, and their work sometimes
includes deployment to special political missions. Their
presence, whether as individual officers or within
formed police units, makes a significant contribution to
building trust among civilians and preventing relapses
into conflict. In that regard, we want to emphasize the
importance of adequate training for United Nations
police officers, including in terms of linguistic skills,
compliance with the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, the handling of cases of gender-
based violence in conflict and the protection of children.

Secondly, with regard to the rule of law, the
police also have a role to play in strengthening legal
institutions in host countries, in security-sector reform
and capacity-building of institutions for consolidating
the rule of law and preserving stability, as well as in
ensuring that host countries have the capacity to address
the challenges that they face, including organized crime
and the various rogue groups that operate outside the
law. The police should help to address such challenges
while ensuring respect for State sovereignty and
commitment to the Security Council's mandates.

Thirdly, with regard to peacebuilding, the
continued presence on the ground of United Nations
Police, as opposed to other uniformed personnel, makes
them responsible for ensuring a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and for cooperating
with local and international organizations and
partners to implement exit strategies for peacekeeping
operations, based on successful political solutions and
integrated national responsibility, in which all elements
of society have a key role in ensuring lasting peace and
empowering women to be peacemakers.

In conclusion, the reforms undertaken by the
Secretariat, including of the peace and security pillar,
will undoubtedly make police action on the ground
more consistent in all peacekeeping operations, within
a context of unified leadership based first and foremost
on Security Council resolutions and the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. We also look forward to the forthcoming
report of the Secretary-General on police activities,
and we once again thank you, Mr. President, and the
delegation of China for highlighting the importance of
peacekeeping during your presidency of the Council.

