Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I would like
to join previous speakers in offering our profound
condolences for those who lost their innocent lives in
the tragic terrorist attack in Peshawar, Pakistan, which
only makes us more resolute to fight terrorism.

1 thank the presidency of Chad for convening this
important debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations, in
particular on the United Nations-African Union (AU)
partnership. Both the United Nations Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council have
a legitimate interest and genuine desire to build on the
various peace and security coordination mechanisms
established jointly by the United Nations and the
African Union since 2006. Considerable progress has
resulted from that deep relationship, including joint
consultative mechanisms.

Mutual support and cooperation also need to
respond better to peace and security challenges in Africa
by strengthening the AU capacity in peace operations.
With the devastation afflicting the lives of civilians
today, it is obvious that the issues of accountability
and the protection of civilians and children in armed
conflict also raise paramount concerns.

Ending impunity and promoting justice and
reconciliation remain among the core objectives, and
the United Nations and the AU need to develop a
policy framework on transitional justice, especially on
the issue of impunity and its relationship with peace,
justice, reconciliation and healing.

Modernizing the police force and enhancing
security-sector reform draw the attention of both
Organizations. A major challenge also lies in jointly
designing hybrid operations, with more comprehensive
and multidimensional approaches.

At the same time, coordination between the United
Nations and the AU is important in order to avoid
duplication or rivalry. We recognize that cooperation
with other emerging peacekeeping operations and
institutions is essential to make existing and new
peace operations succeed. Considerable efforts have
been made to move from ad-hoc cooperation to more
permanent and predictable coordination mechanisms,
and overall success depends on coherent and integrated
relations at all levels.

My delegation proposes that the United Nations
assistance to the AU under the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme ending in 2015 should continue to
cover the following areas: peace and security, capacity-
building for mediation, democracy and electoral
assistance and support for the AU Peace and Security
Council. That can be achieved through exchanges
on regional political developments and responses,
knowledge-sharing and management, strategic policy
development, lessons learned, the training of experts
and strengthening non-governmental organizations.
Guidance should also encompass the establishment
of sanctions committees, the building of institutional
memory and the strengthening of the work of the AU
Gender Directorate in the areas of peace and security.

Kazakhstan welcomes the AU decision to mark
its fiftieth anniversary in May 2013 with a solemn
declaration by African leaders pledging "to end all wars
in Africa by 2020" and "achieve the goal of a conflict-
free Africa". We also appreciate that 2014-2024 has
been declared as the Madiba Nelson Mandela Decade
of Reconciliation in Africa.

Since poverty and deprivation breed conflict, our
efforts must also be directed at achieving development
that ensures political and socioeconomic stability.
Kazakhstan is therefore carrying out several initiatives
to promote the economic growth of the continent as
part of peacebuilding and recovery processes. Those
initiatives include the Astana EXPO-2017 World
Specialized Exhibition on Future Energy and the Green
Bridge Partnership programme, aimed at transferring
new technologies to developing countries.

With the vast potential that lies ahead, Kazakhstan,
which now has observer status with the AU, has
established its Embassy in Addis Ababa and is trying to
better understand and become more involved in African
Union activities, including by deploying Kazakhstan
peacekeepers in Africa. My country is committed to
developing mutual cooperation with the AU and calls for
further fostering the political relationship between the
United Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. Although peacekeeping operations
can achieve a great deal, Kazakhstan will work with
the international community to develop more viable
and lasting political processes.

