Ms. Ibrahim: I would like to thank the members
of the Security Council for their condolences to the
family of Ms. Almaas Elman. I know that family has
a background of working on peace. Her father, with
whom I had the opportunity to work, was a remarkable
person who worked for peace, and her mother is also
doing tremendous work in peacebuilding. It is really
a tragedy and disaster for Somalia to continue to see
such losses as Somali citizens continue to work hard
to achieve peace and stability in Somalia. We have lost
so much. Ms. Elman is not the only thing that we have
lost, and if we do not try to stop that, we will lose even
more. I myself am a victim of that loss, because my
husband, who was working for peace and development,
was killed too. I am not alone in this, because there are
others, too. But in spite of that we must keep working
together to overcome our problems, build up Somalia
and consolidate a Somali State. We will prevail if we
continue on our path.

I will now respond to some of the questions. First,
there are several reasons why one-person-one-vote
elections are important for Somalia as opposed to the
clan model. If we go back to the selection methods
that we have been using, the corruption will get worse.
Some politicians talk about the enhanced 2016 election.
We say that it was enhanced in terms of corruption
because there was a great deal of vote buying and
corruption. Somalia therefore continues to sustain the
corruption status.

Another matter is the possibility of Al-Shaabab
becoming part of the parliamentarians because recently
Al-Shabaab has been calling together the elders in
areas it controls and providing training and instruction,
directing them as to whom they should nominate and
elect. That is a great risk.

The exclusion of women and minorities is another
issue. If we go back to a clan-based election, women
will not have any opportunity. Two weeks ago, there
was a consultation meeting with the ulema or sheikhs.
Their point was to exclude women's participation
in Parliament or the Ministerial Council. That is
why we need a one-person one-vote election in order
to give opportunities to women, minorities and
marginalized groups.

Another question concerns why it is not a paper-
based election versus biometric. First of all, there is no
census in Somalia. No one knows how many people
can vote. Also, there was a war among Somalis, or clan
fighting. No one trusts anyone else. Every clan says
that it has a majority and that it must have more seats
than the others. So how can that be clarified? It would
be difficult.

Another issue is that most Somalis have the same
name. Many people are called Mohamed, Mohamed
Ali and so on and there is no photograph identification,
since we do not have a census. How can we differentiate
between people? How can one say that this is Mohamed
and he is also Mohamed if there is nothing on which to
really base that?

But, most importantly, two years ago, the National
Independent Electoral Commission and the United
Nations convened a meeting with an international

organization supported by the United States Agency
for International Development. Together, we carried
out a feasibility study, which was based on the election,
whether people wanted one and if there was an election,
how good would they want the voter registration to be.
We went to all the federal member states and met all the
leaders and all sectors of civil society. We met women
and young people separately, as well as the sheikhs.
Every Somali said they did not trust a piece ofpaper. So
how can we adopt something that people do not want?

When we returned, we decided to study what
kind of biometric system would be possible for us
economically as well as technically. The Integrated
Election Support Group and its creative team provided
us the most knowledgeable experts on election
processes. We sat together several times and discussed
what kind of biometric system we should choose. They
presented us with different kinds of biometric systems,
which we studied one by one. We did not choose the
most expensive or most complex technologically but
the simplest, which is just taking a photograph so that
we know who is voting. That is the biometric system
that we are using, and it is what the Somalis want.
Some international partners are now asking why we are
not using paper. Why did they not ask two years ago
when the Commission approved it. The Commission
approved it two years. We have studied it and we know
what works for Somalis.

Regarding the election modalities, in, I think,
July 2018, the federal member states and the Federal
Government went to Baidoa and came up with modalities
that they had decided. They were then discussed by
the Ministry of the Interior, which was preparing the
draft electoral law and included them. The choice of
modalities now depends on Parliament. That does not
mean going back to the federal member states or to civil
society. They have been discussed, agreed and signed.
That is now with Parliament in the electoral law. So we
are waiting for the electoral law.

