Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Let me begin by commending
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting
on one of the very important structures of the
United Nations dealing with peace and post-conflict
reconstruction and development in affected societies.
Let me also thank His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Deputy Secretary-General, for his briefing this
morning, and Ms. Helen Clark, Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, for her
briefing. I particularly wish to thank His Excellency
Ambassador Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for his briefing on the perspective
of the PBC.

I recall that in 2005 to 2006 I was in Geneva when
the Secretary-General's document "In larger freedom:
towards development, security and human rights for all"
(A/59/2005) was being discussed and the configuration
or establishment of the PBC was actualized. The PBC
and the Human Rights Council gave a clear signal to
the whole world that the United Nations was desirous
of continuing to deepen the implementation of peace
and human-rights elements all over the world. The third
element, which remains outstanding, was the reform
of the Security Council, which we are now looking
forward to taking place soon.

Nigeria commends the Peacebuilding Commission
for all its contributions to the United Nations
peacebuilding efforts in the aftermath of conflicts. The
example of Sierra Leone is very good testimony to the
work of the Commission, which has been drawn down
today because of the success of the implementations of
various elements.

Nigeria also notes that today's briefing is taking
place in accordance with the presidential statement of
20 December 2012 (S/PRST/20l2/29), which invited the
Secretary-General to brief the Council on the progress
made in the implementation of the his 2012 report on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746).

That periodic report to the Security Council and the
General Assembly on peacebuilding in the aftermath
of conflict highlights the need to strengthen collective
and coherent efforts to prevent conflicts and to avoid
relapsing into conflict. We also support and encourage
regular interactive meetings among Member States,
through which we can exchange views on issues on
the agenda of the PBC at all levels. That is consistent
with the note by the Council President of 28 August
2013 (S/2013/515), which calls for a regular informal
interactive meeting with the members.

The establishment of the PBC was a statement of
our aspirations for sustainable peace. Its institutional
structure was designed to permit stakeholders, both
within and outside the United Nations system, to
contribute to the realization of those aspirations in
post-conflict countries. Indeed, the PBC has been
the rallying point for key stakeholders in the work of
peacebuilding in marshalling available resources, in
galvanizing political support to countries on its agenda
and in coordinating the relevant actors within and
outside the United Nations system in the promotion
of peacebuilding objectives. In particular, we must
appreciate the contributions of the country-specific
configurations, which have been rightly described as
the heart and soul of the PBC, and therefore its greatest
potential.

The PBC has continued to focus the attention
of the international community on the political and
socioeconomic challenges in countries under its
mandate. The Commission's engagement in Burundi
and Sierra Leone since 2006, for example, has helped
highlight the challenges facing those countries. United
Nations missions in both countries are now in transition
from the Security Council's security- and politically
oriented mandates to the development-oriented mandate
of the United Nations country teams.

While bearing in mind that the primary
responsibility of peacebuilding efforts rests squarely
on the relevant Governments, strengthening their
capacity constitutes the foundation for their success in
that regard. Therefore, we call on all Member States
to forge more effective partnerships with the countries
concerned by assisting their Governments in building
national capacity. We should initiate and support all
efforts aimed at putting national Governments in charge
as we continue to emphasize the need for adherence to
crucial elements such as credibility, accountability,
effectiveness and responsibility.

In that regard, we call on Member States to continue
to assist Burundi and Sierra Leone and to ensure that
both countries remain on course. The same request is
made in respect of Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and Liberia.

Nigeria continues to demonstrate its commitment
to the peaceful settlement of conflicts, sustainable
peace and development. We have stood at the forefront
of global peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts,
especially by standing by the United Nations in all
its peace ventures, including by being a member of
the PBC since its inception. From the lessons we have
learned over the years, we believe that sincere support
for national ownership should be a core principle in
post-conflict peacebuilding efforts.

For that reason, Nigeria looks forward to the first-
ever annual session of the PBC, to be held in June
2014. It is expected that the session will afford us an
opportunity to discuss how to engage key partners to
support national ownership of peacebuilding efforts. In
addition, we would like to stress the following issues as
food for thought ahead of the 2014 session.

First, in view of the fact that much still needs
to be done in order to make optimal use of the PBC
instrument, we expect that the session will consider
ways and means by which the PBC mandates can be
strengthened to attain that objective. We must continue
to work to ensure that the Commission remains central
and key to the development of post-conflict States
and that it continues to occupy its rightful place in the
United Nations system.

Secondly, we must improve on the coordination, the
coherence and the clear delineation of responsibilities
among key stakeholders in the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture so as to prevent the
duplication of effort and maximize output.

Thirdly, and lastly, we should explore ways
of mobilizing support for long-term political and
socioeconomic dimensions of peacebuilding from the
subregions and from international partners.

