Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We are forced to take the floor again to
respond to the allegations in the statements made by
the representatives of Qatar and Turkey.

As usual, the representative of Qatar made
allegations against my country's Government in order
to cloak his country as the protector of freedoms. In
referring to the state of Syrian children, he completely
disregarded his country's role in the financing of
terrorism and its support for terrorist groups operating
in my country.

The facts regarding the Qatari regime's involvement
in providing support to jihadist extremist groups in
Syria have been documented and verified in various
international reports, including a report by CNN in
June. Its role has been described as that of a key ally
of the United States in financing Wahabist terrorist
groups, including groups linked to Al-Qaida, such as
the Nusra Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. Other reports refer to the involvement of the
Qatari regime and the connection of some of its sheikhs
to Al-Qaida.

The children that the representative of Qatar
referred to died because of Qatar's support for
terrorist groups. That clearly reflects the hypocrisy
of Qatar's approach with regard to the fate of children
in Syria. The Syrian people will never forget the
crimes committed by the sheikhs, supported by their
petrodollars in Qatar. Those responsible for those
crimes should be brought to justice. The Syrian people
will not forgive the hypocrites who contributed to their
suffering - those who shed crocodile tears for Syrian
children while giving the green light to those who kill
children in Syria.

As for the representative of Turkey, we are puzzled
by her feigned surprise with regard to the fate of
children in our country. But perhaps Turkey believes
that the constant attacks against Syrian civilians by
terrorist groups supported by Turkey and the facilitation
of access to Syria across Turkish borders for thousands
of terrorists is the best way to protect Syrian children.

