Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): I should like to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, and the Republic of Ireland, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. In the same vein, I
would like to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte of France, for a very
successful presidency in September.

I would like take this opportunity to felicitate
Guinea, Cameroon, the Syrian Arab Republic, Bulgaria
and Mexico on their election to the Council as non-
permanent members for the period 2002-2003. Nigeria
looks forward to working closely with them, as it has
done with the outgoing members of the Council.

The important issue before the Council today is
Somalia. The situation in Somalia continues to engage
the attention of the international community, and our
Organization in particular, as it has done over the past
decade. In a presidential statement issued in November
1999, the Council reaffirmed its commitment to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation
in Somalia, bearing in mind respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and unity of
Somalia, in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Council also
expressed its concern at the absence of a central
authority, which had exacerbated the dire political,
economic and security situation in the country.

In considering the plight of this State Member of
our Organization, and the way forward in resolving its
problems, the Secretary-General, in fulfilment of a
Council mandate, has rendered to the Council his most
recent report on the situation in Somalia.

In the period between the issuance of the current
report, contained in document S/2001/963, and the
previous one, contained in document S/2000/l2ll,
issued in December 2000, significant developments
have occurred in Somalia. The internal political
situation has evolved to the extent that the Transitional
National Government (TNG), led by President
Abdikassim Salad Hassan, has begun to take hold and
put in place the infrastructures of administration and a
functioning State. A vivid and eloquent example of this
happy development is the presence among us of the
Permanent Representative of Somalia. It is, without
doubt, a good omen that, after many years of effective
representation being in abeyance, Somalia is finally
able to send an Ambassador to the United Nations. Mr.
Ali Khalif Galaydh, the Prime Minister of Somalia, is
also in this great Chamber today, participating in and
listening to this debate on the situation in his country.

My delegation would like to reiterate its support
for the peace process that has made the present
situation possible. In this regard, Nigeria would like to
pay tribute to President Guelleh of Djibouti for his
dedicated and tireless peace initiatives with regard to
Somalia, which have led directly to the establishment
of the TNG. It is worthy of note and praise that this
fruitful initiative enjoyed the support of the United
Nations, the Organization of African Unity, the League
of Arab States and the European Union.

In the clearly daunting task of moving the peace
process forward and creating a more stable
environment in the country, the inclination of the TNG
to reach out and bring on board all the parties yet to
accept its authority and control over the entire country
is most commendable. Nigeria believes that all
Somalis, as stakeholders in the peace of their country,
must put aside all parochial considerations and fully
embrace dialogue. In the view of my delegation, this
will pave the way for lasting peace, stability, national
rehabilitation and reconstruction for Somalia. The
leaders of Africa, at the thirty-seventh summit of the
OAU, held in Lusaka, Zambia, in July 2001, affirmed
this position. The summit reiterated Africa's
commitment to the unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Somalia. It expressed its support for the
Arta process and called on the TNG to intensify efforts
to build upon it with the support of the United Nations,
in cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.

On the issue of the humanitarian and
development situation in Somalia, and the response to
it by the international community, the Secretary-
General's report offers a grim and disturbing
assessment. Food security in the country, especially in
the southern part, has deteriorated as a result of a
combination of factors, such as drought and other
natural causes. As a consequence, an estimated 750,000
people are in danger of starvation and therefore in need
of international food assistance. This situation is
compounded by the prevalence of diseases such as
cholera, as well as a lack of water and basic
infrastructure. Although the United Nations and its
partners have contributed to alleviating the emergency
situation, much remains to be done if the humanitarian
and development challenges facing Somalia are to be
fully confronted and the TNG is to be given a fighting
chance of consolidating the peace in the country.

In this regard, it is particularly disturbing that,
according to the Secretary-General's report, only $20.7
million - 16 per cent of the $126 million requested for
the Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for 2001 f has
been provided by Member States. This assistance, as
we all know, is required for humanitarian, recovery and
development activities in the country.

The Secretary-General's report also asserts that
the security situation in Somalia has not improved
since February, when an earlier security assessment of
Mogadishu was undertaken. It concludes, in paragraph
72, that the time is not ripe for a United Nations post-
conflict peace-building office for Somalia, as there is
"no single authority in the country that can assure
security and unimpeded access to the United Nations
even in Mogadishu".

The question that may be asked is what the
United Nations and the international community at
large can and should do to see Somalia through this
delicate and critical transition period. I am of the firm
belief that the peace process must be given full support
and encouragement. In the View of my delegation, one
definite way of manifesting such support would be
through the mobilization of necessary material
resources, as well as the taking of symbolic, yet
powerful, steps on behalf of the peace process.
Peace must be made attractive and irresistible to
all, including those who otherwise might have little
interest in embracing it. Nigeria believes that the
United Nations must lead the way and be in the
vanguard of this effort. It must see post-conflict peace-
building as an urgent challenge in Somalia if that
country is to enjoy lasting peace.

In this regard, my delegation urges the Security
Council to urgently undertake a fact-finding mission to
Somalia in order to ascertain the situation on the
ground. These are hopeful times for Somalia. Many of us
have waited long for this moment. We must not allow
this opportunity to slip away. Somalia must never again
be allowed to witness the horrors of the recent past.

