I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, Mr. Qu Dongyu and Mr. Beasley for their briefings. Let me also thank their teams in the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Food Programme, respectively, for their untiring efforts on the ground. Viet Nam joined the Dominican Republic and others in requesting today's briefing to discuss the alarming situation of conflict-induced hunger, in particular with regard to the four largest food crises reported by OCHA, namely, the situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Yemen, north-eastern Nigeria and South Sudan. In those cases, the fragility of peace and security at different levels are compounded by such factors as poverty, food insecurity, diseases, natural disasters, the negative impacts of climate change, poor access to aid and funding and the economic shocks caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The World Food Programme has estimated that, by the end of 2020, 265 million people will face acute food insecurity. This is a concerning number. Without a healthy population, how can peace and development be sustained? We often say that children are the future. What will be the future of a country when millions of children suffer from acute malnutrition and are at risk of under-five mortality? Conflicts and violence continue to be one of the major drivers of food insecurity. They destroy crops, livestock and critical food infrastructure and impede humanitarian assistance. Food insecurity in turn can create tension, prolong conflicts, breed new ones and hinder reconstruction. My delegation reiterates the need to break the vicious cycle between armed conflict and hunger and would like to highlight the following points. First, respect for international humanitarian law is a must in all situations of armed conflicts. We call on parties to armed conflicts to ensure the protection of civilians, in particular women, children and the most vulnerable; ensure unhindered and unimpeded humanitarian assistance to the people in need; and guarantee the safety of impartial humanitarian and essential health workers. Civilian infrastructure indispensable to agriculture and food production and distribution, which is critical to the survival of the civilian population, must be protected. Secondly, there will be no sustainable solution to these crises unless we address the root causes of conflict and advance dialogue among relevant parties to find lasting political solutions. The Security Council should keep up its primary responsibility to maintain international peace and security. We reiterate the call on all parties to armed conflicts to adhere to the Security Council's demand for an immediate cessation of hostilities to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. Thirdly, in the times of the COVID-19 pandemic, a solution to food insecurity in countries in conflict situations is made more challenging. Given the fact that resources tend to stretch domestically, it is crucial to strengthen international humanitarian assistance, in funding and in kind, and to coordinate our joint efforts. International and regional organizations, as well as countries in and outside the regions, all have a role to play in this regard. We must support relevant countries, especially those affected by armed conflicts, in building resilience, guaranteeing the availability and accessibility of food, and enhancing adaptation capabilities in the face of multidimensional global challenges. The needs of vulnerable population, especially children and women, must be adequately addressed. Food security has proved to be highly correlated with international security in certain situations. The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated food and security risks. This is the time to foster greater collaboration among Governments, international and regional organizations, the private sector and other stakeholders to ensure accessible, safe, nutritious foods for all, especially the most vulnerable in conflict situations.
