Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by congratulating the Spanish delegation
on its outstanding leadership last month and assure you,
Mr. President, of the French delegation's full support in
your work.

At the outset, I would like to thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her tenth report and her briefing, and
to affirm France's support for the Prosecutor and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) as a whole. While
the Council was able to adopt resolution 1970 (2011)
unanimously, giving the ICC one of the most important
tasks there can be, Ms. Bensouda's briefing confirms
the importance of ensuring that the Council remain
mobilized to help Libya - which is still going through
a period of instability and uncertainty whose chief
victims are Libyans themselves - get back on a path to
civic peace and justice. A careful reading of her tenth
report compels three conclusions.

The first is the importance of continuing to appeal
to the Libyan authorities to cooperate with the Court
above all. That cooperation will be crucial to ending
a long period of impunity in Libya and enabling the
Court to fulfil its mandate. The Court had jurisdiction
to try Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and requested his
surrender to the Court in accordance with the arrest
warrant issued on 27 June 2011. The Tripoli Court of
Assize's death sentence for Mr. Al-Qadhafi, handed
down on 28 July, is doubly regrettable in that regard,
and the Security Council must step up its efforts to
ensure that Mr. Al-Qadhafi is surrendered to the Court.
Resolution 2238 (2015) of 10 September also takes due
note of the request of the Prosecutor to the Pre-Trial
Chamber dated 30 July that Libya immediately
surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court.

Concerning Abdullah Al-Senussi, on 11 October
2013 Pre-Trial Chamber I decided that his case was
inadmissible before the Court. However, France shares
the concerns expressed by several of our colleagues
and the Office of the Prosecutor about the allegations
of torture of Mr. Al-Senussi in Al-Hadba prison. Here
we should recall the relevant provisions of resolution
2238 (2015), which condemns the acts of torture,
mistreatment and deaths by torture inflicted in some
detention centres in Libya. We should also note the
pronouncements made on 28 July by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights regarding lack
of respect for the right to a fair trial as guaranteed by
international law. The Prosecutor's Office emphasizes
that if those allegations are true, they could justify
a reopening of the case on the basis of the relevant
articles of the Rome Statute. We should all remain very
vigilant on this point.

France notes that despite the prevailing instability in
Libya, the Prosecutor has managed to have discussions
with Libya's Prosecutor General and has continued
to implement the memorandum of understanding on
burden-sharing between the Court and the Libyan
authorities, signed in November 2013, and she notes
that this is a positive and encouraging sign.

Our second conclusion is that we cannot allow the
multiple crimes committed since 15 February 2011 to
go unpunished. In that regard, France paid particularly
close attention to the paragraph in the report that
emphasizes that the crimes attributed to members of
Daesh fall under the prima facie jurisdiction of the
Court, on the basis of resolutions 2213 (2015) and 2238
(2015). We can only encourage Prosecutor Bensouda
to pursue her investigations and inquiries into such
crimes, which are an outrage to the human conscience.

Our third and last conclusion is that we must
provide practical support to the Libyan authorities,
particularly in the area of justice and rebuilding
the rule of law. That goal makes the formation of a
Government of national unity more urgent than ever.
After months of negotiations, and thanks to the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Bernardino Leo'n, a compromise on a final text
was reached and capped by the announcement of the
formation of a national unity Government headed by
Mr. Fayez Sarraj as Prime Minister. There is no time
left to lose. We urge all the parties to endorse the
political agreement in order to immediately enable the
formation of a Government of national unity. That is
the only way that peace and stability can be restored in
Libya, as its people are demanding.

In that regard, we welcome the appointment of
Mr. Martin Kobler as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. France reaffirms its full support for
the United Nations mediation in Libya and will support
the efforts of Mr. Kobler as it has those of Mr. Leo'n,
whom we thank for his work. Through tenacity and
dedication he has succeeded in making major steps
towards an inter-Libyan agreement.

The challenges and expectations in Libya are still
huge, both for the International Criminal Court and the
Libyan authorities. The Prosecutor has demonstrated
her full willingness to act. It is up to the Council to
do everything possible to facilitate the success of an
inter-Libyan political dialogue and to help the Libyan
authorities cooperate fully with the Prosecutor.

