Mr. Miiftiioglu (Turkey): We join our colleagues
in thanking Under-Secretaries-General Amos and
Le Roy, as well as Assistant Secretary-General
Simonovic'.

The Council is holding this meeting today against
the backdrop of the historic events that are sweeping
the Middle East and North Africa. The dynamics of
change that have been set in motion by the democratic
aspirations of the masses and the transformation we are
witnessing as a result are irreversible. Cognizant of the
fact that fundamental change never comes about easily,
Turkey nevertheless is seriously concerned about the
loss of civilian life and the ongoing suffering of
civilian populations on a daily basis throughout the
unfolding of these dramatic events.

Allow me to emphasize that Turkey condemns
any and all deliberate attacks on civilians and the
deaths resulting from the indiscriminate and excessive
use of force. We are aware that, as always, the primary
obligation for protecting civilians lies with States.
However, the international community also has a
responsibility to help protect civilians in situations
where States openly fail to do so. That is essentially
what happened in Libya. The international community
cannot, and could not, simply look away when civilians
are, and were being, targeted.

Turkey has played an active role from the very
beginning of the crisis, both to alleviate the suffering
of the Libyan people and to bring about a rapid
political resolution to the conflict. While we are taking
part in NATO operations based on resolutions 1970
(2011) and 1973 (2011), our humanitarian assistance to
Libyans also continues, both bilaterally and in
cooperation with partners. One of the three pillars of
the road map that we have proposed is the formation of
secure humanitarian zones that would provide
unimpeded humanitarian aid flow to all Libyans
without discrimination. Establishing a genuine
ceasefire and setting in motion an inclusive political
process are also key to the stabilization of Libya.

The developments over the past few months, in
particular vis-a-vis Libya and Cote d'Ivoire, have
triggered a new debate on the notion of the protection
of civilians and how it can be taken forward. It is clear
that, both conceptually and pragmatically, new ground
has been broken and there are important questions that
need to be answered. Bearing in mind that perceptions
are as important as realities, Turkey believes that this is
a necessary and welcome debate, which we must have
in the United Nations, especially as the protection of
civilians will continue to be an integral part of the
work we do here in many different settings. It might be
useful for the Council's informal experts group on the
protection of civilians to take this matter up with a
view to providing a thorough analysis and in-depth
reflection of the state of play.

While Libya has justifiably been given a lot of
attention over the past several months, when the
protection of civilians is being discussed we should not
fail to recall the plight of the Palestinian people.
Whether in Gaza or the West Bank, Palestinians
continue to suffer under blockades and occupation,
while their fundamental rights are denied. This sad
state of affairs is not sustainable, and must be
addressed within the context of a two-State solution as
a matter of the utmost urgency. Let me also take this
opportunity to underscore our determination to follow
up the process of inquiry, until justice is done, into the
Israeli attack on the humanitarian aid convoy to Gaza,
which took place almost a year ago in international
waters and resulted in nine civilian deaths and many
wounded.

With regard to the application of the concept of
protection of civilians, let me reiterate our position that
counter-terrorism efforts do not constitute armed
conflict and cannot be considered as such. We should
make a clear distinction between the counter-terrorism
efforts of law enforcement agencies and armed
conflict. Turkey strongly condemns all acts of
terrorism and the use of civilians as human shields, and
acknowledges the legitimate right of Governments to
combat terrorism.

Before concluding, I wish to underline that the
rule of law, human rights, democracy and good
governance should be strengthened in order to ensure
the long-term and lasting protection of civilians. We
should ensure that the perpetrators of violence against
civilians are held accountable for their actions. They
should know that they will face justice eventually.

