Mr. Matjila (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to recognize the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, and earlier on, Mr. Mike Pence,
Vice-President of the United States of America.
We would like to thank all the briefers, especially
Mr. Lowcock and his excellent staff in Venezuela. We
ask him to convey our utmost gratitude and appreciation
for the sterling job they are doing in Venezuela, as
they dispatch and offer much-needed assistance to the
people of Venezuela in the midst of uncertainty and
political contestation.

International solidarity is a hallmark of most of us
in developing countries, including Cuba. The situation
in Venezuela requires a constructive and united
Security Council in addressing both the humanitarian
and political situation facing the country.

The political situation and continued economic
difficulties in Venezuela are the result of myriad
factors, including conflicting geopolitical dynamics.
That necessitates the Council's focus on the resulting
humanitarian situation in Venezuela and its adverse
impact on ordinary people. In that regard, I wish to
reiterate South Africa's position on three issues.

First, the provision of humanitarian assistance
must be provided in accordance with the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence and in full compliance with General
Assembly resolution 46/182. Those principles have
enabled the Council to act in other difficult situations in
order to support people in need of urgent humanitarian
assistance. That should be the central approach of
the Council in this matter. We totally agree with the
Secretary-General in that respect. The Council should
not politicize humanitarian assistance.

Secondly, it is important that the effective and
unhindered provision of humanitarian assistance
take place in coordination and cooperation with
the Venezuelan Government, acknowledging the
fundamental principles of State sovereignty, as reflected
in the Charter of the United Nations. It is therefore
necessary to acknowledge and work with established
structures in Venezuela so as not to create parallel
structures that may also cause increased tensions in
that country.

Thirdly and finally, the provision of humanitarian
assistance should be based on an adequate and accurate
needs assessment of the situation - as Mr. Lowcock
advised - in order to match those needs with
appropriate support and totally steer away from the
possibility of humanitarian intervention being used as a
pretext for increased tensions, including the possibility
of military intervention.

South Africa therefore urges all parties to respect
the need for impartiality, neutrality and independence in
the provision of humanitarian assistance to Venezuela.
We also call on the international community to support

the channelling of humanitarian assistance through
United Nations agencies. We are very grateful to be
able to say that we have increased personnel capacity to
more than 400. We hope to see more in Venezuela and
an increased United Nations presence in neighbouring
countries. We should also do so through other
international organizations, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, in order to promote
the much needed neutrality and impartiality for the
provision of humanitarian assistance to Venezuela.
