I would like to thank the Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the Secretary- General for the Great Lakes Region, for his briefing. I would like to briefly underscore three points. First of all, we welcome the positive developments over the past six months. It is crucial to continue to build on the encouraging momentum that followed the election of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi in order to further reduce tensions, build confidence and achieve progress on the other fronts. In particular, we commend the involvement of Presidents Tshisekedi and Lourengo, which has been crucial to advancing reconciliation efforts between Rwanda and Uganda, thereby leading to renewed commitments through the finalization of an extradition treaty. We welcome that significant development in furtherance of the objectives of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. Several areas that have shown less progress remain concerning. There is continued violence in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, with a troubling human rights situation and grave violations of human rights, including an additional 1 million displaced persons in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In his report (S/2020/272), the Secretary-General describes the scale of the remaining challenges, which I will not repeat here. I would, however, like to express France's vigilance with regard to the situation in Burundi, in particular. Given the decision of the Government of Burundi to move ahead with the elections in the current context, we note that it is paramount to ensure a free political space and that all actors refrain from actions that could jeopardize the holding of peaceful, inclusive and credible elections, as these would contribute to the region's path towards political stability and peace. The Burundian people's confidence in the ability of the justice system to respond to the victims' aspirations and prosecute crimes in an independent manner is key to meeting the long-term objectives of unity and stability. Secondly, we share the concern expressed by all about the threat that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic poses to the region, in a context where the Ebola virus, in particular, has still not been eradicated. The countries of the Great Lakes region remain particularly vulnerable to large-scale pandemics due to the high number of people displaced by the persistence of hostile group operations. The international community stands to benefit from the countries' past experience with outbreaks of the Ebola and Marburg viruses. I welcome the measures taken by national Governments to combat the spread of the epidemic, pursuant to the recommendations of the World Health Organization, and I note that their implementation must respect human rights. Taking into account this new and dramatic global challenge, France wishes once again to express its solidarity with the countries of the region; they can count on our support. We have mobilized €1.2 billion to support African countries' efforts aimed at fighting the pandemic. The health threat needs to be addressed both by strengthening barrier measures designed to prevent the spread of the coronavirus disease today and by refocusing support for enhancing African capabilities in the health sector in the long term. Furthermore, the disruption caused by the pandemic will undoubtedly have a significant socioeconomic impact - one that needs to be anticipated. For 9/30 10/30 this reason, President Macron has been strongly advocating a collective effort to reschedule the public debt of African countries. We therefore welcome the Group of 20's endorsement of our proposal for a debt moratorium. Thirdly and finally, I would like to stress that the context created by the pandemic further reinforces the need for regional cooperation. At a time when borders are closed, communications disrupted and attitudes of mistrust are spreading, the pandemic complicates regional cooperation, which nevertheless remains crucial because it is only through cooperation that the root causes of the conflicts that undermine the Great Lakes, from armed groups to the illicit exploitation of natural resources, will be addressed. The countries of the region are facing a shared test. By supporting each other in their common struggle, they can build the foundation of mutual trust that will be decisive for success in future steps. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and his Office must undertake all necessary measures to that end. France reaffirms its support for the Special Envoy and reiterates that it stands ready to continue to assist him in the fulfilment of his mission. As a road map upon which to build, the regional peace and security strategy will be a useful tool in identifying and implementing concrete measures to strengthen political stability and peace in the region. We stand ready to actively participate in the shaping of this new collective peace and security instrument and we look forward to seeing it develop in time.
