Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak in Austria's capacity as Chair in Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the OSCE.

At the outset, permit me to thank the Jamaican
presidency for scheduling this open debate. The
presence of the Jamaican Foreign Minister clearly
expresses the importance of the topic and the need to
thoroughly discuss the various issues.

I would also like to thank you for giving me the
floor to address the Council on the issue of conflict
prevention as representative of the Chairperson in
Office of the OSCE. The OSCE itself was created as a
means of conflict prevention during the cold war, as a
standing conference to de-escalate the bipolar political
tensions in Europe. This year we commemorate the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the signature of the
Helsinki Final Act, the basic document in post-war
Europe that set the parameters for a dialogue across the
iron curtain, a dialogue which contributed significantly
to the reduction of mistrust and facilitated the political
developments in and after 1989, including the peaceful
changes of international borders.

The OSCE was not able to prevent the outbreak
of armed conflict in some cases, most notably in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia. However, the
organization has learned its lessons and adopted a
multifaceted approach to conflict prevention. In order
to address the root causes of conflict, it established the
Center for Conflict Prevention in Vienna and the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights in
Warsaw and instituted the High Commissioner for
Minorities and the Representative for the Freedom of
the Media. In addition, very useful work in conflict
prevention is done by the field missions in Kosovo,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Albania, Georgia,
Chechnya, Nagorno-Karabakh, Moldova and
Tajikistan.

In addressing the OSCE's role in conflict
prevention at the ceremony in Vienna yesterday
commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
signing of the Helsinki Final Act, the Chairperson in
Office, Austrian Foreign Minister Benita Ferrero-
Waldner, elaborated general principles which could
also be of relevance to the United Nations, in particular
to the Security Council, the main United Nations organ
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security. These elements are the indivisibility and
universality of security, the need for a culture of
dialogue, the importance of respect for human rights,
flexibility of the organization, international
cooperation and effectiveness of measures.

First, the indivisibility and universality of
security. As our distinguished President, the Foreign
Minister of Jamaica, has just underlined, the need for
security is the same all over the world; armed conflicts
cause human suffering everywhere without distinction.
In order to assume its role as the world's guardian of
international peace, the Security Council must treat all
potential conflicts the same and must devote equal
attention to all crises in every region of the world.

Second, a culture of dialogue. Peaceful
international relations require respect for the principle
of equality of States and the will of the States to
cooperate peacefully with one another. Together with
the Secretary-General, the Security Council must
continue to enhance the United Nations role as a
facilitator of dialogue and negotiations, both in
international and in internal conflicts. As a
consequence, any illegal resort to the use of force must
effectively be sanctioned immediately.

Third, the role of human rights. Recent history
has demonstrated the crucial role of human rights, the
rights of minorities, and humanitarian law in conflict
prevention. In a time when 90 per cent of armed
conflicts are internal, safeguarding these rights is an
inevitable prerequisite for peace. Human rights
violations are often early warning signs of tensions. In
this respect the Security Council has undertaken
significant efforts and must continue to do so in order
to effectively prevent conflicts.

Fourth, flexibility. Today's conflicts are
significantly different from those which the drafters of
the United Nations Charter had in mind. Equally, the
challenges for world peace and stability and the
potential root causes of conflict are of a different
nature. Poverty, organized crime, drugs, terrorism,
disease, the availability of large numbers of small arms
and the scarcity of natural resources require adequate
attention and a variety of different responses in
preventive diplomacy. The OSCE has tried over the
past years to adapt institutionally and functionally to
the new situation. The Security Council has also
adopted innovative procedures and initiatives. Let me
just mention the establishment of the criminal
tribunals, the recent prohibition of trade in "blood
diamonds" and the equally recent reaction to the threat
caused by the spread of AIDS.
Other possible means of action come to mind,
such as investigative missions to identify potential
conflicts, special hearings of the parties involved,
preventive arms or trade embargoes, preventive partial
disarmament of the parties involved and the creation of
demilitarized zones.

Fifthly, as regards international cooperation,
recent examples have shown that conflict prevention is
an enormous task that no international organization can
solve on its own. Cooperation between international
organizations, including non-governmental
organizations, must become the norm. In the Istanbul
Charter for European Security, the OSCE clearly
supported the notion that only a sensible distribution of
tasks could maximize the profit of our endeavours. The
Security Council would be well advised to continue its
policy of actively involving regional organizations and
possibly expand it to other international forums.

My sixth and final point concerns effectiveness. It
is clear that attempts to prevent conflicts will only be
effective if the organizations are adequately equipped
for their tasks. Successful prevention requires
mechanisms to identify potential conflicts, a variety of
instruments of prevention, including appropriate means
to counter non-compliance by the parties and
organizational structures, especially adequate personnel
and financial means. Most important, however, as we
all know, is the full political support by the member
States of the organization.

The United Nations, the regional organizations
and States must invest more effort, time and money in
conflict prevention. Considering the costs of conflict
resolution and post-conflict reconstruction, in terms of
human suffering as well as financial and operational
means, the investment in conflict prevention may be
the most economic and rational investment of all.

