Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like at the outset to thank the Ukrainian
presidency for having convened this open debate of the
Security Council on the issue ofthe protection ofcritical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks. I should like in
particular to welcome Mr. Pavlo Klimkin, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, who honours us with his
presence today. We wish also to thank previous speakers
and to welcome the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017).

The protection of critical infrastructure,
particularly from attacks by terrorist groups, should be
a priority for all States in the framework of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, with the
goal of preserving the health, security and economic
well-being of citizens as well as the proper functioning
of the State and its administration.

As has been stated, critical infrastructure includes
the various facilities, networks and services of the
economic and social structure of States, including
communication routes, basic services, and tourist
and recreational facilities. These should be taken
into consideration in the process of designing
protection strategies.

Peru having been the target of terrorist attacks
in the past, we know that critical infrastructure is
a preferred target for terrorist organizations due its
vulnerabilities - and all the more so when such attacks
lead to serious consequences, such large loss oflife and
the destruction of property, and, in the medium- and
long-term, to economic losses and insecurity among
the population.

With the development of information and
communication technologies, the Internet and virtual
infrastructure have also become a target of attacks for
terrorist organizations. The increasing interconnectivity
and greater technological dependency increase our
vulnerability: the services of an airport control tower,
a nuclear power plant or the valves of a dam can be
simultaneously attacked remotely.

In Peru, we are aware of the importance of
protecting ourselves against those threats. In 2009, we
set up a cybersecurity incident response team, which
works closely with the national police and is developing
a national cybersecurity network. Faced with global
threats there should be global solutions. In that regard,
Peru strongly believes in the importance of international
cooperation and the exchange of experience and good
practices in order to find effective and innovative
responses. States must work together while using
regional and international coordination mechanisms.

The United Nations plays a key role based
on the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
its comprehensive, coordinated and balanced
implementation across all of its different pillars. We
welcome the work of the Working Group on Protecting
Critical Infrastructure of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. We urge it to coordinate
efforts to establish the necessary mechanisms to
provide the necessary technical assistance to Member
States at their request.

Similarly, my delegation recalls the importance of
completing the process of drafting a general convention
on international terrorism and of convening a high-
level conference on this topic under the auspices of the
United Nations. We call on everyone to step up their
efforts to conclude such a convention.

I would like to reiterate the commitment of Peru in
combating the threats posed by terrorism and violent
extremism. To that end, Mr. President, you can count
on the constant support of my delegation.

