Ms. Tetteh: I would like to express my appreciation
to the President of the Security Council for convening
this important meeting on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, including
the African Union (AU). From the outset, I would like to
congratulate members of the Security Council and their
colleagues at the African Union Peace and Security
Council for the successful annualjoint meetings between
the two Councils held in Addis Ababa last week. The
constructive nature of the discussions illustrated the
strong commitment of the members of both Councils
to addressing peace and security challenges in Africa
in close cooperation and partnership and in the spirit of
mutual respect and solidarity.

The Security Council has before it the report of the
Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including on the
work of the United Nations Office to the African Union
(S/2019/759). As I had the opportunity to mention in
Addis Ababa last week, the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations continues to grow
from strength to strength. The Secretary-General noted
in his address to the African Union summit in February
that there has been a quantum leap in ourjoint strategic
cooperation. Our collaboration in addressing peace
and security issues on the continent is becoming more
systematic and predictable. We both recognize that
contemporary threats to peace and security in Africa
are complex and interconnected and that their impact is
so profound that neither organization can resolve them
without cooperating with the other. We recognize and
leverage each other's relative strengths and comparative
advantages in pursuit of a common objective, namely,
collective peace, security and development.

Our collaboration in Madagascar is a good case
in point. Collaboration among the African Union, the
United Nations, the Southern African Development
Community and other partners, with the African Union
in the lead, prevented the deterioration of a political
crisis. The collaboration facilitated peaceful, free,
fair and credible elections held on 7 November and
19 December 2018, respectively, and the subsequent
peaceful political transition in January 2019. Similarly,
our joint efforts in the Central African Republic
resulted in the signing of the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation on 6 February, which has
led to a substantial decrease in incidents of violence, a
progressive re-establishment of security structures and
an improvement in humanitarian access. Commissioner
Chergui of the African Union and Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix remain actively engaged in supporting
implementation of the Agreement and to underscore
the consequences of violations, including through a
joint visit earlier this month. This engagement is also
of particular importance in the context of the upcoming
elections in 2020.

Joint African Union-United Nations efforts have
also resulted in positive developments in the Sudan.
There is a resolve to advance the implementation of
the Constitutional Declaration of 17 August and the
agreement governing the transition. The Transitional
Government led by Prime Minister Abdalla Adam
Hamdok, which was sworn in on 8 September, has
articulated its priorities, with a primary focus on
achieving lasting and comprehensive peace across the
Sudan and on the country's urgently needed economic
recovery. On 11 September, the parties signed the
Juba Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures
and the Preparation for Negotiation, which constitutes
a trust-building agreement and a road map for a
comprehensive peace agreement.

However, significant challenges remain, which
call on us to deepen our collaboration with the African
Union and regional economic communities and
mechanisms and to act in a concerted manner to address
the challenges that we continue to face. As illustrated in
the report of the Secretary-General, we continue to face
challenges to lasting peace and security on the continent
resulting from political and socioeconomic exclusion
and discrimination, weak governance institutions, in
some cases poor public sector management, including
with regard to election management bodies, and the
challenges of contested elections where the electoral
process is called into question.

Respect for the rule of law, human rights and the
challenges associated with the delivery ofbasic services
and the equitable management of natural resources,
added to the negative effects of climate change and food
insecurity, continue to create challenges for us on the
continent. With regard to climate change in particular,
we are witnessing an impact across a continent
manifested by floods, hurricanes and the resultant
humanitarian crises. Those weaknesses are in some
instances compounded by external interference, proxy
conflicts, violent extremism, terrorism, organized
crime, corruption and the absence of effective State
authority in large parts of the continent.

There is serious concern about the situation in
South Sudan, as Council members witnessed in Juba
last week and from their deliberations with members
of AU Peace and Security Council in Addis Ababa.
The implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan is lagging behind agreed benchmarks and
timelines, and slow progress on the implementation
of pre-transitional tasks, including the transitional
security arrangements, and the outstanding decision on
the resolution of the number of states and boundaries,
for instance, continues to threaten the implementation
of the provisions of the Revitalized Peace Agreement.

As the Council members who were in Addis Ababa
last week and the AU Peace and Security Council
underscored, it is critical that the 12 November deadline
for the formation of the reconstituted Transitional
Government of National Unity - as previously agreed
by the parties and endorsed by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) - be maintained
and respected to avoid a breakdown of the peace
process. We hope that momentum will be maintained to
address the outstanding issues and return South Sudan
to a path leading towards peace and stability. The
close attention of, and follow-up by, IGAD, supported
by the African Union and the United Nations, will be
important in that regard.

In Somalia cooperation between the Federal
Government of Somalia and some federal member states
remains a challenge. Yet it is critical in order to make
progress on political, security and economic reforms.
We recognize that, in order to have a universal mandate
and universal election in 2020 or 2021, the Federal
Government and the legislature have to deliver on their
commitments to adopt the electoral law by December,
complete the constitutional review by June 2020,
adopt an amended federal Constitution establishing
the Constitutional Court and the Judicial Service
Commission, continue the national reconciliation
process and ensure the participation of all sectors of
society, including women, in political decision-making.
At the recently concluded Somalia Partnership Forum
in Mogadishu, international partners agreed to a mutual
accountability framework to narrow their joint focus to
priority areas in order to achieve key priority outcomes
before December 2020.

The situation in Libya remains of concern to
the United Nations, the African Union and the
wider international community. Military actions
and inflammatory rhetoric continue to escalate, and
conditions on the ground are not conducive to direct
dialogue among the parties. An estimated 135,000
people remain in immediate front-line areas, with more
than 270,000 more in areas directly impacted by the
conflict, including migrants, some of whom are being
held in inhumane conditions in official and unofficial
detention. Council members also heard concerns
expressed by the AU Peace and Security Council last
week, including with regard to the continued violations
of the arms embargo, which is exacerbating the crisis,
further undermining the territorial integrity of Libya
and fuelling instability within the region.

The challenges in the Sahel region remain
daunting, including terrorism, violent extremism,
drug smuggling, trafficking, transhumance issues and
intercommunal violence, which are exacerbated by the
absence of State authority in vast areas, particularly in
border areas.

We are witnessing the impact of climate change
and food insecurity on peace and security, with the
lack of access to basic rights, services, economic
opportunities, increased Violence and challenges to the
role and participation of women, which continues to
hinder development.

The Joint AU-United Nations Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
was signed in April 2017, provides the approach and
mechanisms to effectively address those complex
challenges. The United Nations and the African
Union have agreed to strive, wherever possible, to
reach a common understanding of conflict situations
and, through consultative decision-making, develop a
collaborative approach. We have agreed to exchange
information and analyses on the root causes of conflicts
on ongoing developments as the basis for subsequent
joint assessments to help identify how the two
organizations can work together to prevent and continue
to address them. We have agreed to share early-warning
information and analyses of potential hotspots and
work together to prepare options and coordinate and
collaborate on measures for conflict prevention.

We have also agreed that good offices and mediation
transcend conflict prevention and extend throughout
the conflict cycle. We have agreed to collaborate
closely in good offices, preventive diplomacy and
inclusive mediation activities on the continent in
coordination with other subregional organizations
and regional mechanisms. Furthermore, we have
agreed to collaborate in electoral matters, improving
good governance, the protection of human rights and
humanitarian assistance.

To that end, during the reporting period, the African
Union and the United Nations undertook mediation and
good offices missions across the continent, notably to
Madagascar, the Central African Republic and Libya.
Special Representatives and Envoys from the two
organizations conductjoint field visits and hold regular

consultative meetings, including the meeting currently
taking place in Djibouti.

The practice ofjoint briefings to the two Councils
by senior officials of both the United Nations
Secretariat and the AU Commission continues to be
mutually beneficial and is now the norm. That has
provided us with an opportunity to broaden discussions
to incorporate the views of both organizations and to
consider new information and perspectives on conflict
situations. Our partnership review and coordination
mechanisms remain Vibrant and active, including the
third annual conference of the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the AU Commission, which took
place in May, the consultative meetings of the Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security at the Commissioner
and Under-Secretary-General level, which took place
in February and September, and the desk-to-desk
Consultative Meeting on the Prevention, Management
and Resolution of Conflict, held in March.

Those mechanisms have provided an opportunity
to take stock of the progress and the challenges that
we are facing in enhancing our partnership and chart
the way forward. We have conducted regular conflict-
prevention and joint horizon-scanning meetings and
joint technical visits to the headquarters of the regional
economic communities to share information, carry out
joint analyses, support ongoing coordination activities
and strengthen working relationships.

We have supported the participation of women in
mediation and conflict prevention, in particular through
the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention
and Mediation, also known as FemWise-Africa, in
coordinationwith the AU Peace and Security Department
and the African Union's High Representative for the
silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative, which
the United Nations is also supporting.

In that regard, the AU has identified its priority
as the intensification of efforts to enhance operational
and structural conflict prevention with an emphasis on
the nexus linking peace, security, development and the
imperative to respond early and decisively to prevent
the occurrence or escalation of conflict.

We welcome the discussions between members of
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council on the modalities for joint field visits. As
I had the opportunity to state last week, joint visits
between senior officials of the Secretariat and the AU
Commission have become an important and regular
feature of our work. The benefits are clear to us,
particularly in developing a common understanding
of complex conflict situations and their root causes,
assessing the state of play as well as delivering joint
messages. We look forward to further discussion and
resolution of this issue by members of both Councils,
recognizing that this will contribute significantly to
further strengthening our partnership.

WerecognizethatthefinancingofAUpeace-support
operations remains an important strategic issue for
the African Union. In that connection, I would like
to commend the commitment of AU member States
to support peacebuilding activities through their
contributions to the African Union Peace Fund, which
currently stands at $131 million. I also welcome the
efforts of the Chairperson of the AU Commission to
fully operationalize the governance architecture of the
Fund. Furthermore, we look forward to the AU Peace
and Security Council's engagement with the United
Nations on this issue following the AU Assembly
meeting that should take place in February 2020.

In conclusion, I thank the Council members for
their continued strong backing for the AU-United
Nations partnership for peace and security in Africa,
and for their support to the United Nations Office to the
African Union.

