Ms. Wieczorek-Zeul (Germany): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The Candidate Countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the Countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Serbia, as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova align themselves with this
statement.

Let me start by thanking you, Madam President,
for convening this meeting which has received the high
level of interest it rightfully deserves. The security
implications of climate change should receive more
attention and, therefore, we welcome this opportunity
to convey the perspective of the EU on this subject.

This Council usually deals with more imminent
threats to international peace and security than those
caused by climate change. However, less obvious and
more distant drivers of conflict should not be
neglected.

This is true especially against the background of
one of our central tasks - the prevention of violent
conflict. The Security Council is committed to a
culture of prevention, as incorporated in resolution
1625 (2005). Today we know that there is a clear link
between climate change and the need for conflict
prevention.

The past decade was the warmest on record,
forcing glaciers and Arctic ice to retreat. Moreover, the
recent findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) provide clear evidence that our
globe is already being heavily affected by temperature
increases caused by man-made warming. Some of the
profound changes in many of the Earth's natural
systems projected by the Panel will have direct or
indirect implications for security.

We can imagine how water scarcity - as has
been mentioned by many representatives - as well as
scarcity of food and fertile land could contribute to
driving conflict. The countries most vulnerable to
environmental stress factors are small island States,
low-lying coastal nations and countries in arid and
semi-arid areas. They contribute least to the problem
but are most affected by climate change. To give only
two examples, several small island States are seeing
their very existence threatened by rising sea levels. As
early as 2020, up to 250 million people in Africa are
projected to suffer from increased lack of water due to
climate change. In addition, and more generally,
elsewhere we can anticipate much more frequent and
extreme floods and droughts, with potentially
disastrous effects on food production, food security
and human life, as well as potentially destructive
impacts on livelihoods.

The vulnerability of people, particularly in poor
countries, can increase the potential for instability and
conflict. Certainly a wide range of interacting factors
such as ethnic tensions, trans-border disputes,
inequalities within societies, population movements
and failed States can contribute to armed conflict. But
climate change will become an increasingly important
factor among root causes of conflict as the climate
continues to change at an ever faster rate.

What is the conclusion we should draw from
these findings? The cost of action on climate change is
far outweighed by the consequences of inaction. We
need to give due consideration to the security
implications of inaction and mitigate those risks. We
are in need of a global framework of risk management
to address the challenge of climate change. Such a
framework needs to be based on two pillars: mitigation
and adaptation.

Concerning the mitigation pillar, we have to keep
changes in the world's climate within manageable
limits. Hence, we need to formulate a forward-looking
climate and energy policy. The world is expecting new
and determined measures from Governments and the
United Nations which will shape the future of
humanity on our planet. The EU is prepared to play its
part in efforts to address those challenges at the global
level and is calling upon others to do the same. This is
above all a political imperative, but it also makes sense

economically. That is why the EU decided in March
this year to put itself on fast track to a low-carbon
economy.

The EU has decided to take the lead and to
unilaterally reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by
20 per cent by the year 2020 compared to 1990 levels,
regardless of the progress made in international
negotiations for a post-2012 agreement. Yet since the
EU is responsible for only 15 per cent of worldwide
greenhouse gas emissions, the effects of our reduction
will be limited. It is thus necessary to reach a global
and comprehensive agreement on how to combat
climate change beyond 2012. The European Union
offers a binding 30 per cent target compared to 1990,
provided other developed countries take similar steps
and economically more advanced developing countries
adequately contribute according to their
responsibilities and respective capabilities.

In addition, the EU adopted a binding target for
the increased use of renewable energy and aims to
achieve significant increases in energy savings. We
hope that those goals will inspire the leaders of both
the Group of Eight (G-8) and of economically more
advanced developing countries. We also hope that
those goals will help pave the way for ambitious
international climate negotiations.

Concerning the adaptation pillar, we need to
consider the consequences of unavoidable climate
changes. To that end, we think that the security
dimension should be duly reflected in future research
and reports on the effects of climate change.

We are convinced that an overall framework of
preventive diplomacy is needed in order to alleviate the
worst consequences outlined in the recent IPCC report.
Like other challenges to humankind, such as hunger,
disease, poverty, water scarcity and migration, climate
change should be addressed in a holistic and preventive
manner. If we realize the interdependency of these
factors, it will be easier to devise coherent and holistic
approaches, and it might be easier to increase adaptive
capacities, especially in those countries most
vulnerable to those challenges.

No country alone can tackle problems of that
dimension. Environmental, economic and energy
policy decisions in one part of the world directly or
indirectly affect people elsewhere and could be a root
cause of conflict there. Sound environmental policies
therefore become an essential part of conflict
prevention on a global scale.

We have to develop concrete strategies for
coherent, integrated and holistic responses on the part
of the United Nations family and United Nations
institutions to address this challenge, and many United
Nations institutions and organs can and should make a
contribution to facing it. They should work hand in
hand in a cooperative manner. No institution can claim
exclusive competence with respect to this cross-cutting
issue.

In conclusion, we think that the complexity of the
subject and the institutional aspects of dealing with the
various effects of climate change should not deter us
from our task: to ensure that current and future
generations can live in a safer and more prosperous
world. I am sure that today's debate will deliver a
valuable and powerful message that will contribute to
the upcoming climate negotiations for a post-2012
framework, to be held in Bali in December.

