I would like to thank Mr. Shearer, Mr. Lowcock and the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan for their comprehensive briefings. I want to emphasize four points. First, France is concerned about the lack of progress in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We welcome the progress on the distribution of portfolios at the state and county levels. However, we deplore the delays in the formation of the Transitional National Legislative Assembly and the appointment of a Governor of Upper Nile, as well as the lack of progress on the participation of women and young people. In the area of security and the fight against impunity, the formation of the unified forces and the establishment of the hybrid court for South Sudan should be progressing more rapidly. Secondly, while the security situation has certainly improved since 2018 and, as has been said. the ceasefire remains generally respected by the parties, the relative decrease in violence in recent months should not cause us to lose sight of the fact that the conditions for a resumption of violence during the dry season are still in place. The causes of conflict are aggravated by the lack of positive prospects for the implementation of the peace agreement but also, as the briefings showed us, by the deterioration of the economic and humanitarian situation. France therefore calls on all parties to respect their obligations under international humanitarian law. We condemn the attacks on humanitarian workers, which caused 14 deaths in 2020. Such violence must not go unpunished. It is important for the Council to be more systematic in sanctioning the groups responsible. At a time when humanitarian needs are immense and some regions are on the brink of famine, humanitarian workers must be able to move around unhindered and without fear of being targeted. The increasing number of kidnappings of civilians in the Equatoria region, attributable to the armed groups that remain active in the area, is also worrying. In that regard, France welcomes the mediation efforts of the Community of Sant' Egidio to engage the armed groups that are not signatories to the 2018 agreement. In what we can see is an extremely difficult environment, France commends the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for its commitment, its efforts to adapt and its work in general. I am thinking particularly of the transfer of responsibility for protection-of-civilian sites to the South Sudanese authorities. We will, of course, carefully examine the strategic review to ensure that the Mission's mandate is geared more to a realistic objective, taking into account the will of the parties. The protection of civilians and the facilitation of humanitarian access will naturally remain at the heart of the Mission's priorities, in any event. The South Sudanese authorities must increase their oversight in this area, with the support of UNMISS. I commend UNMISS for its work and want to emphasize that restrictions on its freedom of movement are not acceptable. In conclusion, France also supports maintaining the sanctions regime established by resolution 2206 (2015), including the arms embargo. Both South Sudan and the countries of the region must improve their implementation of the embargo. Obstacles to the work of UNMISS such as attacks on humanitarian personnel are grounds for designation, which the Council must use in view of the challenges on the ground.
