Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): The Brazilian
delegation is particularly pleased to congratulate you,
Sir, for the important initiative of debating this item
during the month of January. We are thankful, as well,
to the Secretary-General, for his report on ways and
means in which the Security Council could contribute
to dealing with the question of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in situations under its
consideration.

The issue of the uncontrolled traffic of this kind
of weapon became a great concern for the international
community, due to the tragic consequences of arms
availability in terms of making local conflicts more
lethal and generating a sense of insecurity in civil
societies.

The issue of small arms, whether in the context of
disarmament, national security, public security or from
a humanitarian perspective, must be permanently
discussed in all relevant forums - subregional,
regional or multilateral. The Security Council has been
dealing with this problem, when it is associated with
conflict prevention, implementation of arms
embargoes, post-conflict arms collection and the tasks
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

In 1999, when the subject of small arms was
discussed in the Council for the first time, Brazil also
had the opportunity to occupy a non-permanent seat.
Since then, the Council has reached common ground on
that issue, permitting a broader understanding of its
diversified aspects. The implementation of the
Programme of Action of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, enacted in 2001 and
recently evaluated in July 2003, is especially important
in our effort to find an acceptable solution to that
serious problem.

Unfortunately, despite national efforts, there are
still loopholes in the regime for the legal transfer of
arms that allow for the diversion of arms to the illegal
market. Brazil stands as an example of such efforts,
having adapted its legislation to current necessities.
Recently, President Lula da Silva sanctioned the
innovative Disarmament Statute, which restricts the
bearing, possession and commerce of arms, in addition
to criminalizing international arms trafficking. Brazil
has also adopted a national arms system as a measure
of preventive control. Aside from such strengthening of
legislative measures, we also regularly exchange
information with our neighbours and have established
border procedures.

With our Southern Common Market partners, we
have endeavoured to establish a joint mechanism
establishing a registry of buyers and vendors of
firearms, ammunition and explosives. In our region as
a whole, which has been a pioneer in dealing with
small arms, as well as with other matters relating to
disarmament, the Inter-American Convention Against
the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and other Related
Materials is in effect. Notwithstanding all these
national, subregional and regional initiatives, we still
have not solved our problem.

For this reason, the step taken by the General
Assembly towards constituting a working group
responsible for devising an international instrument to
identify and trace small arms is crucial. We expect the
document to be produced in forthcoming sessions to be
legally binding and responsive to the urgent necessity
of interrupting the illegal flow of weapons.

The head of the delegation of the Philippines,
Ambassador Lauro Baja, made interesting comments
on the recommendations contained in the Secretary-
General's report, drawing our attention to the
complementarity between the work of the Security
Council and that of the General Assembly on this issue
and to the need for consultations on this point between
the Presidents of those organs.

A solution to the problem of small arms will
require the commitment of all States and the assistance
of civil society, in addition to the necessary input of
international, regional and subregional organisms. The
Council will not be able to meet the challenge alone.
The fact that it is discussing the matter and listening to
the opinion of States members of the Council and other
Members about expectations with regard to its actions
is positive, however. This open debate assures all
Members of the Council's renewed commitment to
working together and contributing to collective efforts
towards eradicating the illegal flow of small arms.

