Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary- General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Henrietta Fore, UNICEF Executive Director, for their briefings. I also welcome the ministers participating in the meeting. Tunisia has been following with concern the military escalation in the north-west of Syria, as well as the ongoing communication and the repeated appeals by many Security Council members and the Secretary-General to stop the fighting and restore calm. We are also concerned at the reports of the deteriorating humanitarian situation in and around Idlib and the continuing violence and acts of terrorism. Casualties among civilians, including children, are on the rise. There have also been consecutive waves of displaced persons against a backdrop of insufficient shelter capacity and aid for meeting urgent humanitarian needs. We stress once again that an immediate ceasefire and a commitment of all parties to exercising self- restraint must remain the highest priorities. We reiterate our condemnation of attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, including those attacks launched by groups designated as terrorists by the Security Council. We emphasize the importance of combating those terrorist organizations. We call on all parties to fulfil their obligations under international law and international humanitarian law to protect civilians at all times and to ensure the safe and sustained delivery of aid. We have been following the latest efforts aimed at reaching a ceasefire in north-western Syria through bilateral and multilateral negotiations. Tunisia welcomes all efforts made to this end. We also believe that an international umbrella could help to advance these efforts and initiatives and ensure their effectiveness, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), since such efforts become more effective when the Council is united. We recall once again that any initiatives undertaken to ensure a ceasefire in Syria are mere temporary solutions as long as they do not address finding a joint practical solution that counters the such terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council as Al-Qaida, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and Da'esh. These groups must be eradicated completely from the region. Tunisia has reviewed the recommendations set forth in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/139) on ensuring the delivery of humanitarian aid, including medical supplies, to those in need in an expeditious and safe manner. This result could be reached by adopting an approach that combines the delivery of relief items across borders and conflict lines to north-eastern Syria. We believe that ending cross- border aid deliveries requires a smooth and progressive approach that takes into consideration Syria's unity, independence and territorial integrity, while ensuring the safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery of humanitarian aid in line with international law and the principles of humanitarian action and ensuring the Syrian Government's full ownership over coordinating relief efforts. To overcome outstanding issues related to meeting humanitarian needs in areas receiving aid, including delays in obtaining approval and other practical and administrative roadblocks, various parties need to facilitate the work of the United Nations and its partners on the ground. The dialogue and cooperation between the United Nations and the Government of Syria must be enhanced in order to ensure an effective and coordinated humanitarian response. My country's delegation welcomes the fact that, according to the letter of the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the President of the Security Council, dated 26 February 2020, the Syrian Government is ready to make progress in relief efforts in cooperation with the United Nations. We look forward to resolving the issue relating to the delivery of surgical and medical supplies to the north- east of Syria that has arisen between the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Syrian Government through further discussions about alternative routes by land, sea and air proposed by the Syrian Government. My country stresses that the only sustainable solution to the situation in Syria - and the only way to restore peace and security in the country - is a political settlement in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). To that end, the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process in Geneva must resume under the auspices of the United Nations, paving the way for the drafting of a constitution by consensus of Syrian civil society representatives and political parties, preparing the ground for free and fair elections under the supervision of the United Nations, preserving the unity, independence and territorial integrity of Syria and contributing to peace and security in the region. In conclusion, we once again commend the tireless humanitarian efforts of the United Nations in Syria, despite the difficulties and challenges on the ground. We support the noble work of the United Nations to protect lives and alleviate the humanitarian suffering in Syria and other conflict areas.
