Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I congratulate
Japan on its assumption of the Council presidency,
and thank France for its very efficient running of the
Council's business last month.
I should like to take this opportunity tojoin Egypt in
paying tribute to the role of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). As we review the AMISOM
mandate, we should remember that without the bravery
and sacrifice of its troops, Somalia would not have seen
the progress which it has made. It is essential that we
ensure that AMISOM. troop contributors commit for
at least the next two years, because that progress can
easily be undone.

It is equally important that the Federal Government
of Somalia deliver on its commitment to building
credible security forces, not only to address the
legitimate concerns of AMISOM. troop contributors,
but also to ensure that peace and security in Somalia are
secured for the long term. Without that, all our efforts
on elections and the Somali political process will have
been wasted.

We are grateful for all of the engagement and support
of partners in preparing a draft text and in working on
its details. We will work hard to provide clear direction
and prioritization to AMISOM's tasks in this critical
year. That means liberating the Somali people from the
threat of Al-Shabaab through deliberate operations,
enabling the security environment needed for the
electoral process to take place, as the representative
of Egypt rightly emphasized, and supporting the
gradual hand-over of security responsibilities to the
Somali security forces, which must be the overarching
objective of us all.

Progress in Somalia is about partnership, and
in that partnership we need every organization and
stakeholder - the international community, the
United Nations, donors, the African Union and the
Federal Government of Somalia itself - to play its
part. That cooperation will enable AMISOM. to leave
Somalia in a stronger and more secure place than
when it first deployed, and it will provide long-term
regional security. We will therefore continue to support
AMISOM. and the essential work that the force is doing,
as the Council has just shown by its unanimous vote
today.

