Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the presidency for convening this briefing, as
well as for its concept note (S/2015/846, annex). I also
thank the Secretary General for his briefing.

While we take note of the reports (S/2015/682)
of the Secretary-General and of the High-level
Independent Panel (see S/2015/446), we understand that
this is one of several meetings to be held in conjunction
with the membership, especially with countries
contributing troops and police. In that connection, we
recall the central mandate of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations when it comes to such
operations.

Turning to the particular issues requested by the
President in his concept note, we endorse the use of
the term peacekeeping operations proposed by the
Independent Panel and endorsed by the Secretary-
General, denoting the broad spectrum of work of the
Organization on peace and security while also including
tools and flexible instruments such as groups of experts
and peace and security advisers.

We agree with the observations in the reports
that the Council must exercise its collective political
influence for the benefit of political solutions. They
must be at the centre of peacekeeping operations.
The Council has the responsibility to detect early the
emergence of conflicts and seek response mechanisms
to avoid and overcome cycles of violence. Issues that
are potentially disruptive to international peace and
security must be considered under "Other business"
in order to monitor crises and to make known to the
countries involved the Council's concern about the
situations they face. Timely awareness on the part
of the Council can be a powerful tool for deterrence
and facilitate preventive work - sometimes elusive
to date owing to the lack of collective action. The
political role of the Council should be complemented
by strengthening the mediation of the United Nations,
where possible, through its various mechanisms.

Peacekeeping operations deployed by the Council
must be part of a comprehensive strategy drawn up in
support of the political process. We agree with the need
for a sequential approach in developing mandates. In
that regard, it is necessary to design medium- and long-
term political objectives, including field verification
mechanisms and implementation strategies. Mandates
must be developed with consensus from the parties
involved in the conflict, along with the Secretariat and
the Council.

All those aims must be able to respond to structural
change that promotes peace, democracy and inclusive
development. Revisiting the functioning of the Council's
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations to
maximize its links with troop- and police-contributing
countries could also contribute to that goal. We also
have to better address their contributions when drawing
up mandates, because they have information on the
situation on the ground and assessments of what can or
cannot be achieved.

In conclusion, we would like to point out that,
in planning peace missions, we also have to address,
from the very start, the incorporation and participation
of gender advisers and advisers to protect women,
children and human rights, as independent categories
in order to ensure that people in vulnerable situations
are protected.

