The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Mr. De Mistura for his helpful and informative
briefing today. We appreciate his commitment in this
process going forward.

Last week, Bashar Al-Assad yet again terrorized
his own people with one of the world's most horrific
weapons. Al-Assad's murderous attack shook everyone
of us to our core. It once again showed the world that
Al-Assad is not a partner for peace. It showed what
happens when Al-Assad's allies - Russia, Iran and
Hizbullah - decide to lend their support to a barbaric
regime instead ofjoining the world to stop it.

When Al-Assad's planes dropped chemical weapons,
his regime violated a resolution of this very Council
(resolution 2118 (2013)) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Al-Assad mocked every assurance the
Russians gave us that there were no chemical weapons
in Syria. The United States was compelled to act.
We will not allow the use of chemical weapons to go
unanswered. We are not going to look the other way.
We are watching the regime's actions carefully.

My colleagues from Russia are isolating themselves
from the international community every time one
of Al-Assad's planes drops another barrel bomb on
civilians and every time Al-Assad tries to starve
another community to death. People - not just in the
West but across the Middle East and the world - are
speaking out against Al-Assad's brutality. It is long
past time for Russia to stop covering for Al-Assad. It
is long past time for Russia to push seriously for peace
and not continue to be part of the problem.

The road to peace is long. We will not get a political
solution overnight, but we can start by working together
to actually de-escalate the conflict. For Russia, getting
serious about peace starts by fulfilling its commitment
to getting chemical weapons out of Syria. We urge
Russia to use its influence to make Al-Assad actually
live up to his international obligations. That means
giving investigators who are already mandated through
existing mechanisms full access to the bases from which
the regime launched its chemical weapons attacks and
access to anyone who might have been involved.

Russia talks about its commitment to a political
solution. It must commit to the Geneva talks. Now is
the time Russia needs to show the world whether it
genuinely wants to be a part of the political process. We
need to see a real ceasefire on the ground. We need to
see a credible political process through which Syrians
can chart their future. We need to see Russia choose
to side with the civilized world over an Al-Assad
Government that brutally terrorizes its own people.
The United States is ready to do our part. Russia, too,
needs to do its part.

Getting serious about peace also means that we
have to be honest about Iran's role in Syria. Iran is
Al-Assad's chief accomplice in the regime's horrific
acts. Standing next to Al-Assad's generals are Iranian
advisers whispering in their ears or giving orders.
Standing next to Al-Assad's soldiers are Hizbullah
militias, with weapons courtesy of Iran and the power
to overrule the Syrian military. Iran is dumping fuel
on the flames of this war in Syria so it can expand its
own reach.

The Council needs to bring attention to Iran's
barbaric acts in Syria. We need to collectively demand
that Iran stop. We need to make sure that Iran cannot
use Syria as a base to keep terrorizing the Syrian people
and the entire region.

The Council also needs to be serious about peace in
Syria. Month after month, we all repeat the same points
in this Chamber. We all say there is no military solution
to this conflict, but look at what actually happens on
the ground. The Council's relevance depends on taking
action to condemn those responsible for violence and
to hold them accountable for defying the Council's
demands. The Council should not just say that it is in
favour of a political solution, but also actively pressure
the parties to prove it. That means adopting resolutions
that say what we mean - resolutions that we are all
willing to uphold.

So what happens next in Syria will depend on what
all parties choose to do. For our part, the United States
will continue to use influence over any party to push
for peace. We will encourage our allies to use their
influence on any and all opposition groups, too. We
will not support a process that gives cover to Al-Assad
while he stalls for time and his forces slaughter the
Syrian people, and as we showed last week, we will not
stand for the continued use of chemical weapons. There
are actions by the Al-Assad regime that we simply will
not tolerate.

The United States firmly believes that a political
process can work despite the odds. We remain committed
to the Geneva process. We are ready to throw our weight
and resources behind diplomacy. We are ready to help
bring this conflict to an end. But our commitment is
not enough. The United States is looking for partners
that are serious about using their influence over the
Al-Assad regime and towards defeating the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham. Every country needs to do
its part. All ofus must commit notjust in words but also
in actions to the same goal - peace in Syria.

I now resume my functions as President ofthe Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic, whom we ask to be conscious
of time.

