Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): Let me first express my
greetings to you, Mr. President. I am very delighted to
see you chairing this meeting today, thus underscoring
the importance that Singapore attaches to Africa in
general and to the prevention and resolution of conflict
in Africa in particular. Our congratulations go also to
Ambassador Mahbubani and to his efficient and
capable staff, with whom we enjoy the best of
relations.

May I also pay a well-deserved tribute to
Ambassador Koonjul of Mauritius for steering the ad
hoc Working Group into action. I truly commend him
for his earnest attempts to cooperate, liaise and
contribute with respect to all issues of interest to us,
specifically African issues.

I would also like to echo fully and endorse the
sincere sentiments expressed by Ambassador Kebe'
towards Mr. Fall. Mr. Fall has been a pillar of
moderation and a source of wise counsel. This morning
he made an eloquent statement that was clear testimony
to his insightful appreciation of African issues.

Perhaps the heart of the matter and why we are
here again today in a public meeting on the situation in
Africa is contained in the second paragraph of
Ambassador Koonjul's letter of 10 January 2002
addressed to the Council President, who happened to
be himself at that time (S/2002/46). Here Ambassador
Koonjul observed that the Council had been dealing
with almost all the conflict situations in Africa, but,
unfortunately, we are not getting the desired overall
results.

It is proposed therefore that the issues be
revisited, attention be refocused on Africa, a proactive
approach for the continent be devised and a workable
set of recommendations be worked out. We have the 31
January statement laying out in concrete terms the
framework for Council actions, which resulted in the
establishment of the ad hoc Working Group, which has
already elaborated its programme of work, which is the
basis for this meeting today.

The analysis of the root causes of the conflicts in
Africa has occupied this Council for too long, but it
took a dramatic turn with the 1998 report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (S/1998/318). For the first time,
the links between the conflicts in Africa and, inter alia,
poverty and development were clearly spelled out. In
other words, the problems have been identified and
solutions have been proposed. What remains to be done
has always been to put these recommendations into
practice and to gather the resources necessary to
guarantee their success, of course always trying to put
in place the structures and mechanisms to promote
their implementation.

In this respect, we welcome the programme of
work proposed by the ad hoc Working Group. Some of
the issues identified are technical in nature; some call
for strengthening and enhancing coordination as well
as consultation with the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and subregional organizations; and some
require further inputs in clarifying the roles and
relationships of certain actors.

While all this merits discussion, as should be the
case - and I do concur with the inputs outlined by
colleagues who preceded me this morning - I would
also like to draw the attention of the Council to the
broader and larger question that needs a frank and
honest response: why does the situation persist despite
all the initiatives and efforts to tackle the pernicious
issues of conflict situations in Africa?

Among the broader issues that require focus and
commitment, in our view, is the inability to adopt
effective, timely and necessary measures to deal with
conflict situations in Africa. Where there is
intervention after a lapse of time, mandates and
resources available for the operations are not consonant
with the requirements of the situation. Where the
strategic, political and economic importance of a
conflict is deemed significant to some parties, usually a
movement towards early action is discernible. Certain
conflicts, however, are left to take their own course.
With that inaction, incalculable loss of lives and
destruction are experienced, and it takes years and
generations to overcome the attendant stagnation and
decay of economic activities.

I am raising these broader but core issues because
there is a certain sense of deja-vu with regard to the
propensity to meet, discuss and analyse Africa's
condition. Both the Council and the General Assembly
have thoroughly examined the 1998 definitive report of
the Secretary-General. The implementation of the
recommendations, however, has been indecisive and
slow, particularly in light of African expectations.

This brings us to another question in the context
of addressing broader issues. Can the Council be even-
handed in addressing all conflicts in the world, but
particularly African conflicts?

Finally, we hope that we may be near the point
where talk, analysis and proposals are concluded, and
that we move on to vigorous, comprehensive and
meaningful measures, instituted in coordination with
the OAU, African subregions, the donor community
and the Economic and Social Council in order to
combine the experiences, capabilities and resources of
all concerned for the benefit of the lives of people
crying for help.

