Mr. Ramos-Horta: On behalfofmy colleagues who
served with me on the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (HIPPO), I commend you, Mr. Prime
Minister, and the Permanent Mission of Ethiopia for
this very timely initiative. I also thank you, Sir, for the
invitation extended to me to participate today. Sitting
behind me is my colleague Ian Martin, who will be very
familiar to many members of the Security Council.

It is very gratifying to us that our report (see S/2015/446) and recommendations were so well received
by Member States. Indeed, our report was not written
by Ivy League academics or doctoral students without
field experience. I was privileged to work with eminent
achievers with deep experience of peacekeeping and
special political missions. After criss-crossing the globe
in our consultations, our report reflected the collective
experience and recommendations of hundreds of
people from many walks of life - retired and serving
military and police officers who saw wars up-close, and
community leaders and activists who live in the midst
of conflicts.

We acknowledge the extent to which former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon embraced our
recommendations, the consideration they have been
given by the General Assembly and by the Security
Council, and the work already undertaken by the
Secretariat towards their implementation. But the
essential shifts advocated by HIPPO remain to
be achieved.

The three peace and security reviews - on peace
operations, the peacebuilding architecture and of the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda - as well as the World Humanitarian Summit,
converged on the crucial need for more effective conflict
prevention and for working to sustain peace before,
during and after conflict. Last month, the Council was
reminded of HIPPO's approach to sustaining peace
when our colleague Youssef Mahmoud contributed
to its discussion of the contribution of peacekeeping
operations to this overarching goal (see S/PV.8033). The
Council has embraced this priority, and no Secretary-
General has made a stronger commitment to prevention
and the necessary surge of diplomacy than has
Secretary-General Guterres. We see it reflected in his
insistence on an integrated system-wide commitment
to prevention, in the way in which he has organized
his Executive Office, in his proposals for reform of
the development system as well as of the peace and
security architecture, and in his appointment ofa High-
level Advisory Board on Mediation - half of whose
members are women, consistent with his commitment
to gender parity and HIPPO's emphasis on the role of
women in all aspects of sustaining peace.

It is national leaders and stakeholders who have the
primary responsibility to prevent conflicts and engage
in mediation, and the United Nations should seek to
support local and regional prevention and mediation
partners. Our report emphasized that the United
Nations must invest in its own capacities to undertake
prevention and mediation and in its capacity to assist
others, particularly at the national and regional levels.
These core United Nations functions must, we said, be
funded under the regular budget, and not be dependent
on voluntary funding. Member States should support
the Secretary-General in these mediation efforts, both
politically and financially.

Secretary-General Ban wisely asked our Panel to
review peace operations, not peacekeeping missions
alone, and he accepted our recommendation that
the United Nations should embrace the term "peace
operations". Our intention was not to move away
from the principles of peacekeeping, which we said
remained valid, but maintaining sharp distinctions
between peacekeeping operations and special political
missions should give way to a continuum of responses
and smoother transitions between different phases of
missions. He accepted our critique of the dysfunction
of the present departmental configuration, which has
hampered the effective design and conduct of peace
operations, but rightly left it to his successor to consider
a restructuring.

I believe that the proposals for restructuring the
peace and security pillar, which Secretary-General
Guterres has now outlined, meet the two greatest
concerns of HIPPO. The management of both
peacekeeping operations and large field-based special
political missions by the same department will enable
situation-specific responses tailored to context and
smoother transitions as those contexts evolve. The
single political-operational structure under regional
Assistant Secretaries-General that would link the two
reconfigured departments will not only overcome
duplication and rivalry, but will ensure that peace
operations are designed and managed within their
regional context and in closer consultation with the
relevant regional organizations. Our report said that
the essential shifts we outlined would not be achieved
without restructuring. This reform proposal is therefore
to be warmly welcomed.

The Council has been concerned with seeing
reviews of individual peace operations carried out,
and our report itself recommended a review of long-
standing missions to assess their effectiveness. We
addressed the shortcomings of the Secretariat's
policy, analysis and strategy-development processes,
and stressed the need for a core capacity for strategic
analysis and assessment, including in the planning and
review of peace operations. We also recommended that
independent evaluations of peace operations should be
commissioned at key decision points. The Secretary-
General's establishment of a strategic planning and
monitoring unit in his Executive Office is precisely the
reform that has been required to ensure better planning
and reviews - with, I hope, an independent element.

The Council's decisions in mandating peace
operations on the basis of such planning and reviews
should always reflect the primacy of politics, and I
hope the Council will be stronger in its insistence
upon and support for the political strategies that
peace operations are deployed to pursue. While some
reviews may properly lead to reduction of resources, I
would remind the Council that both the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) and the HIPPO report emphasized that
mandates, resources, expectations and capabilities
must be in alignment if peace operations are not to be
set up for failure.

It is a pleasure to recall in the presence of
Secretary-General Guterres and Chairperson Mahamat
the emphasis our report placed on partnerships with
regional organizations, in particular the African Union
(AU), and to warmly welcome their signature in April
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security.
I reiterate here today HIPPO's support for flexible,
sustainable and predictable funding for the AU peace
operations that the Council authorizes, and for the use
of United Nations assessed contributions on a case-by-
case basis. I emphasize too our belief in the importance
of United Nations regional offices as forward
platforms for conflict prevention in partnership with
regional actors, of which the successful efforts early
this year to resolve the crisis in the Gambia were an
excellent example.

In arguing for an essential shift to field-focused
administration, HIPPO presented the distinct needs
of the field. We know that the Secretary-General,
coming to Headquarters from a field agency, fully
intends his management-reform proposals to provide
the delegation of authority that is absolutely essential
to those who provide the services to the field and to
expedite service delivery and recruitment. From the
HIPPO perspective, both the changes in management
and policy and the operational support that is proposed
to be provided to both Headquarters and the field by
a single department must be rigorously assessed as to
their impact in the field. We urge Member States to take
whatever decisions are required to fully support such
a delegation.

HIPPO's advocacy of an essential shift towards
more people-centred peace operations has been widely
quoted, and should be taken to heart by the leadership
of every peace operation. Critical for the moral
credibility of a peace operation is effective action to
prevent sexual exploitation and abuse. The Secretary-
General has given the leadership required and has gone
far beyond the recommendations we made in 2015.
We urge Member States to enter into the compacts
he proposes.

In conclusion, in the course of 40 years - when
I first came to the Council, I was 25 years old, the
youngest person in the Chamber - today, as I survey
the Chamber, I seem to be the oldest - starting as an
innocent and romantic believer in the promises and
possibilities of the United Nations, I have seen the
best - when it lived up to the expectations of the people
it deployed to protect - but also shocking betrayals on
other front lines. I have engaged with United Nations
personnel in my own country and in remote outposts
where dedicated field staff have to bear the indifference
of Headquarters, whose envoys descended on us, when
I was in the field, to evaluate the mission, yet things
stay the same. The United Nations can do better. The
Council can do better. I trust that today's debate will
mark a significant step on the road to the improvements
that the High-level Panel has marked out.

