Mr. van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
thank the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for the
initiative to organize this important and very timely
debate.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement made earlier by the observer of the
European Union.

In View of time constraints, I will limit myself to
the main points of my statement. My full statement
will be available via my Twitter account. I will address
three issues: education, our international involvement
and the importance of inclusiveness.

First, with regard to education, the Netherlands
has an active policy aimed at strengthening the role
of young people in countering violent extremism and
promoting peace. Our approach is characterized by
strengthening the role of families, professionals and
their communities in countering radicalization and
social tensions.

The Netherlands aims to enhance knowledge and
expertise within the triangle of parents, schools and
their social environment. In our view, parents play a key
role in preventing radicalization. To reach parents, we
have developed a set of tools and answers that provide
guidance for education in this context. We organize
local information sessions about recruitment methods
and the dangers children face on the Internet, an issue
many of us have addressed before.
In addition, the Netherlands has set up a national
advisory centre that offers support to family members
of radicalized individuals. Furthermore, we aim to
enhance the expertise of professionals in education to
better identify and discuss radicalization. We train many
teachers in recognizing radicalization and acting upon
it. We have developed a toolbox, including web portals,
e-learning and networks of front-line professionals
who can provide advice. Our schools have the duty to
discuss citizenship and related values such as equality,
the freedom of expression, the freedom of religion and
freedom in general.

My third point in this context is that it is important
to be in contact with young people in the immediate
vicinity of their communities. In order to influence
groups of young people, we involve youth leaders to be
voices of moderation and reason. At the local level that
requires cooperation among schools, municipalities,
the police, civil society and political and religious
groups. Municipalities are supported in their efforts to
strengthen such community networks - for instance, by
organizing group dialogues with parents, professionals
and key opinion leaders, such as imams.

The second issue I wish to discuss concerns
our international activities. We are involved in
many international initiatives. Let me mention the
Radicalisation Awareness Network and the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum. Of course, we also support
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, which we are very happy to
see represented in the Council. Let me also mention in
particular the bilateral cooperation that exists between
the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Kingdom
of Morocco in preventing terrorism and addressing
radicalization. Another specific activity includes our
work with non-governmental organizations on this
matter. As an example, we have financed a publication
on strategic communication in countering the narrative
of extremist organizations.

The third issue concerns inclusiveness. The
Netherlands firmly believes in the necessity of more
inclusive decision-making, which should empower
young people to voice their concerns. Young people
should be active partners in tolerance and conflict
prevention initiatives. We must ensure that their
priorities are part of our policies. Governments should
be responsive to the concerns of young people. This
holds true in particular for the post-2015 sustainable
development agenda. The young people of today are
both an object and a subject of that agenda. Not only
will it define their future, they will be the ones who in
large measure will have to implement it. All sustainable
development goals are relevant for the young people of
today. Their voice must be heard; their commitment is
crucial; their action is needed.

As we speak, the Netherlands United Nations
Youth Representative, Jilt van Schayik, is travelling
from Amsterdam to South Africa, crossing more than
20 countries and passing through two continents. In
good Dutch tradition, he is covering more than 11,000
kilometres by bicycle. The purpose ofhisjourney, called
Building Bridges, is to listen to the young people in the
countries he visits. We will use his input as valuable
content for the post-2015 agenda. Young delegates like
him are positive role models for other youth around the
world.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
prides itself in being a partner for peace, justice and
development. An old Dutch proverb says, "He who is
young, controls the future". Let us work together for a
future where the youth of today shall wield the tools of
peace, justice and development. instead of the arms of
hatred and terror.

