Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate, which is
timely. We are grateful to Burkina Faso for
championing this issue in the Council and to
Mr. Pascoe and his team for today's briefing.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2009/ 189) and
today's debate provide an opportunity to put the
spotlight on what can be done to ensure that the
mediation efforts of the international community -
and especially of the United Nations - are more
effective in helping to resolve conflict. It is important.
The failure to generate durable peace agreements will
lead to the continued scourge of conflict, which both
the countries concerned and their neighbours can ill
afford.

The international community's recent record in
supporting mediation efforts has been mixed. We have
seen some clear successes, such as Kofi Annan's
leadership of the international community's efforts in
Kenya and President Obasanjo's engagement in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Mr. Pascoe
rightly highlighted Special Representative Ould
Abdallah's work to bring the political process in
Somalia to a more positive stage, and President
Campaore has played an important personal role in
Togo and C6te d'Ivoire.

But as the Secretary-General's report makes clear,
there is much more that the United Nations can and
should be doing, and we support that conclusion. The
report's emphasis on early mediation is critical. Every
effort needs to be made to put an early stop to an
emerging crisis before it can develop into conflict and
humanitarian emergency which places further strain on
already limited peacekeeping resources.

We therefore see it as an important and positive
development that we are now seeing proper investment
in United Nations mediation capacities. We welcome
the General Assembly's decision to enhance the
capacity in mediation of the Department of Political
Affairs as part of strengthening its overall preventive
diplomacy effort. With these new resources, we shall of
course be looking for improved performance from
Mr. Pascoe's department and the United Nations as a
whole. We welcome specifically the establishment of
the Mediation Support Unit and the assistance it has
provided the United Nations and other mediation
efforts. We appreciate the need for flexible resources,
including for the early startup of mediation activities.

But it is not just a question of resources. The
report provides some useful principles for successful
mediation. We need to ensure that every effort is made
and every opportunity taken to improve the speed and
effectiveness of mediation efforts. We need to ask a
number of questions: Are the right mechanisms in
place? Can we trigger the early launch of mediation
efforts? Can we determine who is best placed to lead a
mediation effort? And can we ensure that other actors
support the person in the lead?

My colleagues have talked about the need for
increased numbers of women to be involved in
mediation. The statistics in the report about their
under-representation are striking, and we need to work
much harder to ensure the full involvement of women,
and of civil society generally. This is particularly
important for conflict situations that have been
characterized by widespread sexual violence, and the
United Kingdom looks forward to further discussion of
this issue in the context of the Secretary-General's
reports on peacebuilding and on women and peace and
security.

Mediation cannot be conducted in a vacuum.
Mediation capacity must be a core part of any
institutional architecture to address conflict, and we
need to ensure that the right links are made between
mediators and those engaged in the planning and
implementation of peace agreements.

In taking forward the report's recommendations,
as Mr. Pascoe noted, the Secretariat will also need to
take account of the conclusions of the forthcoming
reports of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and
early recovery, which we hope will be comprehensive
and ambitious. They will also need to take account of
the work being undertaken for a more rigorous and
strategic approach to peacekeeping.

With that in mind, we support the overall effort
and this debate, and we support the conclusions set out
in the draft presidential statement.
