Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): Allow me to first
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your country on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. It is a great honour for me to be back in
this Chamber and to share with Council members our
opinion on the current developments in Timor-Leste, as
well as some of our ideas and actions for the near
future.

The Security Council has been following the
question of Timor-Leste since December 1975. Many
decades have passed, and together we have overcome
many difficulties and challenges. Today, we live in an
independent, peaceful and democratic country.

On 12 October, democracy and accountability
were put to the test in our national Parliament. Speaker
Fernando "Lasama" de Araujo, the leader of the
Democratic Party and a member of the current majority
coalition, convened a session of Parliament to debate a
motion of no confidence in the Government, tabled by
the opposition party FRETILIN. Their stated reason for
the motion was the unconstitutionality and illegality of
the Government's decision to grant freedom to a former
militia leader accused of taking part in the massacre at
the church in Suai district in 1999. It was a lively
debate that lasted almost an entire day, and it was
broadcast live on national television and followed by
thousands of Timorese.

Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao successfully
defended the Government's actions. The motion was
rejected by the national Parliament by an absolute and
solid majority. The decisions taken were based on the
Constitution of our country and our national interests.
The former militia leader was not released but was
transferred to the Indonesian embassy, since he is an
Indonesian citizen. As of now, he remains at the
Indonesian embassy, waiting for legal procedures to
take their course.

Before I came on 20 October, Minister of Justice
Lucia Lobato and I had a meeting with defence lawyer
Sergio Ornay. He informed us of the two petitions he
had delivered to the Tribunal requesting the release of
his client for health reasons. No decision has been
taken by the Tribunal to date. We commend the
Government and the embassy of Indonesia in Dili for
their understanding of the legal complexity of the case.

On 13 October, an independent comprehensive
needs assessment team comprised of four judicial and
legal experts from the international community, led by
Judge Rapoza of the United States, published their
report. Many recommendations were made; some will
take many years to be implemented. Some are already
included in the Government's plans. I would like to
quote the conclusions of the report:

"As noted throughout this report, a
significant amount of progress has been made in
developing the overall justice system of Timor-
Leste. Although a number of challenges and
needs continue to exist, the Timorese with whom
the team interacted demonstrated a high degree of
dedication and commitment. Although there is no
question that they foresee the need for continued
advice and assistance from the international
community, they are motivated by a vision of a
justice system run by the Timorese. This is a goal
worth striving for and is a cause that deserves the
continued support of the international
community."

One of the major challenges we as the people of
Timor-Leste have encountered was the crisis of 2006.
Some 150,000 Timorese fled their homes and
65 internally displaced person tent camps were
established in Dili and other districts. With the
assistance of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), United Nations agencies,
non-governmental organizations, the European
Commission, many countries and other partners, the
Ministry of Social Solidarity was able to reintegrate all
the internally displaced persons (IDPs) and close all
the IDP camps this year.

The Government has invested its best efforts and
allocated $35.8 million to provide support for their
reintegration. Today, many of their houses have been
rebuilt. We are now preparing to deliver the second
phase of assistance to the 16,500 registered internally
displaced families. By the end of 2009, we will provide
recovery assistance for the possessions and assets
destroyed.

We have also developed a social housing
programme to support the elderly, the disabled, widows
and chronically ill. A total of 450 improved traditional
houses will be built this year. Next year, we will
continue to expand this programme so that better
housing will be available to our most vulnerable
people.

We are also providing assistance to poor
households to prevent malnutrition during the lean
season. We have provided food assistance this year to
almost 90,000 households. A special programme has
been created for widows and single mothers,
particularly those who are ill and whose circumstances
prevent them from earning an income to support their
children. Assistance is provided for them to purchase
food, clothing and school materials for their children.
As of today, 7,050 families have received assistance
under this programme.

A social security programme this year will benefit
almost 65,000 elderly persons and a total of 5,355
disabled citizens. The Government has allocated
$16.25 million for this programme. From January to
August of this year, 3,267 veterans and the families of
the martyrs have received their pensions. The total
potential number of beneficiaries is 12,540. The
Government, under the leadership of Prime Minister
Gusmao, believes that by implementing these social
policies, we are also investing in the stability and
social harmony of our country.

Social harmony and stability, the values of
democracy and respect for the rule of law were
recently demonstrated by our people in every village in
Timor-Leste during the successful and peaceful Suku
elections that were held this month. We thank the
United Nations system, United Nations volunteers and
the international community for their support. The
Timorese National Electoral Commission did a great
job in supervising the elections, and the Technical

09-573 62
Secretariat for Electoral Administration did a great job
in organizing these elections.

Security sector reform has been a priority since
the inauguration of the current Government. Progress
has been made in the defence area. The draft national
security law and national defence law are now before
the national Parliament. The new Ministry of Defence
and Security structure, the military police law, a
military service law and amendments to the military
service law were approved. There is ongoing
discussion on the drafts of the new Falintil-Forcas de
Defesa de Timor-Leste structure, the concept and
system of training and the new concept of employment.

A draft national security law is before the
Parliament, laying out the roles and responsibilities of
the respective forces. The process will lead to civilian
oversight and professional defence and security forces.
The United Nations and the Government have agreed
on a mechanism to progressively hand over
responsibilities to the National Police Force of Timor-
Leste (PNTL). So far, three districts and one unit of the
police academy have been handed over to PNTL
control.

By investing in human resources and providing
better infrastructure, equipment and salaries to our
defence and security forces, we will help them fulfil
their obligations under our Constitution. This reform is
a long-term process. Some scholars and experts say
that it may take a generation, but we are confident that
we are going in the right direction and at the right
speed.

In order to achieve lasting and sustainable peace
and stability, we also need to invest in the development
of the country. As a nation blessed with natural
resources, we have allocated our own resources to the
financing of the national budget. Petroleum and gas
revenues have been our main source of income. The
petroleum fund reached $5 billion in July this year; the
fund's annual return was 4.17 per cent.

Just a few days ago in Buenos Aires, Argentina,
Timor-Leste became a member of the International Gas
Union to better protect our interests. Next year, we will
establish a national oil company and invest in the
creation of the basic infrastructure needed to develop
our petroleum and gas industry.

Economic data of the World Bank indicate that
Timor-Leste's economic growth rate was 12.8 per cent
in 2008. This year, we hope to achieve growth of 8 to
9 per cent. The national budget for 2010 will be
debated in the national parliament next month. A total
of seven national priority areas have been identified:
roads and water; food security, focused on
productivity; human resources and development;
access to justice; social services and decentralized
service delivery; good governance; and public safety.
We expect to maintain our economic growth. We will
invest in infrastructure needed for development. We
will create more jobs for our people. We will continue
to invest in education, health and gender equality.

In order to improve budget execution, efficiency
and professionalism in public service, parliament has
approved a proposal by the Government to create a
civil service commission, which is an independent
body. Parliament has also approved a proposal by the
Government to create a national anti-corruption
commission to combat and prevent corruption in State
institutions and in our society.

With all those systems and institutions in place
and operational, we might say to the world that we as a
people are saying a final goodbye to conflict and
welcoming development with an open-hearted smile.

In August this year, Mr. Ramos-Horta, President
of the Republic, took the initiative to organize the
Timor-Leste Tour. That international cycling event took
participants to the villages, mountains and valleys of
our country. Thousands of Timorese came to our roads
with warm smiles, welcoming and applauding
participants from many nations. President
Ramos-Horta has already announced that next year,
Timor-Leste will organize an international fishing
competition. Through such initiatives, we hope to
achieve a new and better image for our country: that of
a peaceful and caring people. We are ready to share
with the world the beauty of our people and our
landscape.

I would like to thank Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his great
and invaluable contributions to peace, stability,
democracy and harmony in our country. His weekly
meetings with President Ramos-Horta, Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmao, Speaker Fernando "Lasama" and
opposition leader Mr. Mari Alkatiri are deeply
appreciated.

I thank Deputy Special Representatives
Finn Reske-Nielsen and Takahisa Kawakami and all
members of UNMIT for their continuous support. I
have had the honour of participating with the Special
Representative and his colleagues in the Trilateral
Coordination Forum to discuss the security challenges
and threats in Timor-Leste. We have learned much
from him. We - and I personally - believe that the
international community will continue to rely on his
expertise, experience and intelligence. We wish
Mr. Khare and his family a successful journey,
whatever the missions or challenges they may embrace
or encounter in the future.

Finally, as President Ramos-Horta has stated
many times, Timor-Leste will continue to need the
presence and support of the United Nations until 2012.
We would like to take this opportunity to praise the
countries and Governments of Council members for
their support for peace, stability, democracy,
transparency, the rule of law, gender equality, human
rights, justice and development in Timor-Leste.

