Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and also to express our gratitude to the
Permanent Representative of France, Ambassador
Merimee, for his skilled guidance of our work in May.

I should like also to welcome to our ranks the new
Permanent Representative of China, Ambassador Qin
Huasun, at this, the first official meeting of the Security
Council in which he has participated.

Russia, with unflagging attention, continues to follow
the development of the situation in and around Rwanda:
we note with satisfaction the indications of a gradual
normalization of the situation. We hope that the
Rwandese authorities, in conjunction with the country's
various political forces and with the assistance of the
international community, will succeed in fully stabilizing
the situation and in creating the necessary conditions for
solving the problems spawned by the civil war, dealing
with the aftermath and, above all, for the refugees to
return to their homes.

In the context of the new situation, we agree with
the need to make certain adjustments to the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR), and believe that the Mission's new mandate,
which was drafted taking the wishes of the Rwandese
leadership into account and which the members of the
Council have just adopted unanimously, retains an
adequate United Nations presence and an active United
Nations role in Rwanda. We expect that further
constructive cooperation by the Government of Rwanda
with UNAMIR and the Secretary-General's Special
Representative will assist in the speediest possible
achievement of national reconciliation and reconstruction.

Russia, like a number of other States, is actively
participating in international emergency assistance to
Rwanda, and has been involved since the early stages of
the crisis in rendering humanitarian assistance. In
addition, there are Russian military observers in
UNAMIR.

On the political level, we continue to believe that the
Arusha Agreement continues to define the framework for
a peaceful settlement. We note the special role that the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and Rwanda's
neighbouring countries are called upon to play.

We cannot fail to be concerned by the situation
resulting from the continuing militarization of certain
camps located in adjacent countries. We note with
satisfaction the useful activity of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),

 

which, through constructive contacts with the Zairian
authorities, was able to establish order in refugee camps
under UNHCR's control. We hope that Rwanda's
neighbouring countries, in accordance with the provisions
of the resolution just adopted, will take all necessary
measures to put an end to the illegal delivery of weapons
to extremists from the Rwandan opposition. This will be an
important contribution to the maintenance of stability both
in Rwanda and in the region as a whole.

