Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to join the
participants in today's discussion in expressing our
sincere gratitude for the organization of this important
debate. It is only fair that this meeting take place
during the presidency of Indonesia - a nation with an
outstanding peacekeeping record.

I am about to deliver a statement in my national
capacity; however, I would also like to signal that
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General and the briefers for their valuable
input to the discussion. It is a particular pleasure for
me to welcome the Force Commander of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lieutenant General
Elias Rodrigues Martins Filho. That Mission continues
to be a decisive stabilization factor on the ground
with the substantive support of Ukrainian attack and
military transport helicopters.

From the briefings it appears indisputable that, to
keep up with an unpredictable world, the United Nations
peacekeeping endeavour urgently requires additional
reform. It is high time to assess the current state of
play and prospects of United Nations peacekeeping. I
sincerely hope that this debate will contribute to that
Vital exercise.

We fully support the efforts of the Secretary-
General to implement a robust, comprehensive
United Nations reform agenda within the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. There are certainly palpable
results achieved in the implementation of the September
2018 Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which Ukraine also
joined. However, we still have a long road before us to
make contemporary and fully effective peacekeeping
a reality.

For Ukraine, as an active troop contributor and
an initiator of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, the theme of
our discussion has much practical meaning. Ukrainian
Blue Helmets have been participating in United Nations
operations throughout the world. In many cases, they
have been instrumental in reaching peace - from the
Balkans to Liberia. Ukraine's involvement in United
Nations peacekeeping did not cease even at the height
of the ongoing armed aggression against my country,
and even as Ukraine continues to await action from the
Council on the deployment of a peacekeeping operation
to the occupied territory in Ukrainian Donbas.

Unfortunately, the casualty level in United Nations
peacekeeping remains a grim reminder of the still
unsatisfactory level of personnel safety and security.
On the other hand, the action for protecting civilians
as an integral part of the peacekeeping endeavour still
lacks efficiency and determination. Both issues have
often similar or closely interlinked causes, as was
rightly outlined by the briefers. I see several essential
issues to be addressed for success here.

Ukraine proceeds from the understanding that the
United Nations has to use all its potential to prevent
the outbreak, resurgence and prolongation of armed
conflicts. Gross human rights violations are often a
precursor to the outbreak of a military conflict. Yet
some Member States try very hard to prevent the
United Nations and the Council from addressing human
rights violations as an issue of international peace and
security. The consequences of such irresponsibility can
be seen in many places around the globe.

Decisions on peacekeeping operation deployment
should be based on a political solution or guided by
peace agreements, which must include the protection
of civilians. If an operation's mandate has nothing to
do with the implementation of peace accords, such
a peacekeeping operation will not serve its main
objective of establishing lasting peace and can result in
the freezing, or even in the escalation, of the conflict.
Any peacekeeping operation relies on appropriate force
generation to be able to deliver on its mandate. One
should not be deceived by a false belief in the ability
of peacekeeping operations to function efficiently
and effectively without proper funding and sufficient
capabilities, including aviation assets, advanced
intelligence and modern technologies.

The Council should continue the dialogue with
troop- and police-contributing countries in formal and
informal consultations during the establishment or
renewal of peacekeeping operation mandates, in order
to ensure proper and on-time personnel training and
equipment supply to the missions. Proper conduct by,
and the discipline of all personnel deployed in, United

Nations peacekeeping operations are vital to their
effectiveness. The Council must continue to support
the Secretary-General's initiative to eradicate sexual
violence in United Nations peacekeeping operations. It
is essential also to ensure gender balance integration
in peacekeeping operations, which would certainly
further improve their capabilities to address gender-
based violence, thereby contributing dramatically to
conflict resolution.

Ukraine has committed itself to the protection of
civilians policy, including by recognizing the Kigali
Principles, and Views the issue of the protection
of civilians as one of the most important tasks of
peacekeeping operations. One of the practical ways for
achieving improvement in that regard is by eliminating
the practice of caveats, which often becomes an obstacle
for a swift reaction by the United Nations.

We also support the importance of protecting the
environment in peacekeeping operations, which could
make them a more effective instrument in curbing
challenges on the ground. We welcome the ongoing
implementation of the environmental performance
and risk management framework in peacekeeping
operations. It is now important to translate into action
data collected from the framework in the course of
peacekeeping operations.

Our Organization has to move from traditional
to cost-effective and smart peacekeeping, using all
the necessary technologies and capabilities. As we
approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations next year, we have to be prepared to give an
honest assessment of the peacekeeping activities of
the Organization. We must be prepared to assess all
its achievements and gaps in the face of contemporary
challenges in order to make our peace efforts stronger
than ever before.

