Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The support of the United Nations has played an essential
role in the establishment in Haiti of a police force that
respects legality. The strengthening of the national police is
essential for the consolidation of democracy and a State
based on the rule of law in Haiti.

Following earlier United Nations missions, the
United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH),
whose mandate ends on 30 November, has supported
efforts made by the Haitian authorities, particularly in the
area of police training. United Nations monitors have also
provided assistance to the Haitian National Police in
carrying out their daily tasks.

As stressed by President Preval in his letter of 29
October addressed to the Secretary-General, this police
force, which has been in action for only two years, still
needs support to complete its development.

The Secretary-General's report notes that the current
situation in the country remains fraught with uncertainty.
There are still many difficulties - political, social and
security difficulties. It is therefore essential that the
security of the population be guaranteed by a police force
which is competent, effective, and which enjoys the trust
of the people.

For all these reasons, France supports the request of
the Haitian authorities to establish a civilian police
mission. It also supports the recommendations made by
the Secretary-General to that end.

Within the group of Friends of the Secretary-General
for Haiti, France participated in the preparation of the
draft resolution now before the Council. France will vote
in favour of the text. The draft resolution proposes the
establishment of a United Nations civilian police mission
for the next 12 months. This mission will be responsible
for helping the authorities to continue with the work of
professionalizing the Haitian National Police.
While continuing the work already undertaken by the
United Nations, the new mission will mark a change
compared to previous missions. This mission will be
entirely composed of civilian police. Specific
arrangements have been made, inter alia, in the area of
the security of United Nations monitors. However, these
arrangements, as the draft resolution makes clear, do not
constitute precedents for other operations of the same
kind.

France will continue to contribute financially to the
mission under the terms of United Nations resolutions on
this subject. In this regard, we took note with interest of
the document submitted to us during unofficial
consultations this morning that gives the picture of
contributions made, payments outstanding and amounts
due. It is agreeable for France to see that it is fully paid

 

up with regard to past contributions for the financing of
United Nations missions. We hope that this example, which
fortunately is not the only example, will be followed by all
Member States.

We will also give a contribution in staff comparable
to the one we gave to the United Nations Transition
Mission in Haiti. France will make available to the new
mission 36 gendarmes and policemen, as well as the senior
officer who is currently heading the police force.

