Mr. Jinga (Romania): At the outset, I would like
to commend the People's Republic of China for holding
today's debate. I am confident that under China's
presidency the Security Council will continue to build
on this important topic.

Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.

In the light of the recent sacrifices made by the
Blue Helmets, I would like to recall the words of former
Deputy Secretary-General and President of the General
Assembly Jan Eliasson when he said,

"For all the civilians saved thanks to the presence
of peacekeepers, there have been those who were
lost - the United Nations personnel who sacrificed
their lives for a noble cause. Even as we mourn
our fallen colleagues, we are all uplifted by their
unflinching commitment and are inspired to strive
even harder for the collective cause so eloquently
envisaged in the United Nations Charter: a world
free from the scourge of war." (GA/SM/3 74)
Romania has a long-term commitment to the core
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the peace, development and justice nexus,
which is also our motto as a candidate country for a
non-permanent seat on the Security Council for a term
from 2020 to 2021.

As a security provider, my country attaches great
importance to the effectiveness of the United Nations
Organization in the pursuit of peace and stability. Since
1991, when the first Romanian military peacekeepers
were deployed to the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission, more than 12,500 Romanian
military, police and close-protection personnel have
served under the blue flag all over the world in 25
United Nations missions. Romania is currently one of
the foremost European contributors of police officers
to United Nations missions. Our national contribution
to the United Nations missions on the African
continent covers the entire spectrum of security in six
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
in the Central African Republic, Mali, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Darfur and Libya.

We also recall the recommendations of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, and see
them as a tool for achieving the Organization's most
valuable goal, global peace. At the same time, Romania
strongly supports the efforts undertaken by the
Secretary-General, through his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, aimed at ensuring that the primary focus is on
political solutions and on strengthening the protection
of civilians and improving the safety and security of
peacekeepers through effective performance in the
field and accountability at all levels.

Following its endorsement of the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, Romania notified the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) that in line with
our peacekeeping commitments, starting in October
2019 we will contribute a military utility helicopter
unit made up of four helicopters to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. They will not only provide transportation
services, but will also be able to carry out aerial medical
evacuation tasks, which should now be a standard
requirement for all utility helicopters in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as recognized in resolution
2436 (2018).

Romania is also committed to maintaining its
current rate of 20 per cent female participation in
peacekeeping operations as military observers and
military staff officers by implementing a set of
measures designed to increase the pool of female
officers fit for such missions and ready to be deployed
in accordance with the positions allocated by DPKO.
Moreover, for the second consecutive year, Romania
is supporting the work of the Office of the Special
Coordinator on improving the United Nations response
to sexual exploitation and abuse with a military expert
on military loan, and in doing so is one of only two
countries that have made available the services of
qualified military personnel to assist the Office of the
Special Coordinator.

Lastly, Romania welcomes resolutions 2320 (2016)
and 2378 (2017), which we regard as a cornerstone of
the foundation for solid and sustainable peacekeeping
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union, and we stand ready to contribute further
to that cooperation.

