Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay is aware ofthe alarming migration and refugee
situation at the global level. According to data of the
International Organization for Migration, between
1 January and 28 September approximately 302,486
migrants and refugees entered Europe by sea and
3,502 men, women and children died or disappeared.
We often see heart-breaking images of the dead from
North Africa and the Middle East who, while trying
desperately to escape from the wars and the conflicts
that have brokenout there, cross the Mediterranean Sea
under inhumane conditions, while putting their lives at
risk.

Uruguay voted in favour of renewing the provisions
of resolution 2040 (2012) by way of today's resolution
2312 (2016), for we are aware of need to address and
provide responses to the smuggling of human beings
by criminal organizations that are benefiting from
the difficult situation being experienced by thousands
of people who are willing to risk their lives by going
to sea in search of a better life. For Uruguay, it is
essentiala that the work of EUNAVFOR Med Operation
Sophia continue in full concordance with international
humanitarian law and while taking into consideratiton
the extreme vulnerability of the refugees and migrants
who cross the Mediterranean Sea. In that regard,
the measures mentioned in the resolution should be
implemented in accordance with the purposes of
principles of a Charter of the United Nations, as well
as international law, international humanitarian law,
refugee law and international human rights law.
Allow me to point out one aspect that is
extremely important for my country, namely, the
non-criminalization of migration. In that connection,
we are concerned by the inclusion, in the seventeenth
preambular paragraph, of the following reference to
illegal migration:

"the need for effective international action to
address both the immediate and long-term aspects
of illegal migration and human trafficking towards
Europe".

My delegation would like to recall that it is not
a crime to migrate, and States should therefore not
develop policies that are aimed at criminalizing
migrants. Moreover, it is important to point out that
implementing resolution 2312 (2016), which we just
adopted, does not affect the human rights of migrants
and asylum seekers aboard vessels who are subject to
the measures set out in the text.

