Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to join others in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Ivan Mrkic', Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and His Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/444) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

On 28 June, Serbia and Kosovo took a further step
towards European integration with the decision by
the Council of the European Union to open accession
negotiations with Serbia and to authorize the start of
negotiations on the conclusion of a stabilization and
association agreement between the European Union and
Kosovo. The decision of the Council of the European
Union was the culmination of the efforts made by the
Serbian and Kosovo Governments since the beginning
of the dialogue facilitated by the European Union. The
commitment of both Governments to implement the
first agreement of principles for the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina, concluded
19 April in Brussels, led to that historic decision.

The exchange of liaison officers, the establishment
of integrated border management and the gradual
dismantling of parallel structures in northern Kosovo
are just a few examples among many that attest to
the progress achieved in the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union. I welcome in that context the
crucial role that European Union High Representative
Catherine Ashton continues to play.

The implementation of the agreement of 19 April
should continue to strengthen the standardization
process. In that regard, we welcome the fact that, at
their meeting in Brussels the day before yesterday, the
two Prime Ministers, Mr. Ivica Daeic' and Mr. Hashim
Thaci, reiterated their commitment to the success of
the municipal elections of 3 November. It is essential
that the necessary conditions be in place to ensure a
good turnout for the elections, especially by Serbs
in northern Kosovo, so that the provisions of the
19 April agreement on the northern municipalities can
have their full impact. The Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe has an important role to
play, since, under the agreement, it is responsible for
facilitating the elections in the north. For its part,
the European Union is considering - with a View to
accepting - the invitation by the President of Kosovo
to deploy an election observation mission to assess the
conduct of the electoral process throughout Kosovo.
Moreover, the time remaining until the next session
of the dialogue facilitated by the European Union,
scheduled for 8 September in Brussels, will be utilized
to continue the negotiations on telecommunication
and energy in order to reach an agreement on those
important issues in a timely manner.

The normalization of relations between Serbia and
Kosovo must absolutely be accompanied by further
reforms in Kosovo. We welcome, in that respect, the role
that the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
continues to play with regard to the implementation of
the normalization agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina and in the fight against organized crime and
corruption, the prosecution of war crimes and the fight
against impunity for the most serious crimes, including
those related to allegations of organ trafficking. It goes
without saying that it is imperative that the Kosovo
authorities continue to work closely with the European
Union's Special Representative for Kosovo, Mr. Samuel
Zbogar, and EULEX to continue building the rule of
law in Kosovo. At the same time, it is clear that full
normalization requires the irreversible dismantling
of parallel structures throughout Kosovo. The rule
of law that we all support must be based on a single
administration, and good faith efforts are needed to get
there.

The recognition of Kosovo by more than half of
the States Members of the United Nations reflects the
positive trend in Kosovo since the establishment of
UNMIK, in 1999. Now, following the agreement of

19 April and given the normalization process that has
been undertaken between Belgrade and Pristina, the
time has come to take into account the new realities
in the international community's approach to the issue,
including within the Security Council. We will probably
need to adapt, in the medium term, the international
community's presence on the ground in Kosovo, as the
European Union and NATO have already done.

As the European perspective for Serbia and Kosovo
materializes in the coming years, it is clear that the
need for United Nations involvement in Kosovo will
decrease. We can only encourage the two countries
and their leaders to continue to show the decisiveness
necessary to bring about that common European future.

