The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of December, I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to Her Excellency Ms. Karen
Pierce, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, for
her service in the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. I am sure I speak for
all members of the Council in expressing our deep
appreciation to Ambassador Pierce and her team for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning Iraq

Twenty-fourth report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
(S/2019/865)

Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2470 (2019) (S/2019/903)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq; Mr. Robert
Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations; and
Monsignor Bashar Matti Warda, Archbishop of Erbil.

Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert is joining today's meeting
Via video-teleconference from Baghdad.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/865, which contains the twenty-fourth
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation

of paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107
(2013), and document S/2019/903, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2470 (2019).

I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.


