Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we welcome some of the important progress we have made in ensuring the role of women as key actors in international peace and security. However, the comprehensive implementation of the women and peace and security agenda remains a challenge, as the global pandemic is diluting the modest gains that have been achieved because of its disproportionate impact on women and girls, who continue to face discrimination, marginalization and exclusion. We are concerned that, owing to various cultural, social and economic factors, substantial participation by women in peace processes remains extremely limited - for example, within the framework of the inter-Afghan dialogue. Gender inequality, increased militarism, the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and violent extremism are all factors at the root of armed conflict. Therefore, ensuring inclusive peace processes with the participation of women is the only way to guarantee their sustainability. Failing this, armed conflict will remain protracted, and therefore exacerbate violence of all kinds, including sexual and gender-based violence, which has a devastating impact on the lives of women and girls. In this regard, we welcome some progress in the normative framework, such as the inclusion in the Arms Trade Treaty of provisions requiring that arms-exporting States consider whether the arms could be used to commit serious gender-based violence or violence against women and children in authorizing a sale. We recognize the essential role of civil society in the design and implementation of this agenda and the special protection that must be provided to women human rights defenders and peacebuilders, who risk their lives in the face of increasing threats and intimidation because of their work. The Security Council should not simply address this agenda on its own. While we have seen progress in this regard, there is concern that, in 2019, provisions on this matter were not included in Council decisions as often as they should have been. We must reverse this trend, as mainstreaming a gender perspective into all its decisions, mandates and the work of its subsidiary bodies is the only way to achieve tangible results on the ground. The following are some of the premises that will guide Mexico's participation in the Security Council. First, women and girls should be placed at the centre of conflict prevention and resolution actions, as well as peacebuilding, and the mandates and strategies of this organ should be based on international human rights law and international humanitarian law, while guaranteeing the protection of all human rights of women and girls in conflict situations and humanitarian contexts. Secondly, the full, equal and meaningful participation of women, especially marginalized groups, such as refugees, migrants, indigenous people, persons with disabilities, the community of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons, young persons and persons from rural areas, should be ensured in all areas related to international peace and security, including conflict prevention, peace processes and their implementation, ceasefire agreements and special political missions, and their role as active agents in peacebuilding, and not just as victims of armed conflict, should be stressed. Thirdly, the number of women civil society and peacebuilders in Security Council meetings should be increased and their recommendations on specific conflict situations should be incorporated. Fourthly, more substantive use of the work of the independent Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security for this agenda should be made by inviting its co-Chairs to review specific situations and the Council's thematic agenda. Mexico will submit its first national action plan this year. And, as part of the Generation Equality Forum, which will take place in 2021, we have promoted the establishment of the Compact for Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action, which will also contribute to the mobilization of funding. We reiterate our commitment to increasing the substantive participation and training of Mexican women in uniform in peace operations. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2538 (2020) and we support the recent call by the Secretary- General on women transforming peace and security. The implementation of this agenda, which we have built over two decades, is a collective endeavour, for which all actors must be held accountable. This year, which also marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Platform for Action, we reaffirm our full commitment to gender equality and the human rights of women and girls, and we will not allow any back-tracking or attempts to weaken this agenda.
