Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes today's open debate. As Matthew
Rycroft has just said, Security Council working
methods matter because poor working methods
can lead to poor outcomes. Progress has been
made in recent years in codifying existing
Council practice in documents such as presidential
note S/2010/507, which we are reviewing today. That is
welcome, as is the new presidential note S/2016/619 on
transitional arrangements for incoming members.

But let us be honest - these notes and statements
do not normally result in better Council performance.
Today I will address a few areas where New Zealand has
sought to improve Council culture and practice during
our term, and where we think further work is required.

First, in regard to the quality ofCouncil interactions,
the Council was intended to be a collective security
body. Too often, it is a forum for polarizing initiatives
and last-minute take-it-or-leave-it drafts tabled by so-
called penholders. Those practices leave no space for
meaningful input from Council colleagues, let alone
affected parties. New Zealand has made it a priority
to try to create space for more meaningful discussions
focused on identifying collective approaches and
solutions. During our presidency in July 2015, we
initiated an ambassador-level breakfast at the start of the
month. The aim was to have Permanent Representatives
talk to each other about the challenges facing the Council
and how they might be resolved. We are pleased that
the breakfast is now becoming an established Council
practice. We Permanent Representatives have had good
conversations about how to manage the programme
of work and topics of the moment, but we believe
that we could do more if we were able and willing to
engage in discussions of a more substantive, problem-
solving nature.

Secondly, in regard to living up to our own
undertakings, paragraph 44 of note S/2010/507 is
clear that all draft resolutions should be introduced in
informal consultations. That almost never happens.
Penholders routinely take zero drafts straight to
meetings of so-called experts. This precludes any real
effort at building genuine consensus on the key policy
questions to be considered. Non-penholders have to
choose between accepting a text largely as presented, or
risk being accused of torpedoing important documents
if they wish to make substantive policy proposals.
Those practices are neither effective, sustainable nor
respectful ofthe perspectives ofother Council members.

Thirdly, as regards more meaningful engagement
with key stakeholders, despite the provisions in
paragraph 33 ofnote S/2010/507, we are yet to see troop-
and police-contributing countries consistently engaged
in Council discussions. Those countries need regular
meaningful engagement on issues of importance to
their contingents. For a variety of reasons, the formal
consultations held a few days before a draft resolution
is adopted rarely produce useful conversations. Last
year, New Zealand instituted the practice of holding
informal triangular consultations among Council
members, contributing countries and the Secretariat to
discuss key issues and challenges facing a number of
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We think it is
important that that practice now be fully mainstreamed
and become part of standard Council procedure.

Time constraints do not permit consideration
of other areas where we consider Council working
methods can be improved, but I want to make some
more general observations.

First, elected members have to take responsibility
for the way the Council operates. It is easy to blame
permanence and the veto for the Council's dysfunction,
but the acquiescence ofthe elected 10 members is also a
big factor. Ten votes are needed to adopt any resolution.
Procedural resolutions cannot be vetoed. If the elected
10 are prepared to assert themselves, the five cannot
dictate terms, especially on working methods, which
are quintessentially a procedural matter.

Secondly, Council practice in the operation of
subsidiary bodies is a glaring case where Council habits
well exceed the requirements of the Charter of the
United Nations. Consensus is laudable if it strengthens
the Council's voice, but to elevate consensus to the
equivalent ofa lS-member veto is foolish, particularly if
it allows a single member to assert control over matters
that the Charter never envisaged as subject to veto.

If we really want to make the Council work
more effectively - and New Zealand passionately
believes that we must - the elected 10 must use their
influence and their legitimacy as the representatives
of the wider United Nations membership to push for
real change. Notes on working methods can be useful.
More important, however, is the courage to change
behaviour, to do things differently and to exercise the
powers conferred on us under the Charter. In our own
small way, New Zealand has tried to make a difference.
We hope those that follow will continue our efforts.

