Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): First of all,
allow me to join others in congratulating you,
Madam President, and Lithuania, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I would like to also express my appreciation for the
thoughtful presentations and briefings this morning.

Thailand shares the concern that the illicit trade
and transfer, proliferation, trafficking and misuse of
small arms and light weapons pose a serious threat to
peace, security stability and development. It is both a
cause and a catalyst of violence and crime, resulting
in countless deaths and injuries among civilians and
entailing devastating humanitarian and socioeconomic
costs, more than any other type ofweapon. It is therefore
in the interests of all parties to address the matter in a
more concrete and collective manner.

Thailand welcomes the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/289) and its recommendations. Allow me to
address some ofthe key important points in that respect.

First, our particular concern lies in the fact that
women and children often disproportionately fall
victims in situations of armed conflict as well as in
post-conflict settings. To address that problem, gender-
sensitive data must always be taken into consideration in
both geographical and thematic issues on the Council's
agenda, especially in the framework of the protection of
civilians, which is one of its core mandates.

At the same time, women must be encouraged
and allowed to participate fully in planning and
implementing measures to combat the illicit trade,
transfer and misuse of small arms and light weapons. In
particular, the role of women should be recognized as
change agents and conciliators, in line with the women
and peace and security agenda.

Secondly, given the multifaceted nature of the
causes and adverse consequences of small arms and
light weapons, we need to strengthen collaboration and
coordination under the various multilateral frameworks
aimed at curbing the proliferation of small arms and
promoting responsible actions by States in order to help
in preventing the spread of those illicit weapons.

Thailand is pleased with the increased efforts on the
part of the international community towards tackling
the issue over the past few years, such as the discussion
within the scope of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) and
the adoption of resolution 2117 (2013), the first stand-
alone Council resolution that addresses the question of
small arms and light weapons.

The entry into force of the ATT, in December last
year, will undoubtedly reinforce the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects in tackling that challenge more efficiently,
in particular by increasing transparency of the trade in
small arms and the submission of ATT State parties'
annual reports.

The Treaty's universalization and full implementation
are key to its success. Thailand signed the ATT and is
undertaking the necessary domestic procedures to ratify
the Treaty in the near future. However, measures in the
ATT and the Programme of Action should complement
each other. Duplication of work and the imposition of
unnecessary burdens on small States that are neither
major arms producers nor importers should be avoided.

Thirdly, apart from preventing the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons, civilian firearms should
also be strictly regulated, both through the registration
process and with regard to transfers, for the purpose
of effective control and tracing, as those weapons also
exacerbate violence and crime at community level.

Fourthly, a people-centred approach should be the
core principle of any attempt to address the challenge
related to small arms and light weapons. Awareness
regarding the serious nature and urgency of the matter
should be raised among the public and civil society.

Fifthly, Thailand is heartened by the scientific
research and inventions of new technologies that have
led to new possibilities in regulating and tracing the
use of small arms and light weapons. It is our hope that
such technologies will be applied to the manufacturing
of all small arms as widely as possible so as to decrease
the adverse consequences that we know too well.

Sixthly, my last point is that it is important for
countries to have effective mechanisms to enable the
full implementation of their obligations. Each country
needs to strive to exercise effective control over the
transfer of such weapons. However, certain challenges
remain. New possibilities of illicit arms trade routes,
such as trafficking through maritime transportation,
have emerged. Therefore, information-sharing among
the authorities concerned and capacity-building
measures remain instrumental in cross-border control
and improved implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and other multilateral instruments.

Thailand realizes the importance of capacity-
building for experts, and we would like to emphasize
the important role the United Nations Regional Centres
for Peace and Disarmament can play in strengthening
capacity through regional or country training
programmes customized for the specific needs of each
region and country.

