Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I am about to conclude, Madam President.

Everything has got worse since a significant
number of refugees from other camps in the north-
east moved there. Half of the residents are women and
children. It is high time to think about handing over the
illegally occupied territory to the Syrian authorities in
the interests of resolving the IDP problem.

Mine clearance continues to be a pressing issue.
We welcome the start of work on United Nations Mine
Action Service projects in Syria. Russia is involved
in demining in Syria both in a national capacity and
through its contribution to the Mine Action Service.
In that regard, we urge all countries that are genuinely
concerned about Syria's humanitarian welfare to join
these and other humanitarian efforts and to deliver
humanitarian assistance to all Syrians, without
discrimination, politicization or preconditions. That
includes not only post-conflict reconstruction projects
but also lifting unilateral sanctions in the interest of
normalizing Syrians' lives.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize that despite
various factors and spikes in tensions, the situation in
Syria continues to return to normal, primarily as a result
of the gradual restoration of increasing areas of territory
to the control of the legitimate Government. One
positive factor was the launch of Syria's Constitutional
Committee in Geneva on 30 October. Its establishment
and launch of its work, with the decisive assistance
of the Astana format, are undeniable achievements
for the Syrian people. We welcome the first round of
inter-Syrian dialogue, which is aimed at defining the
country's future. As the guarantor countries of the
Astana process, Russia, Turkey and Iran are ready to
continue to help the Syrian parties and Special Envoy
Pedersen in the quest for a political solution to the
Syrian conflict. We believe that the situation on the
ground should not be allowed to influence the work of
the Committee.

