Mr. Voronkov: I am joining the members of the
Security Council today from Rome, where I have
just a signed a memorandum of understanding with
Italy's Guardia di Finanza, a major expert agency and
capacity-building provider in the field of countering
terrorist financing, to work together with the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) on
relevant activities around the world.

Today's resolution 2462 (2019) is further evidence
of France's leading role on strengthening international
cooperation to counter the financing of terrorism.
In that regard, I would like to recall the high-level
International Conference on Combating the Financing
of Da'esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris last year on
the theme "No money for terror" under the personal
leadership of His Excellency Mr. Emmanuel Macron,
President of France, where I represented the Secretary-
General. As follow-up to the Paris Conference, this
year Australia is leading the convening of the next
international conference on countering the financing
of terrorism.

The adoption of resolution 2462 (2019) comes at a
critical time. Recent terrorist attacks around the world
demonstrate that financial flows continue to reach
terrorist groups from both illegal and legal means.
A concerted effort to redouble the world's attention
on stopping the financing of terrorism is therefore a
vital topic. Several Security Council resolutions have
focused on countering the financing of terrorism. But
the resolution the Counciljust adopted helps consolidate
the various requirements into a single document and
expands the focus to key emerging issues, including
innovative terrorist financing typologies. I would like to
particularly welcome the role that the resolution assigns
to the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in
identifying ways to suppress terrorist financing and
helping countries develop the capacities to implement
key priorities. We at UNOCT are ready and willing to
play an enhanced role in supporting Member States in
implementing the resolution.

The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
and its Centre for Counter-Terrorism have focused an
important of their policy, coordination and capacity-
building work on countering the financing of terrorism.
We offer a coordination platform for inter-agency
dialogue through our United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Coordination Compact Working Group
on Countering the Financing of Terrorism. We have
also provided practical support to Member States on
understanding and implementing effective measures to
suppress terrorist financing.

I thank the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United
States of America, Japan, Switzerland and, most
recently, India and the State of Qatar for making
contributions to the counter-terrorism financing
projects implemented by the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism.

I would like to make three points on UNOCT's
priorities in the field of countering the financing
of terrorism.

First, we must expand our focus to include
intelligence sharing, sectoral risk assessments and
public-private partnerships to ensure that financial
regulation is responsive, targeted, proportional
and effective.

Secondly, taking a cue from the resolution, we
must look at countering the financing of terrorism
as a comprehensive package comprising a variety
of related topics. System-Wide awareness-raising,
inter-agency coordination, judicial reviews and the
continuous commitment of human and technological
resources are equally important. Human rights and
humanitarian law should be upheld and protected. It is
only through a comprehensive and multidimensional
approach that national and international financial
systems and institutions can be properly safeguarded
from terrorist abuse.

Thirdly, we must work more closely with the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and FATF-style
regional bodies on capacity-building assistance. I
welcome the participation of the FATF in this forum.

My Office remains committed to working with
all our partners, particularly the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, to coordinate
capacity-building support to interested Member
States, which is in line with the Security Council's
guidance under resolution 2395 (2017). We will use
our inter-agency coordination platforms to extend
such alignment of assistance and needs with other key
bodies, such as the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the International Monetary Fund, the World
Bank and INTERPOL.

I would like to take this opportunity to call upon all
Member States, and especially those actively engaged
in today's discussions, to make available national
experts to United Nations programmes on countering
the financing of terrorism so that beneficiary countries
have an opportunity to learn good practices in this area.
Significant financial support for more comprehensive
packages of assistance is also necessary to increase
Member States' capacity to prevent and detect
terrorism financing.

Only through strong collaboration and targeted
efforts can we achieve concrete results in our fight
against terrorism and terrorist financing. My Office
is ready to play its policy development and capacity-
building roles in the broader international efforts to
counter the financing of terrorism.

