Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to assure you of the full support of my
delegation. I would also like to repeat our appreciation
for the work of Ambassador Kafando and his team in
the month of September.

We would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General, Mr. Pascoe, and the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Permanent Representative of Brazil, Mrs. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, for their briefings. We also welcome the
presence here of the Permanent Representative of Guinea-
Bissau, Ambassador Cabral.

Last week, the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission formally adopted the
Strategic Framework. We would like to congratulate
the authorities of Guinea-Bissau on reaching this
important stage. I would also like to pay tribute to the
efforts by our Brazilian colleague and her team. Their
involvement led to this outcome.

However, we are all aware that the adoption of
the Framework is only a first step. It is now up to
everybody to implement the mutual commitments. In
this context, it is essential to have tangible indicators,
and we therefore commend the intention of the Chair to
complete, over the coming weeks, a monitoring and
review mechanism for the Strategic Framework.

For its part, the European Union (EU) will
continue its support for the priorities identified by the
country, particularly security sector reform. The EU
support mission is now fully deployed and operational.

One of the first opportunities to implement the
Strategic Framework will be the preparation and
holding of parliamentary elections next 16 November.
The events of this summer showed how fragile the
stabilization process was. To deal with that, it is
important that the Government's actions be supported
by a parliament.

We commend the new Prime Minister's
determination to respect the electoral timetable, and we
also welcome the mobilization of the people during the
electoral registration phase. For his part, President
Vieira made a commitment before the General
Assembly to ensure that the elections are transparent,
free and credible. The EU will take part, including by
sending some 50 observers who will join those from
the region.

My delegation remains particularly concerned by
the rapid growth in criminal networks, particularly
drug traffickers, and its consequences for the country
and the region. We have taken note of the message
from the authorities to your representative indicating
their wish that the Security Council would undertake a
concrete and robust response in regard to the scale that
this phenomenon has assumed and the danger it
represents for the country. We can assure them that we
share their concern. We express our readiness to
discuss all proposals that take into account respect for
Guinea-Bissau ownership. All efforts must go towards
ensuring that those who are responsible are brought to
justice. In this context, all solutions must respect and
enhance justice in the country.

The effect of drug trafficking on the institutions
in the country and the region has been quite rightly
compared to a cancer. It is therefore correct to deal
with it at the subregional level. Belgium welcomes the
organization by Economic Community of West African
States on 28 and 29 October at Praia of a conference to
develop a regional action plan. Given the scale of the
problem, we are pleased to learn that the United
Nations Office for West Africa will be involved in
those efforts.

The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau will
come before us in a few weeks' time. Following the
elections of 16 November, the Security Council should
receive proposals on restructuring that mission. On that
occasion it would be useful to study various ways to
make best use of United Nations support to the
institutions in Guinea-Bissau.

