I wish to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of July. I also highlight the work done by France during the month of June. There could be no better way to start this month than with the unanimous adoption of the long-awaited resolution 2532 (2020), on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), concerning which I appreciate the efforts of France, Tunisia and all the members of the Council, which brought to fruition a week of overwhelming support from the international community, reflected in the statement co-initiated by Ecuador in support of the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire, endorsed by 172 countries. I deem it necessary to emphasize that the resolution requires an immediate and general cessation of hostilities in all situations, and calls all parties involved in armed conflicts to an immediate humanitarian pause for at least 90 days. In the current circumstances of the global health crisis, all members of the Organization and all its organs, including in particular the Security Council, must rise to this existential challenge. To that end, it is essential to ensure the implementation of the ceasefire worldwide. That is why, with resolution 2532 (2020), the Security Council has definitively joined international efforts to fight the pandemic. The Government of Ecuador reiterates its full support for the efforts of the United Nations and the Member States in the implementation of the resolution. In thanking you for convening this necessary debate, Sir, I also highlight the briefings by Secretary-General Antenio Guterres, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, and the African Union Commissioner for Social Affairs, Amira Elfadil Mohammed Elfadil. In the May debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (see S/2020/465), we were able to make an early assessment of the devastating impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and of the need to protect people's lives, dignity and rights. But today's debate also offers us the opportunity to identify and recognize that pandemics exacerbate crisis conditions on the ground, weakening peace, stability and security. The year 2020 should mark a before-and-after in terms of security, as it is the year of the review of the peacebuilding architecture and the first year of the Decade of Action, which also coincides with the commemoration of 75 years of the United Nations. In reality, the COVID-19 pandemic is accelerating that epochal division. We have only one option; we must learn and cooperate to be more resilient. That issue cannot be the subject of this debate alone. It is imperative that the Security Council henceforth include the issue of the impact of pandemics on its agenda. We need to generate efforts to improve the security conditions of health systems and infrastructures. We also need to move forward on a coordinated international response. We must permanently secure humanitarian access channels in conflict zones and we must place greater emphasis on the implementation of international disarmament commitments, in particular nuclear disarmament, due to the humanitarian consequences and risks posed by the mere existence of weapons nuclear. Finally, in commemorating the first anniversary of resolution 2475 (2019), on the impact of conflict on people with disabilities, we must ensure the special attention of the Council and the international community, all the more so in the context of global health crises such as that caused by COVID-19. I conclude by reiterating that multilateralism and international cooperation are the best mechanism for preserving stability, peace and security.
