Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
David Shearer and Ambassador Wronecka for their
insightful briefings.

I will first say a few words on the peace process,
which clearly remains at an extremely critical
juncture, as we have heard once again from Special
Representative Shearer. While it is positive that the
ceasefire has for the most part been respected, there
are many outstanding critical tasks that need to be
implemented. Those tasks, which are stipulated in
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan, must be implemented in order
to overcome the lack of progress. We fully agree with
the Secretary-General's assessment that now is the time
to show political will during the 100-day extension
period to form a transitional Government.

We welcome the repeated personal meetings
between President Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar and
commend and take note of the statements recently issued
by the opposition and the Government, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer
mentioned. However, at the same time, we see the need
for concrete progress to be made on the implementation
of the peace agreement, especially regarding the still
unresolved substantive issues. We urge the parties to
address key questions such as security arrangements,
establishing the security services and, in particular,
the number and boundaries of states. From our point
of view, it is important not to lose the momentum but,
ultimately, substance and inclusiveness are just as
crucial to the sustainability of the peace process.

As the representative of South Africa has just said,
we also see that the regional actors remain absolutely
crucial for making progress on these issues. It is
essential that the pressure of the region on the parties
to the conflict be maintained. We therefore very much
welcome the fact that the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and, in particular, the Sudan
and Uganda as guarantors of the peace agreement
successfully mediated reaching a consensus among
the parties as to how to continue the implementation
of the peace agreement. The region, particularly IGAD
and the African Union must remain committed, exert
pressure on all sides and support the pursuit of solutions
based on consensus between the parties. We would also
encourage IGAD to share its 50-day interim report
and its recommendations with the Security Council in
due course.

With regard to German activities, very briefly,
Germany has just made an additional contribution
of [F5 million to the reconciliation, stabilization and
resilience trust fund established by the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United
Nations country team, which supports community-
based programmes that address underlying causes of
conflict and provide socioeconomic incentives for
peace. We certainly encourage others to join in that
concrete peacebuilding effort.

Turning to the humanitarian and the human rights
situation, improving the situation of the civilian
population remains our main priority, in particular
unimpeded access for humanitarian actors and UNMISS
and a tangible improvement in the human rights
situation. It is a truism but the attacks on humanitarian
workers must end immediately.

We are also extremely concerned by reports of
new recruitments, including of child soldiers, as well
as reports of soldiers leaving cantonment sites due to
the lack of food and resources. Measures to prevent and
deter violence against civilians must be implemented.
In addition, we join the call made by the Secretary-
General for all parties to address the unacceptable
levels of sexual and gender-based violence and
hold accountable those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights.
That is a key responsibility of the South Sudanese
Government, which must build on the steps taken, with
the support of UNMISS, regarding mobile courts and
take measures to fully establish transitional justice, as
stipulated in the Revitalized Peace Agreement. I would
also like to highlight that sanctions against perpetrators
are at the Council's disposal, and we should use them,
where appropriate, in line with resolution 2467 (2019).

Before I conclude, I will say a few words about the
sanctions. We would first of all like to commend the
Panel of Experts for its invaluable work and encourage
it to pursue its investigation into breaches of the
arms embargo and gross violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. The successful
implementation of the sanctions regime clearly depends
on close cooperation with countries of the region. We
therefore call for coherence and coordination among
all regional and international actors. The international
community must send the signal that continuing
gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, including sexual and gender-based
violence, are unacceptable.

In conclusion, let me thank Ambassador Wronecka
for her tireless efforts as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan and for her dedication to
improving the situation of the people of South Sudan.

