Mr. Holliday (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting on
complex crises and the United Nations response. It
presents an opportunity to tie together a number of the
Council's recent thematic debates and to step back and
consider more broadly some of the interrelated issues
and challenges of the United Nations role in
peacekeeping and peace-building.

Most crises that the Council addresses, or would
seek to prevent, are complex. They represent a failure
of political, economic and sometimes social institutions
and therefore require solutions to meet both security
and development needs. We believe the United Nations
role in the international response to this mix of security
and development needs should draw on various bodies
within the United Nations system and be carefully
coordinated with various other non-United-Nations
sources of expertise and resources.

The Council focuses its energies and the
peacekeeping budget's assessed funds primarily on
meeting security needs. In that effort, the Council has
authorized military observers, peacekeepers and
civilian police. In conflicts around the globe, those
dedicated peacekeepers have helped bring security.
Stability, political solutions and economic development
have followed. I note that tomorrow we shall be
marking the International United Nations Day of
Peacekeepers.

The Council, however, has also recognized that to
ensure the sustainability of peace and security, it is
important to develop national institutions and
structures that will assume security functions when the
United Nations departs. The Council has also
acknowledged that the dimensions of crises may be so
complex that non-security-related resources and
personnel are also needed to address them fully to
prevent the resurgence of violence. In such cases -
increasingly, in most cases - the Council has
authorized the inclusion of human rights staff,
authorized the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to coordinate - although not administer -
United Nations development activities or included a
training component in the new peacekeeping
operations.

In Liberia, the Council saw a country that had
been ravaged by years of civil war and, accordingly,
had been left with few functioning institutions. The
Council responded by authorizing a robust
peacekeeping operation with responsibility for a range
of multidisciplinary tasks. The United Nations
identified key agencies - the United Nations
Development Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs -
to address returnee issues. Although the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has responsibility in
Liberia for the disarmament and demobilization of
combatants, those activities are only the first step in
assisting only one component of the war-affected
community. Ex-combatants subsequently require
reintegration and return assistance. In that regard, the
assistance they receive is similar to the assistance for
returning refugees and internally displaced persons. To
meet the long-term complex needs of security, stability
and reconciliation, the United Nations, UNMIL and the
other agencies must focus on the process of
reintegration and return for those returning - both
combatants and non-combatants - and for the
communities receiving them.

In Afghanistan, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is a unique example
of the ability of the United Nations to coordinate a
comprehensive development and aid programme in
coordination with a massive military coalition, led by
the United States, and a separate security force, the
International Security Assistance Force, led by NATO.
For the first two years of the programme, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Lakhdar
Brahimi, broke new ground by working on the
political, humanitarian, economic and security fronts
simultaneously and assisting the transitional
Government of Hamid Karzai. After national elections
are held in September, UNAMA will have overseen the
entirety of the so-called Bonn Agreement process,
which set out a series of benchmarks leading to Afghan
independence.

My delegation recognizes that in most complex
crises, the economic, political and social routes of a
conflict cannot be disentangled or dealt with ad
seriatim. However, we believe that the response should
continue to come from the whole United Nations
family, including the funds, programmes and agencies
that have the requisite knowledge and experience, as
well as from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs.

We also believe that the specific combination of
agencies, the structure and functions of a peacekeeping
operation and the responsibilities of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General should vary
depending on the specifics of the crisis. Unfortunately,
there can be no template. Complex crises require
complex and case-specific responses.

The Council has recently moved to empower
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General who
lead United Nations peacekeeping operations to
coordinate all United Nations activities in-country.
That move makes sense in order to ensure a
coordinated approach to meet the needs of security and
development and to respond to the complexity of most
crises. But again, that model may not be appropriate in
all cases.

Our focus today is on the United Nations
response to complex crises, but it is important to recall
that the United Nations does not operate in a vacuum.
There are also bilateral responses that should be
coordinated with the United Nations. The United
Nations and the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General can play a useful role in
coordinating and encouraging bilateral actors and
donors, rather than discouraging them by suggesting
that the United Nations has it all under control.

We have seen, for example, training for civilian
police on a bilateral basis in Kosovo that is coordinated
with the civilian police programme of the United
Nations peacekeeping operation. As well, my
Government is administering reintegration for more
than half the disarmed fighters in Liberia in
coordination with UNMIL's disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration
programme in that country.

In addition, a national response is appropriate and
should be encouraged. National actors from civil
society and the Government have the local knowledge
and the long-term commitment necessary to resolve
complex crises. Their potential contribution should not
be underestimated, and their capacity for response
should be strengthened.

I appreciate hearing some of the valuable ideas of
my colleagues on the Security Council as well as of the
representatives of the Economic and Social Council
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.

