Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome
Mr. Lowcock and thank him for his briefing to the
Security Council.

Since the start of the terrorist war imposed on my
country, Syria, the Syrian Government has spared no
effort in meeting all the humanitarian needs of those
Syrians affected by that unprecedented terrorist war.
My country has always sought to cooperate with the
United Nations and with its humanitarian agencies
in line with the guiding principles set out in General
Assembly resolution 46/182, including respect for State
sovereignty. The Syrian Government has therefore taken
a number of measures to allow the United Nations to
operate in Syria effectively and safely during the years
of the crisis and to gradually expand its humanitarian
work. I underline the words "effectively" and "safely"
because over the past eight years ofthe so-called Syrian
crisis, no United Nations humanitarian worker has been
under threat in Syria. There was a price to that because
many officers and soldiers of our armed forces had to
sacrifice their lives in order to save United Nations
humanitarian workers.

I once again emphasize that the Syrian Government
stands ready to cooperate with the United Nations
and Member States that are working in good faith
to improve the humanitarian situation, support the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in
Syria and provide the necessary environment to ensure
the return of Syrian refugees and displaced persons in
safety and dignity. We must not forget that sustainable
development must be achieved in Syria in parallel with
the provision of humanitarian assistance. Those two
tracks should not be separated. It can clearly be seen
those who have good intentions towards my country
and those who harbour ill intentions towards it.

The Security Council has adopted eight resolutions
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. It has held
hundreds of meetings and considered nearly 60 reports
on this topic. However, all those resolutions, meetings
and reports will not alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people until they address the root causes of
their suffering. In that regard, I would like to make
the following points, which may help members of the
Council to understand the root causes of the suffering
of the Syrians that they alluded to in their statements.

First, we firmly believe that we would have been
able to make greater progress together if some partners
within the United Nations had committed themselves
from the beginning to the principles of humanitarian
action, including impartiality, non-politicization and
full cooperation and coordination with the Syrian
Government as the main party responsible for providing
for the needs of Syrians. Even members of the Council
that are the co-penholders on the Syrian humanitarian
issue did not coordinate or consult with the Syrian
Government. In that regard, we express our satisfaction
over the positive meetings and continued honest
dialogue with Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, as well as other
representatives of the Secretariat, whether in Damascus
or in New York. We hope that those meetings will help
us to make further progress this year at the humanitarian
and development levels without any political pressure
or diktats from donors. We believe that humanitarian
action is noble, not a tool for political subjugation.

Secondly, over the past years, we have called on
the authors of the reports not to include information
provided by so-called open sources or by Arab or
foreign media hostile to my country. We warned many
times against some Member States relying on false
information and misleading reports in dealing with the
situation in Syria. The past years have proved us right.
We have provided considerable evidence to the Council
in our letters and statements. Those lies include the
fabricated stories of a child called Omran in Aleppo
or Hassan Diab in Douma. In December 2016, the
Egyptian Interior Ministry arrested five adults and two
children who were filming fabricated bloody scenes in
the city of Port Said in Egypt in order to disseminate
that video footage and to allege that it took place in
the Syrian city of Aleppo. There are also lies fabricated
by the so-called White Helmets under the guidance of
the intelligence services of certain Western States with
regard to allegations of the use of chemical weapons,
which give some permanent members of the Council
the pretext they need to launch one act of aggression
after another against my country without international
legitimacy. It seems those countries follow two tracks:
a legitimate one within the Council and an illegitimate
one outside it.

I would like to give the Council another piece of
evidence. Germany's Der Spiegel magazine announced
that one of its reporters, Klaus Relotius, an international
award-winning journalist, had fabricated news articles
when reporting on the crisis in Syria That means that
the Der Spiegel - the mirror - did not reflect the
situation faithfully.

Thirdly, the following measures, inter alia, must be
taken to end the suffering of Syrians.

There must be full commitment to respecting
Syria's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity,
as set out in the Council's resolutions. There must
also be full commitment to supporting the efforts of
the Syrian Government, both at the humanitarian and
development levels, while avoiding any practices that
might violate those lofty principles, such as cross-
border operations by agencies with hostile agendas
based in neighbouring countries and participating in
violating my country's sovereignty.

There must be genuine cooperation with the Syrian
Government to eliminate the remnants of armed
terrorist groups, while also ending all support to
terrorism being provided by well-known Governments.
We underscore that, in order to eradicate the Al-Nusra
Front terrorist group, which is on the Council's list of
terrorist organizations and is currently operating in
Idlib, the efforts of the international community must
be consolidated in line with Council resolutions on
counter-terrorism.

There must be an end to the illegal presence
of American, British, French and Turkish forces
on Syrian soil. Those forces support terrorism and
hinder humanitarian action, as we saw in the case of
the Rukban camp, which is in an area controlled by
American forces. There is also a need to stop the illegal
international coalition from committing any further
crimes against Syria, which have led to the death or
injury of thousands of Syrian civilians, most of them
women and children, as well as to the destruction of the
country's infrastructure.

There must be commitment to United Nations
resolutions that reaffirm the illegitimacy of all
unilateral coercive measures, which have largely and
adversely impacted the lives of Syrians. Such measures,
adopted by the United States and some of its allies,
impede Syrians' access to their basic daily needs and
amount to economic terrorism against certain targeted
countries, including my own. They seek to destabilize
countries through imposing economic measures, after
having failed to do so through political intervention,
military aggression and supporting terrorism.

My country stresses its commitment to a solution
based on a Syrian-lead and Syrian-owned political
process. Special Envoy Geir Pedersen visited Syria
a few days ago. We emphasised to him that we stand
ready to cooperate with him to facilitate a Syrian-led
dialogue in order to reach a political solution to the
crisis in Syria in line with the interests of all Syrians,
so as to eliminate terrorism, end any illegitimate
foreign presence in Syria and safeguard Syria's unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

