Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Let me at the outset express
my delegation's profound condolences to the Government
and the people of the Kingdom of Morocco on the passing
of King Hassan II. Our thoughts are with them at this
difficult time.

Over 1.7 million people in Angola are internally
displaced, while hundreds are refugees in neighbouring
countries. Some 450,000 Sierra Leoneans are refugees, and
over 200,000 are internally displaced. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo has over 700,000 internally
displaced persons and 300,000 refugees. These are but a
few examples. The number of refugees and internally
displaced persons in those three African countries alone far
exceeds the total of refugees and internally displaced
persons outside Africa. Yet the level of financial and
material assistance rendered to refugees and internally
displaced persons in other regions is far higher than what
is available for Africa.

It is in this context that my delegation wishes to
thank you, Mr. President, for arranging this briefing at
this crucial time for African refugees. I also wish to thank
the High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Ogata, for the
informative briefing. Indeed, the information she has
given us is saddening, but the world needs to be
constantly reminded.

It is disheartening to know that hundreds of
thousands of civilians in Africa are forced to flee their
homes and become refugees or internally displaced
persons, living under the most degrading and unbearable
conditions. The High Commissioner has clearly explained
the fate of African refugees. The situation is worst for
women, children and the elderly. Lack of food, clean
water, medicine, shelter and blankets is a problem
confronting these people. In fact, we know this all too
well, because it was not too long ago that many of us
Namibians were refugees ourselves. This is no doubt one
of the most horrendous experiences.

Refugees and internally displaced persons are a
direct result of ongoing conflicts. Conflicts on the African
continent are both internally and externally motivated.
These conflicts, as has been proven, have the capacity to
destabilize a whole region. The ideal situation would be
to have a world without conflict. It is important, therefore
to address the root causes of conflict on the African
continent if we are to prevent recurrence and to minimize
the negative impact of these conflicts on civilians. The
flow of arms and particularly the proliferation of small
arms to conflict areas are no doubt major contributing
factors to conflicts in Africa today. Some of these arms
continue to flow despite arms embargoes imposed by the
Security Council. We therefore call on arms producers to
abide by Council resolutions and to exercise restraint
when shipping arms to our troubled continent.

Through regional efforts such as those of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and the Southern African Development Community such
conflicts could be contained. But regional organizations
have limitations and require financial and logistical
support in order to be successful. We therefore commend
those countries that have rendered support to the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group in its efforts to contribute to
peace in Africa.

Let me stress that we are encouraged by the signing
of ceasefire agreements on the conflicts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone, as well as by
the acceptance by Ethiopia and Eritrea of the modalities

 

for the implementation of the Organization of African Unity
Framework Agreement. We hope that these developments
mark the beginning of a process that will allow refugees
and internally displaced persons to return to their homes in
peace. We are aware that this presents a challenging task to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and to the rest of the humanitarian
relief community, but we are confident that with the vigour
and determination that have prevailed in dealing with so
many conflicts, and with the support of the international
community, the agencies will live up to the challenges
ahead. We welcome the decision by Mrs. Ogata to resume
the repatriation of Rwandan refugees now in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Congo
(Brazzaville).

We cannot overemphasize the need for the warring
parties to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel as well as that of refugees and internally
displaced persons. We would therefore once again call upon
all parties to ensure the security and safety of all
humanitarian personnel. By the same token, we call on the
parties to allow access for the provision of humanitarian
assistance to the needy.

On their own, UNHCR and its partner agencies cannot
succeed in addressing the needs of African refugees. Recent
events have shown that, with the necessary political will,
the international community can help bring about an end to
most of these conflicts. It is, however, unfortunate that
selectivity is applied in exercising that will and in providing
financial support. Images of African refugees are not shown
on our television screens, but the plight of these people is
very real. For example, out of the $1.6 million requested
through the appeal for Angola, only 14 per cent has been
provided, and out of $27.9 million requested for Sierra
Leone, only 26 per cent has reached the agencies.

We wish to emphasize strongly that it is imperative
that the international community support post-conflict
peace-building activities by assisting countries in their
reconciliation and economic reconstruction, which will
ensure long-term security. It is one thing to end a conflict,
and it is another to ensure that the conflict does not recur.
It is an enormous task, yet, if peace is to prevail, all our
efforts are required.

The relevant United Nations agencies can only
coordinate the assistance rendered. It is for the international
community to make available the requested assistance.

Finally, I wish to commend the efforts of Mrs. Ogata
and the personnel of UNHCR and of the other
humanitarian agencies that work tirelessly under strenuous
and often dangerous conditions to bring relief to the
civilians in need.

