Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Allow me, at the
outset, Mr. President, to congratulate you and the
delegation of Guatemala on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October. I would
like to assure you of our full cooperation and support.
It is also my pleasure to congratulate Germany on its
successful presidency and on all its efforts in steering
us through the busy month of September. We are also
grateful to the Secretary-General for his recent report
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2012/678), and to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mariano Fernandez Amunategui for
his briefing.

I would like to commend the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the
United Nations country team, which continue to play a
crucial role in supporting the recovery and stabilization
of Haiti. As the Secretary-General noted in his report,
during the reporting period a number of long-awaited
political milestones were achieved, indicating that the
process of stabilization continues to progress in Haiti.
The achievements include the swearing in of a new
Government, the publication of a corrected version of
the constitutional amendments that provided the basis
for the organization of the Permanent Electoral Council
and the establishment of the Superior Council of the
Judiciary.

We also commend the steps taken by the Government
to move forward with the country's socioeconomic
development. At the same time, redoubled efforts are
needed to combat unemployment and poverty. In the
light of the progress achieved in recent months, it is
essential to continue consistent efforts in rebuilding
the country, strengthening institutions, attracting
investment, promoting sustainable development and
advancing the democratic agenda.

Political stability in the country is a key factor for
the stabilization and development of Haiti. It is therefore
important that all political leaders take a responsible
approach and engage in constructive political dialogue
to address their differences in a spirit of compromise.
Such dialogue is particularly important for the holding
of credible and long overdue elections.

We note with satisfaction that the overall security
situation has been relatively stable during the reporting
period. However, the high rate of criminality remains a
matter ofserious concern. While the role ofMINUSTAH
in the maintenance of overall security and stability
remains vital, we note that the Haitian National Police
(HNP) continue to gradually improve. We commend the
Government's recent successful measures to dislodge
illegal armed groups. Close cooperation between
the HNP and MINUSTAH is critical to effectively
addressing security challenges and to ensuring that the
police move forward to reach the capacity necessary to
handle full responsibility for the provision of internal
security.

The protection of vulnerable groups, particularly
women, children and internally displaced persons,
should remain the priority. The humanitarian situation
in Haiti continues to show signs of improvement as
the number of internally displaced persons living in
camps has declined. However, significant humanitarian
challenges remain. Continued strong international
engagement and efforts by the Haitian authorities are
crucial to ensuring that all pressing humanitarian needs
are met.

Lastly, I would like to express our support for
the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend
the mandate of MINUSTAH, taking into account the
proposed adjustments pertaining to a reconfiguration
and conditions-based consolidation of the Mission.

