We would like to congratulate the Permanent Mission of Germany on its successful steering of the work of the Security Council this month. We also wish to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, and to reaffirm our support for his efforts to calm the situation and restore stability, in particular given the spread of the novel coronavirus pandemic. Today the Security Council is holding its quarterly open debate on the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. Meanwhile, the international community continues to meet and work to confront the plans by Israel, the occupying Power, to annex land in the West Bank and impose Israeli sovereignty over areas of the Jordan Valley and the northern Dead Sea. Over the past few months, Kuwait and the Arab States have intensified their efforts to confront attempts by Israel to exploit the world's preoccupation with tackling the novel coronavirus pandemic. Such attempts ignore the global push to halt hostilities, war and siege in this difficult humanitarian situation. At its meeting at the ministerial level last April, the Council of the League of Arab States stated that the Israeli Government's execution of those plans constituted a new war crime to add to its lengthy record of heinous crimes against the Palestinian people and a flagrant violations of the Charter of the United Nations, United Nations resolutions and international law. We have also watched as the international community has condemned these Israeli plans, which undermine the international bid to achieve a just and comprehensive peace. Perhaps the most significant expression of the international community's stand against Israeli annexation is the fact that, at the Security Council open debate on 24 June (see S/2020/596), a majority of Council members warned Israel against going through with its annexation plans and recalled its violations of international law. The fact that Israel, the occupying Power, did not carry out its annexation plans on | July in no way means that it will change course. Israel seeks to perpetuate the occupation by continuing to perpetrate its illegal activities and policies, expanding and building thousands of settlement units and annexing the territories, in clear violation of resolution 2334 (2016), and preventing the establishment of an independent, contiguous, viable and sovereign Palestinian State. Given that Israel will not hesitate to exploit any circumstance or global crisis to flagrantly attack the Palestinian people, we need to revitalize international political and legal mechanisms to ensure that Israel is held accountable for its continued violations of the Palestinian people's rights under international law. Those violations include arbitrary arrest campaigns; the demolition of Palestinian buildings; the destruction and seizure of property; the forced displacement of civilians, some of whom have fallen victim to settler crimes; the tightening of the siege imposed on Gaza for some 13 years; repeated attacks on Islamic and Christian holy sites; the attempt to undermine the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East; and the continued adoption of unilateral and illegal decisions, such as freezing part of Palestinian tax revenue and endeavouring to alter the character, historical status and demographic composition of Jerusalem. In the face of these Israeli abuses, we reiterate that the Security Council must take a firm stand in order to stop such crimes and attacks. The Council has no alternative but to shoulder its responsibility immediately, before it is too late, because the occupation and the violation of the Palestinian people's rights will not lead to peace, especially with an epidemic ravaging humankind. In conclusion, Kuwait remains committed to the Arab, Islamic and international position that peace is a strategic choice and that a lasting, comprehensive and just settlement must be based on the two-State solution, in accordance with the agreed terms of reference, namely, the relevant Security Council resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative. Such a settlement would enable the Palestinian people to exercise its legitimate political rights and establish an independent State within its own territory, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
