Mr. Skoog (Sweden) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Venezuela for inviting me to speak and for taking the
initiative to organize this important meeting.

In the mid-1980s, Sweden introduced economic
sanctions against the apartheid regime of South Africa.
These sanctions were essentially unilateral in nature
at the time, but with strong political symbolism. Since
then, Sweden has been engaged in processes aimed
at making sanctions more effective and transparent,
including, most recently, in the high-level review of
United Nations sanctions, conducted together with
Australia, Finland, Germany and Greece.

The legal basis for United Nations sanctions
derives from the Charter of the United Nations. The
sanctions instrument has evolved over time. Over the
past quarter of a century, the Security Council has
deployed sanctions with increasing regularity and
with increasingly broader aims. They have been used
to address evolving threats to international peace and
security, to counter terrorism, nuclear proliferation,
Violations of human rights and the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, to name a few. There are important
lessons to be drawn from experiences over the years.

First and foremost, sanctions can never be
successful in isolation. They must always be part
of a broader political strategy. To this end, closer
interaction between chairs of sanctions committees and
penholders of resolutions mandating sanctions should
be encouraged. Coherent overall political strategies that
include the various tools at the disposal of the Council
should be forged. In addition, further interaction
between sanctions committees and the Secretariat, to
coordinate activities and take into consideration input
provided by panels of experts and monitoring teams,
should also be considered.

Secondly, sanctions need to have clear objectives
and clear criteria for suspension or termination.
They have to be targeted and implementable, easily
understood and well communicated. They should be
designed to avoid unintended consequences, including
placing burdens on neighbouring States, limiting
legitimate trade and having any negative humanitarian
impact on civilian populations.

Thirdly, sanctions have to come with transparent
procedures and provisions for due process. In this
context, the sanctions committees are critical, being the
primary interface between the United Nations sanctions
system and Member States. A number of important
steps to increase transparency in the working methods
of the sanctions committees have already been taken.
There is now more active engagement with the principal
stakeholders. Committee chairs are conducting more
field visits to gain a more immediate understanding
of the situation. Reporting to the public has increased,
including with frequent press releases. These efforts
should be commended and strengthened.

In the high-level review, we identified a number of
additional actions for improving the working methods
of the sanctions committees. I should like to highlight
just a few.
Sanctions committees could present their reports
to the Council in a public meeting. This would
allow Member States to be kept informed and more
involved, and help relevant agencies in Member States
to better understand implementation requirements.
Chairs of sanctions committees with similar themes
or geographical scope could organize joint meetings,
including in the regions, to promote understanding of
similar issues and challenges. Similarly, the Secretariat
could organize targeted meetings with New York-
based regional groups on challenges to sanctions
implementation and to seek possible assistance.
Committees could routinely review individual and entity
designations to ensure that listings remain appropriate.
The Security Council and sanctions committees could
utilize standardized terms and guidelines to reduce
uncertainty and the potential for overcompliance with
United Nations sanctions, and each Committee could
indicate exemptions in clear and precise language on
the main page of its website.

Another issue for consideration is the appointment
of chairs of sanctions committees. Presidential note
S/2012/937, on Council working methods, states that
chairs should be appointed "in a balanced, transparent,
efficient and inclusive way". Increased transparency
in this process and broader consultation with Council
members would ensure a better balanced distribution
of chairs. Moreover, new chairs of sanctions
committees should be appointed as early as possible
after each election of non-permanent members of the
Security Council to allow for improved preparation.
Comprehensive and timely hand-over between outgoing
and incoming chairs should become established
practice. Earlier elections of non-permanent members
of the Security Council, which was introduced for the
first time this year, will be helpful in this regard.

In conclusion, we hope that today's important
discussion and the recommendations on more
transparent working practices identified by the high-
level review on United Nations sanctions will add to the
efforts to make sanctions ever more effective.

