The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council this year, I should like to extend my
very warm wishes for a fruitful New Year to all
members of the Security Council, the United Nations
and the Secretariat.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the new
members, namely the Congo, Ghana, Peru, Qatar and
Slovakia. We all look forward to their participation in
the work of the Council. We are convinced that their
experience and wisdom will be of invaluable assistance
in the discharge of the Council's responsibilities.

I shall take this opportunity to express the
Council's deep gratitude to the outgoing members,
namely Algeria, Benin, Brazil, the Philippines and
Romania, for their important contributions to the
business of the Council.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President

The President: I should like also to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
Sir Emyr Jones Parry, Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of December 2005. I
am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Jones
Parry for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The question concerning Haiti


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Haiti in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cazeau
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now

continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the

Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the work of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
future holding of elections is a fundamental step
towards the restoration of democracy and
stability in Haiti. The Council takes note with
concern of the new postponement of the elections
in Haiti and, in this regard, trusts that the delay in
the electoral calendar will enable the resolution
of logistical and technical problems in order to
ensure transparent, inclusive, free and fair
elections.

"The Security Council urges the
Transitional Government of Haiti and the Conseil
Electoral Provisoire to expeditiously announce
new and definitive dates for the elections, the
first round to be held within weeks, but no later
than 7 February 2006, and to ensure that the
elections will take place in accordance with
international democratic standards and under
conditions conducive to the widest possible
participation. The Council calls upon all relevant
international stakeholders to continue to
collaborate closely with the Transitional
Government of Haiti and other national
authorities in this endeavour. The revised
electoral calendar and corresponding budget
should be realistic and comprehensive, and
encompass national, municipal and local
elections.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
security remains an essential element for the
holding of free and equitable elections. The
Council expresses its concern over the
deterioration of security conditions in Port-au-
Prince and urges the Haitian National Police and
MINUSTAH to continue their efforts to further
intensify their cooperation to improve the
security situation in order to restore and maintain
the rule of law. In this regard, the Council pays
tribute to those MINUSTAH peacekeepers who
have been killed or injured in the line of duty.

"The Security Council is of the view that,
after the elections, a period of fundamental
importance for long-term stability will follow.
National reconciliation and political dialogue
should continue to be promoted as a means to
ensure long-term stability and good governance.

"The Security Council reaffirms that open
and credible elections, based on ownership by the
Haitian people, are paramount to the
consolidation of democratic institutions and
procedures, but it recognizes at the same time
that they do not constitute the sole means to
address the longer-term problems that Haiti faces
in the security sector and in the restoration of the
rule of law, both of which are critical to stability
and sustainable development. The Council
welcomes, accordingly, the decision taken by the
donor community to extend the Interim
Cooperation Framework until December 2007 in
order to assist the new elected Government to
continue reconstruction efforts. The Council
reaffirms that short-, medium- and long-term
strategies, within a unified framework, are
needed to ensure coordination and continuity in
the international assistance to Haiti."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/I.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

