Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Today's
meeting is being held to consider the draft resolution
contained in document S/2017/1060, submitted by
Egypt on behalf of the Group of Arab States, pursuant
to the resolution of the emergency meeting of Arab
Ministers held in Cairo on 9 December.

The draft resolution has been submitted in response
to the emergency situation at the heart of the Palestinian
question and as the Security Council is addressing
the latest developments related to Jerusalem. Bearing
in mind the serious situation in Jerusalem and the
repercussions of the unilateral decision of the United
States to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel,
I recall that many members objected to that unilateral
decision at the open briefing of the Council on
8 December (see S/PV.8l28). I stress that there are no
legal justifications for that decision.

Al-Quds Al-Sharif is an issue that is dear to the
hearts of many people around the world, and any
attempt to address the situation in the Middle East
must undoubtedly take that very sensitive topic into
consideration. However, we are well aware that the only
path towards addressing the issue is to resort to the one
pillar underlying all international disputes - that is,
international law - as distinct from religious or other
beliefs. Any attempt to do otherwise would have huge
repercussions on the situation and reawaken the chaos
that preceded human development.

Al-Quds Al-Sharif is one of the final-status issues
that must be settled through peaceful negotiations
between the Palestinians and the Israelis. Any attempt
to change the facts on the ground in Jerusalem would
be considered to be an illegal unilateral measures with
no legal merit, since it would violate international
law and the resolutions of international legitimacy,
including General Assembly resolution 181 (II), which
established two States - Palestine and Israel - and
considered Jerusalem to be a corpus separatum as part
of a very particular international system.

Moreover, Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 252 (1968), 383 (1973) recognize no measure
that includes Jerusalem as an Israeli territory, which
would run counter to the Charter of the United Nations,
which does not allow the annexation of territories.
Additionally, it violates resolutions 476 (1980) and 478
(1980), which recognize no measure that would change
the status quo in Jerusalem. Both resolutions reject any
Israeli law seeking to annex Jerusalem and declare it
the capital of Israel. Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates
that point through very clear legal language rejecting
attempt to alter the demographic or geographic nature
of the territories occupied since 1967, including east
Jerusalem. It also clearly stresses that the Security
Council does not recognize any change to the
demarcation lines of4 June 1967, including those related
to Al-Quds Al-Sharif, with the exception of alterations
derived from negotiations between the two parties.

The draft resolution stresses that any attempt to
alter the character, status or demographic composition
of the holy city of Jerusalem have no effect, are null
and void and must be rescinded. We therefore object to
any such attempt, in line with relevant Security Council
resolutions. The draft resolution calls on all countries
not to establish diplomatic missions in the holy city of
Jerusalem, in compliance with resolution 478 (1980). It
demands that all States comply with Council resolutions
regarding the holy city of Jerusalem and not recognize
any actions or measures contrary to those resolutions.
It also reiterates its call for the reversal of the negative
trends on the ground that are imperilling the two-State
solution and for the intensification of international

and regional efforts in support of achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East on the basis of the relevant United Nations and
Security Council resolutions, in addition to the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map
and an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967.

Egypt was one of the very first supporters of the
Palestinian people. We have supported them since
1948 and will continue to do so until we achieve a full
and lasting peace. In the light of all this, I call upon
all members of the Security Council to vote for the
draft resolution and to implement international law,
which is our main term of reference related to rights
and duties concerning this critical topic and other
international topics.

