Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): We believe that
protection of civilians in armed conflict is a matter of
extreme importance. In this regard, we would like to
express our appreciation to Canada for its initiative in
bringing the matter before the Security Council. The
statement adopted by the Council on 12 February 1999
provides a solid basis for fruitful work, and we are
heartened to see the Security Council call upon all the
parties concerned to comply strictly with their obligations
under international law, in particular their relevant
obligations under the Hague Conventions, the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of
1977. We look forward to receiving the report of the
Secretary-General which was requested in the statement
by the Security Council.

Today, with the continued and increased suffering of
civilians in armed conflicts, respect for the instruments of
international humanitarian law and the enforcement of
those instruments are critical matters. The upcoming
fiftieth anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions
provides us with an additional incentive to intensify our
work in this regard. At this time, allow us to register our
appreciation for the role which has been played by the
Government of Switzerland, in its capacity as the
depositary of the Conventions, and for the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for its untiring
efforts in this regard.

For the Palestinian people, the provision of
protection for civilians is not only an especially important
matter - it is a matter of life and death. More than 50
years ago, approximately 700,000 Palestinian civilians
were uprooted from their homes and properties and made
refugees, thus creating the oldest and most protracted
refugee problem still existing today. Approximately 20
years later, as a result of the 1967 war, scores of
Palestinian civilians were again forced to leave their
homes and lands, some of them for the second time,
creating the so-called Palestinian "displaced persons". To
this very day, the Palestinian refugees, who now number
more than 3.5 million, remain deprived of their
inalienable rights to return to their homes and properties

 

and to be compensated, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948. Even the Palestinian
displaced persons, now numbering more than 600,000, have
not been allowed to return, despite Security Council
resolution 237 (1967).

Following its occupation of the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip in 1967, Israel, the
occupying Power, has continuously committed grave
breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention and of the
Hague Conventions. The Security Council has responded by
adopting 24 resolutions, which have reaffirmed the
applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to the
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem. Many of these resolutions have called upon
Israel, the occupying Power, to comply with the provisions
of the Convention and to accept its de jare applicability. In
several cases, the Council has also called for measures to
ensure the safety and protection of the Palestinian civilians
living under Israeli occupation. The Council has also called
upon the High Contracting Parties to the Convention to
ensure respect by Israel for its obligations under the
Convention in accordance with common article 1. In
resolution 681 (1990) of 20 December 1990, the Security
Council requested the Secretary-General to develop further
the idea of convening a meeting of the High Contracting
Parties to the said Convention to discuss possible measures
that might be taken by them under the Convention and also
requested him to monitor and observe the situation
regarding Palestinian civilians under Israeli occupation and
to submit periodic reports. Israel, the occupying Power, has
not complied with or even accepted any of the
aforementioned resolutions. The Security Council, in return,
has failed to react to this unique situation in fulfilment of
its responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, which has led to an unforgivable
culture of impunity.

The Chairman's report on the meeting of experts on
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which was held in Geneva
on 27 to 29 October 1998, identified violations of the
Fourth Geneva Convention in armed conflicts in general
and in occupied territories. All of those violations apply in
the case of the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territory. Under this occupation, we have seen the
continuing and large-scale destruction of the economic and
social structures of the occupied territories and the
substitution of the occupying Power's laws for those
previously in force. We have seen deportations,
displacement and the arbitrary detention of civilians; the
confiscation of land and destruction of property; ill
treatment of and violence against the civilian population; as

 

well as numerous measures of collective punishment. On
top of all that, we have seen the transfer by the occupying
Power of a part of its own population to the occupied
Palestinian territory, in grave breach of article 49 of the
Convention. This article was drafted specifically to
prevent colonization, annexation and any changes in the
character of any occupied territory. There now exist more
than 330,000 Israeli settlers in 175 settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, 180,000 of whom live
within the illegally extended municipal boundaries of
occupied East Jerusalem.

What does all this mean? It means a unique situation
which has been catastrophic for the entire civilian
Palestinian population - a situation which started more
than 50 years ago and continues to the present day. The
situation is no less catastrophic for the Palestinian civilian
population living under Israeli occupation, which has been
subject to continuous oppression and is now subject to the
only colonization campaign taking place at the end of the
twentieth century.

In April 1997, for the first time in 15 years, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 377 (V) of
1950, entitled "Uniting for Peace", and under rule 8 (b)
of its rules of procedure, the General Assembly opened an
emergency special session to consider illegal Israeli
actions in East Jerusalem and the rest of occupied
Palestinian territory. The tenth emergency special session
was convened after the Security Council had failed to
exercise its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security because of the exercise of
the veto by a permanent member twice in less than two
weeks. The session has adopted five resolutions, all of
which affirm the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention to the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem, and demand that Israel accept the de jare
applicability of the Convention and immediately cease its
settlement activities and other illegal actions.

The General Assembly has also made appropriate
recommendations for collective action by the Member
States. It has recommended three times that the High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
convene a conference on measures to enforce the
Convention in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem, and to ensure its respect in accordance with
common article 1. In resolution ES-10/6 of 9 February
1999, the General Assembly further recommended the
convening of the said conference on 15 July 1999 at the
United Nations Office at Geneva and invited the
Government of Switzerland, in its capacity as the

 

depositary of the Fourth Geneva Convention, to undertake
whatever preparations are necessary prior to the conference.
We believe that the convening of the conference will
be an extremely important development for the application
and enforcement of the Fourth Geneva Convention and for
international humanitarian law in general. Its significance
comes regardless of the fact that it comes belated and
possibly because of the fact that no such conference has
ever been convened in the past, despite all the atrocities
that have taken place worldwide and despite the need for
such a conference. The international community must
ensure that the Geneva Conventions are there to be
implemented and to be enforced and it must provide
protection for civilians in armed conflict. For any promise
of future action to be credible, however, the international
community cannot ignore the above-described situation.

This ends my intervention on the subject at hand.
Allow me, however, to say a few words about our
participation in the meeting of the Council today. As
members know, on 4 December 1975, at its 1859th
meeting, the Security Council considered a request for the
participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
in that meeting of the Council. The request was not made
under rule 37 or rule 39. The Security Council decided on
that date, by a vote, that an invitation should be extended
to the PLO to participate in the debate on the situation in
the Middle East and that that invitation would confer upon
it the same rights of participation as are conferred upon a
Member State when it is invited to participate in the
discussions under rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Council.

That invitation, upon vote by the Council, was
repeated on numerous occasions. As of February 1994,
Palestine has been invited to participate in the discussion
without a vote by the Council, on request, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and established
practice. The established practice, in our opinion, is clear.
On issues related to Palestine, occupied territories and the
situation in the Middle East, as well as other issues, the
practice has always been to follow the same pattern. The
PLO and later Palestine participated among Member States
who are not members of the Council.

Today, that practice was not adhered to, for reasons
we cannot comprehend. We understand that the established
practice was perhaps not made clear and that General
Assembly resolution 52/250 has been raised as a reason.
That, of course, would be ironic, for many reasons,
including the fact that the same resolution states:

 

"The additional rights and privileges of
participation of Palestine shall be effected through
the following modalities without prejudice to the
existing rights and privileges."

I would like to express our appreciation for the
opportunity to speak before the Council today. However,
we hope the Council members will take another look into
this procedural issue, and we trust that today's aberration
will be without prejudice to the established practice of the
Council with regard to the future participation of
Palestine.

