Mr. Jengeli (Somalia): It is my pleasure to
participate in this Security Council discussion on the
situation in Somalia. In that connection, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting.
We would like also to thank the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative for their dedication and
tireless efforts for peace and stability in Somalia.
Similarly, we also want to thank the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for their efforts.

The Security Council was first seized of the
situation in Somalia in early 1992. Since then, there
have been meetings, reports and fact-finding missions
on Somalia. Today, it is not my intention to repeat the
resolutions and deliberations of the past. However, by
way of emphasis, I would like to concentrate on two
important issues, namely, the security and
reconciliation aspect and the humanitarian situation.

With regard to the issue of security and
reconciliation, I would like to refer, as my learned
friends who spoke earlier did, to the recent meeting
which took place in Djibouti between the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the opposition Alliance
(ARS). As the Council is aware, and with its support
and encouragement, a peace and reconciliation
agreement has been reached and initialled by the TFG
and the opposition Alliance. As envisaged, the
agreement will be duly signed by the TFG and the
Alliance in Saudi Arabia very soon. Both the
Transitional Federal Parliament of Somalia and the
Central Committee of the ARS have endorsed the
agreement. Once the agreement is signed we will
proceed to its implementation, and the various
committees, especially the security and political
committees, will be expected to function.

In the meantime, we are in a period of
consolidation and expansion. Both parties have
embarked on widening awareness of the agreement so
that all stakeholders and civil society are informed and
enabled to give full backing to its implementation
when it goes into effect.

We wish to stress that the TFG is fully committed
to implementing its obligations under the agreement.
We also expect the opposition Alliance to demonstrate
genuine commitment to the implementation of the
agreement, and indeed we are hopeful in this respect.

In this context, we hope that we are all in
agreement that if the Security Council authorizes the
deployment of a United Nations international
stabilization force without delay, we will have ample
reason to believe that the 17-year agony of the Somali
people will draw to an end and that the world will be a
better and more peaceful place.

We Wish to point out here that, in our View, a
force of around 26,000 personnel to stabilize Somalia,
envisaged under a previous report, may not be
necessary or feasible. Rather, we believe that a much
smaller force under a United Nations mandate and with
United Nations funding could do a good job under
reasonable circumstances. Moreover, we believe that
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
force that is already deployed in Somalia should be the
nucleus of any future United Nations international
stabilization force or peacekeeping force.

But, in the end, the Security Council may wish to
decide on the actual size of any agreed force. We want
to be on record in reiterating our resolve to do all we
can to provide a climate conducive to the deployment
and proper functioning of a stabilization force.

I would now like to turn to the issue of
humanitarian assistance. Based on the information that
we have, a substantial amount of assistance is required
in the coming months. But we recognize, at the outset,
that there is a very close linkage between security and
reconciliation and humanitarian needs. An
improvement in the security situation will definitely
have a positive impact on the humanitarian situation
and Vice versa.

Therefore, the strategic direction of our future
efforts should focus on the political and security fronts
so that a more stable and secure environment is created
6
for emergency humanitarian and other operations.
Moreover, the window of opportunity that currently
exists on the political front should be taken advantage
of in order to save millions of Somalis from the utter
devastation of conflict, drought and other man-made
and natural calamities.

In this respect, I would like to reiterate our
sadness and sorrow at the deliberate killings and
abductions of humanitarian workers, who are doing
heroic work under difficult and demanding conditions.
Our Government and people will, as a matter of
priority, pursue these criminal elements so as to bring
them to justice.

I wish to appeal to the Security Council to address
in a forthright and urgent manner the issue of impunity
for crimes committed against the Somali people. Indeed,
the Somali people are grateful for the tentative steps
that the Council have already taken in that direction.
But much more needs to be done in this regard.

In conclusion, we have good reason to be positive
and optimistic about the future of Somalia. A lot
depends on the people of Somalia and their leaders.
Also, a lot depends on the quality, relevance, quantity
and timeliness of the assistance provided by the
Security Council and the international community. We
very much hope that the idea of an adequate United
Nations stabilization force will receive a major push
forward at this meeting of the Security Council.

We very much look forward to the day when we
can secure stability and peace in Somalia so that the
major task of rehabilitating, reconstructing and
developing Somalia can begin in earnest. Indeed, the
decisions that will be made here in the coming weeks
will have a profound impact on that becoming a reality.

