The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Costa Rica.

My delegation is pleased to welcome the successful
work of the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP), Whose presence in the Republic of
Macedonia has prevented the spread of the crisis affecting
neighbouring States. My delegation considers of
particular importance the work of the Force in its efforts
to bring together the different communities in order to
promote democratic dialogue between the different
political forces and ethnic communities. Likewise, we
appreciate its efforts to provide humanitarian assistance
to the population and help initiate development projects,
which have contributed significantly to increasing social
integration.

Nevertheless, like other delegations, Costa Rica is
concerned about the persistence of focal points and
processes of regional destabilization. We therefore
believe that the presence of this Force remains necessary,
and we share the judgement of the Secretary-General that
when the mandate of these operations ends there must be
a guarantee of proper successor arrangements, and the
Government of the Republic of Macedonia must be
reassured of the international community's intention to
promote peace and stability in that country.

In addition, my delegation cannot fail to highlight
the importance of the activities being carried out in the
country and throughout the region by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Children's Fund. These activities are essential to
ensuring peace.

Costa Rica trusts that the United Nations
Development Programme will soon be able to open an
Security Council 3839th meeting
Fifty-second year 4 December 1997

office in the Republic of Macedonia, and hopes that it will
serve as an active centre to stimulate and promote
international cooperation and economic and social
development there.

My delegation supports the extension of the mandate
of UNPREDEP, for the last time, to 31 August 1998.

I resume my functions as President of the Security
Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document 3/1997/948.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

The President (interpretation from Spanish): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1142 (1997).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the voting.


