Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the presidency of Guatemala for holding
today's open debate.

Mexico is an active promoter of the work of the
International Criminal Court and of the complete and
effective consolidation of the international criminal
justice system created by the Rome Statute. The
Declaration adopted during the High-level Meeting on
the Rule of Law (General Assembly resolution 67/1)
recognizes the importance of combatting impunity for
international crimes in order to preserve the rule of
law, as well as the role of the Court in that important
endeavour.

Ten years after it was established, it has been
demonstrated that one of the most important challenges
that the Court faces is the lack of cooperation from
States. A total of 13 out of 19 arrest warrants issued
by the Court to date remain outstanding, despite
the fact that, in some cases, the whereabouts of the
individuals is known worldwide. Mexico regrets the
open and manifest lack of cooperation shown by some
States, which undermines the effectiveness of the
international criminal justice system and perpetuates
the unacceptable impunity for the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community as a whole.

The Security Council has a pivotal role in supporting
the work of the Court. Allow me to express some ideas
in that regard. First, Mexico believes that the capacity
conferred by the Rome Statute on the Council to refer
to the Prosecutor of the Court situations in which it
appears that international crimes have been committed
is a useful tool that contributes to the maintenance of
international peace and security, complementary to
other forms of triggering the Court's jurisdiction. That
capacity should be used responsibly and effectively and
be guided by objective criteria that are not selective
or politicized. It is also essential that the Council
follow up such referrals effectively, particularly when
the Court informs it of a State's non-cooperation. In
Mexico's view, there is no question that all States, party
or non-party to the Statute, are obliged to cooperate
with the Court in such situations, due to the mandatory
nature of the Council's resolutions.

Secondly, the capacity that the Statute confers on
the Council to request the Court to defer an investigation
or prosecution should be used responsibly, carefully
weighing its implications for the safeguarding of
evidence, the status of detainees and the protection of
victims and witnesses, and only when the interests of
peace and justice conflict.

Thirdly, whether or not the Council has referred
a particular situation to the Court, both bodies should
cooperate in situations in which they are both involved.
A continuing exchange of information between the two,
as well as the backing of the Council in urging States,
whether parties or non-parties, to cooperate with the
Court in such situations, is essential in order to ensure
the system's effectiveness.

We are convinced that there can be no lasting
peace without justice. The relationship between the
Security Council and the International Criminal
Court contributes to the necessary balance that must
be achieved between both goals. A day before the new
members ofthe Council are to be elected, we note that 7 of
the 15 current members, including 3 of the 5 permanent
members, are not yet parties to the Rome Statute.
While the Security Council, according to the Charter,
acts on behalf of all Members of the United Nations,
Mexico calls on all States, and especially those that are
current or upcoming members of the Council, to ratify
the Statute as part of their commitment to combating
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
significance and to maintaining international peace and
security.

