Mr. Fernandes (Brazil): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zachary
Muburi-Muita. We commend the achievements in the
field in connection with United Nations operational
support for the African Union (AU), as well as the
efforts made to improve the efficiency of the United
Nations representation. I will focus my comments
today on issues relating to the partnership on peace and
security.

The African Union, through its Peace and
Security Architecture, is making a unique contribution
to resolving conflict on the continent and establishing
the basis for lasting peace. The Council's recent trip to
Africa provided an opportunity to witness first-hand
the urgency of sustaining and increasing United
Nations support to the AU's work in the area of peace
and security. Brazil believes that ensuring such support
is a key part of the Organization's responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The creation of the United Nations Office to the
African Union was an important and positive step. We
hope that it will indeed enhance the ability of the
United Nations to take a strategic approach to
cooperation with the AU, thereby improving its support
for AU peacekeeping, particularly though overarching
initiatives such as the United Nations-African Union
strategic partnership and the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Plan.

It would be equally advisable to intensify the
involvement of the African Union in the ongoing
policy work of the United Nations in the area of
peacekeeping. A number of the studies, policies and
lessons learned produced by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support could prove useful to AU peacekeeping and
vice versa. Given the AU's experience with
peacekeeping and conflict resolution, it has a valuable
contribution to make to the development of policy and
guidance.

As we strive to improve the Organization's
support for AU peacekeeping, we cannot overlook
other relevant areas of cooperation, such as conflict
prevention, mediation and post-conflict peacebuilding.

The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is the main concrete instance of
cooperation between the two organizations, along with
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. It is clear that AMISOM. requires greater
material and financial assistance from the United
Nations. Brazil favours a serious and action-oriented
discussion within the United Nations on financial
support to African Union peacekeeping missions
beyond the specific case of AMISOM. We must not
allow bureaucratic or technical considerations to stop
us from giving the African Union the help it needs to
do its part in maintaining peace and security on the
continent.

In closing, we would like to stress that
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations in
the area of peace and security has a vital and
inescapable political component. Cooperation between
the Secretariat and the Commission must be predicated
on a substantive and mutually respectful dialogue
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. Only at that level can we ensure the
common strategic vision and political impetus needed
in order for the partnership to fulfil its potential.

