Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, we would
like to welcome you, Mr. President, and to express our
appreciation to your country for organizing this
important debate. We would also like to extend our
thanks to Under-Secretary-General Mr. Herve Ladsous
for his important introductory remarks.

Lebanon aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

In many post-conflict countries, including the
majority of countries on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission, all of which are in Africa,
security sector reform is a foremost priority for
peacebuilding. Today, the international community
perceives security sector reform within the broader
framework of peace consolidation and institution-
building for countries emerging from conflict, as the
link between security sector reform and socio-
economic development is clearer than ever.

In that regard, security sector reform should be
considered within the broad framework of the rule of
law and as part of a political process that is linked to
other peacebuilding objectives and anchored in
national ownership. At the same time, international
assistance for security sector reform must be conceived
and implemented within a long-term and sustainable
effort. All those notions are at the heart of the draft
presidential statement that we will adopt today, which
Lebanon fully supports.

To that end, we see the need for more integrated
planning and implementation of United Nations
mandates across the entire peacebuilding continuum,
starting with mediation, passing through disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and moving towards
rule of law assistance, the empowerment of youth and
women and socio-economic recovery. Security sector
reform is influenced by the progress in all such
processes over time. Its success will be largely
determined by the ability to respond to context-specific
demands and critical political hurdles and to address
resource gaps.

The role of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund is critical, not least to
encourage a more coherent and coordinated approach
to those mutually reinforcing processes in the countries
concerned. Also, the role of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is important in further
strengthening a comprehensive United Nations
approach to security sector reform.

We need to recognize that security sector reform
is a national process that is likely to see gradual
transformation in the capacity of the State and in the
perception of security institutions in the societies
concerned. Thus, the notion of national ownership is
not simply a slogan, but also a crucial element in
countries emerging from conflict.

Security sector reform assistance, whether
undertaken bilaterally or within United Nations
missions and regional frameworks, must be envisaged
in close coordination with the Government and the
widest possible segments of society, including women
and national civil society actors. In that context, the
specific needs of girls and women in all security sector
reform processes must be taken into account by
supporting gender-sensitive police, army and justice
reform and training, and by including women in those
processes.

The outcome of a capacity and needs assessment
of national actors should guide the planning and
implementation of security sector reform assistance,
with emphasis on capacity development. The ability of
the country concerned to own its own security sector
reform must become a priority for the Council's
mandates.

In that regard, the Nigerian presidency rightly
emphasizes South-South cooperation and the evolving
capacity of the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States in support of
security sector reform in Africa (see S/2011/627, annex).

