Ms. Pajevie (Montenegro): Let me begin by
offering my deep condolences to the victims of terrorist
attacks in Paris and Lebanon.

Montenegro is pleased to contribute to this
important open debate. We warmly thank the United
Kingdom for this initiative and for providing a platform
for our deliberations. We also thank the Secretary-
General, as well as the other briefers, for their important
comments this morning.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
We are all aware of the urgent need for a stronger
and more effective United Nations, which is in all our
interests and without which we will not achieve peace
and security. We know that our Organization can do
better, and that without peace and security, development
will not happen.

It is hard to remember a time when more crises
were simultaneously preoccupying the United Nations,
its agencies and the broader international community.
And we know that the effects of conflicts are felt for
years to come - years of missed opportunities and
years destroying the chances of a generation.

We need to do more to prevent conflict, as we live in
an age where we have immediate access to information
about potential risks of instability in countries around
the world. The Security Council may consider making
better use of the options at its disposal so as to prevent
the emergence of conflicts. Making progress in shifting
from a culture of reaction to one of prevention continues
to be essential. The international community should
recognize that early action can prevent enormous
human suffering, fear and displacement. Needless to
say, it is far more cost-effective.

Ongoing crises are also a reason that Montenegro
believes that cases ofmass atrocities ought to be tackled
with more decisiveness by the Security Council.

However, the maintenance of international peace
and security is not only the task of the United Nations
and other international organizations. It is a process of
individual, collective and institutional transformation,
a process of inclusive development based on the
universal values of respect for life, justice, solidarity,
human rights and equality between men and women.

For countries emerging from conflict with fragile
peace, institution-building and reform is crucial. Such
countries need targeted and effective international
assistance, under the auspices of the United Nations, so
that they will be in a position to provide protection for
their people and deliver basic services. We should keep

in mind that stability is about countries having a strong
economy and healthy and educated population, as well
as strong institutions. It is a long-term process, but it is
a prerequisite for sustainable peace.

It is important to recall that non-discrimination and
the inclusion of all groups in the workings of society is
an enormous asset and a key for stability. Transparency,
accountability and effective management and oversight,
with a View to strengthening the legitimacy and integrity
of security and judicial institutions, is also important.
Credible and legitimate governing institutions that
are able to deal with their citizens' most pressing
needs - economic growth and jobs, basic services and
access to justice - are of the utmost importance.

The risk of extremism, terrorism, organized crime
and conflict grows where people have no education
and no hope for the future, where there is a lack of
development and exclusion. It drives migration. We
should keep in mind that the poorest people on the
world not only lack food, but they also lack justice and
jobs.

Inclusive education provides young generations
with self-confidence and ambition to be constructive
and valued members of society. And it helps to bring
about more sustainable peace. Moreover, addressing
the realization ofthe human rights of young people is a
way of influencing the social and economic conditions
and the well-being and livelihood of future generations.
Only by approaching the issue ofviolent extremism and
promoting peace and security in that way can we ever
hope to face the challenges of securing a lasting global
peace and sustainable development. And this should
be the primary responsibility of all Member States and
regions.

The problems and challenges facing the world
today require a collective global response, and no other
international organization enjoys the legitimacy and
the capacity to unite the international community in
common cause to find enduring solutions to conflicts
and to ensure sustainable peace and development.
Today's knowledge about the root causes of conflict
is much greater; we have a wider range of potential
tools at our disposal that we should use with focus
and dedication to achieve results. Working together
towards a world that will bring about peace, security
and development is our task, our challenge and our
opportunity, and Montenegro is committed to playing
its part.

