Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia): I would like to
express my appreciation to the Indonesian presidency
of the Council for initiating this open debate and to
personally thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to share my views on this pivotal subject.

Shortly after the foundation of the United
Nations, international developments led to the creation
of various regional initiatives and organizations. It
became obvious that the international community
needed a number of organizations to address the
challenges of differing natures arising in different
regions and in a variety of spheres. Those
organizations have been instrumental in handling
regional problems and settling local disputes. In that
regard, I fully share the opinion expressed by the
representative of the European Union. Indeed, the
regional organizations are closer to the facts on the
ground and possess a storehouse of historical
experience and unique perceptions that sometimes
overshadow realities; they often have greater
motivation to tackle explosive problems quickly and
effectively.

I would like to speak about two regional
organizations in particular.

Established shortly after the United Nations, the
Council of Europe has made a tremendous contribution
to regional stability through the promotion of
democracy and the rule of law. Its activities have been
instrumental, especially for the new democracies that
emerged after the cold war. The focus of the Council of
Europe on remedying the socioeconomic and political
conditions that exacerbate conflicts is truly a valuable
long-term contribution.
In that same sense, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) also plays a central
role in creating conditions that will provide security in

our region, by requiring commitments from
participating States and utilizing mechanisms for
conflict prevention and resolution. The Treaty on
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe is among the
OSCE tools providing for an effective and unique set
of arms control mechanisms. The complete observance
of the agreed arrangements by the countries of the
South Caucasus is a sine qua non for the maintenance
of stability and peace in our region, where, regrettably,
the resumption of hostilities is indeed still possible. We
believe that the organization should pay special
attention to - and watchfully consider - all
violations of the ceilings established for conventional
weapons in the South Caucasus.

However, it is the fundamental OSCE principle of
consensus that distinguishes it from other international
forums. The comparative advantage of the OSCE over
other international bodies lies in its consensus-based
decision-making mechanism. We strongly believe that
only consensus among the concerned parties leads to
genuine, willing compromise and guarantees lasting
solutions to seemingly intractable disputes.

Past experience clearly illustrates that imposed
settlements are not only ineffective but also fragile and
unable to withstand the test of time. The very existence
of various international organizations dealing with
conflict resolution proves that uniform approaches and
one-size-fits-all solutions to address different disputes
are hardly realistic. Therefore, we believe that since
every conflict has its prehistory and its peculiarities, it
is important that regional organizations - or those
with appropriate mandates, with acquired institutional
memory and with an understanding of the specifics of
the history and evolution of a conflict - be allowed to
tackle comprehensive solutions that will last, instead of
offering philosophical, well-meaning remedies, which
at best result in a loss of time, and at worst, in a loss of
life and hope.

