Mr. Ward (Jamaica): Under your presidency, Sir,
the Security Council certainly tackled a number of
difficult issues. Despite the tremendous efforts of your
team, there are issues that are not easily resolved. One
such issue is the sanctions regime against Iraq and all
the issues related to that situation. There are differing
views on the way forward on this issue, and the
Council will continue to grapple with them over the
next few days of your presidency and perhaps into the
presidency of Ambassador Wang Yingfan. He probably
will prefer for us to agree before we get there.

Having had an open debate and having listened to
the views of non-members of the Security Council,
including the views of Iraq, the onus is now on the
Council to clearly define the way forward to find a
resolution of all outstanding issues with respect to Iraq.
I dare say, to be successful the Council will have to put
the interests of the international community ahead of
national interests. Far too often the latter has
overshadowed our work, in particular on this issue.

On the issue of Western Sahara, the Council
adopted resolution 1359 (2001) earlier today in
response to the recommendations of the Secretary-
General and his personal envoy. That too proved to be
a very difficult issue. But we were able to resolve it.
And while allowing for new approaches to settling the
political issues, the Council, in its wisdom, ensured
that the principles for which it and the United Nations
stand are preserved, in particular that the people of
Western Sahara will not be denied the opportunity to
exercise their inalienable right to self-determination. I
agree with Ambassador Cooney on the idea of an open
debate at some time in the future on Western Sahara.

As you have indicated, Sir, the Security Council
acted in a decidedly comprehensive manner in seeking
to improve the relationships between the Security
Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries. However, despite the good faith effort of the
Council to address the most critical issues of
consultation and decision-making and to improve
peacekeeping operations, many troop-contributing
countries are not fully satisfied, and we will have to
continue our work in this area.

I thank colleagues for the statements made with
respect to my leadership of the working group, and I
look forward to continued cooperation as we tackle the
more difficult issues ahead. During the month we
considered the very well prepared report of the
Secretary-General on conflict prevention. Undoubtedly,
our work will continue with consideration of the draft
resolution proposed by your presidency. Beyond that,
however, the Security Council must become proactive
in conflict prevention and give full support to the
Secretary-General in building the capacity of the
Secretariat to carry out effective conflict prevention. I
agree with the statements of Ambassadors Valdivieso
and Lavrov with respect to dealing with other matters
during consultations of the whole. I am sure that
Ambassador Wang Yingfan has taken note of these
concerns, and we will receive some relief in July.

My colleague of Singapore, Minister Lee, raised a
number of important issues, which should be further
discussed in the Council. I hope we are afforded an
opportunity to do so. On one of the issues - the
working of the Friends Group- I share the views
expressed by Minister Lee and Ambassador Cooney.

I would like to end by extending my warmest
congratulations to you, Mr. President, and to your
team. I pay a special tribute to your coordinator for the
wonderful work and the tremendous zeal that your
delegation has put into the workings of the Security
Council.

