Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, the Argentine delegation thanks you, Sir, for
organizing this open Security Council debate on a topic
that is of such great importance to all countries: post-
conflict national reconciliation and the role of the
United Nations. We wish also to thank you and the
entire delegation of Chile for your excellent work in
the Security Council presidency for the month of
January.

Experience shows that national reconciliation is a
central pillar of peace-building in societies that have
been scourged by armed conflict. It is an indispensable
element in preventing the recurrence of such conflicts.
It is necessary to build solid foundations to enable
countries that have experienced confrontation and
intolerance to abandon forever their divided past and to
build a harmonious and peaceful future.
It is within that framework that I should like to
speak of the recent experience of Argentina. We
regained our democracy in 1983 after a bloody
dictatorship that committed flagrant violations of
human rights and that carried out systematic murder
and the forced "disappearance" of individuals, as well
as torture and imprisonment aimed against dissidents
and members of the opposition. Obviously, it also
denied basic freedoms to all citizens.

As we emerged from that tragic period of
authoritarianism, which caused grievous pain in broad
sectors of society, there was a general feeling that it
would be possible to build a future of peace and
stability only on the basis of truth and justice
concerning those horrible events. Here, it is important
to note that when preparations began to put on trial the
perpetrators, some voices - in general, those with
links to the former dictatorship - resorted to the
concept of "national reconciliation" to oppose demands
for a search for truth and justice. They said that this
was nothing more than an attempt at revenge and was
based solely on ideological prejudice against
institutions such as the armed forces. That attitude
often served merely to guarantee impunity for crimes
under the pretext of a noble idea such as reconciliation.
All activities aimed at circumventing the
implementation of the law failed and generated no
reconciliation whatsoever, since reconciliation results
from sincere repentance on the part of the perpetrators,
judicial action and appropriate compensation to the
victims.

We must remember that in Argentina, important
steps were taken such as creating a truth
commission- called the National Commission on
Disappeared Persons - that shed light on a repressive
past that had been partially hidden from society and
that brought the principal military authorities to
justice- facts that could serve as a guide for other
post-conflict situations. Years later, important
legislation was also adopted to compensate and
indemnify the victims and their immediate families.
However, despite that progress and as a result of
pressures on the political authorities, various legal
measures containing exemptions were promoted that
ultimately guaranteed a certain degree of impunity to a
large number of those involved in true crimes against
humanity. In our experience, those initiatives fell far
short of ensuring genuine reconciliation, as I said, and
that is why the whole of civil society is urging the
Government of President Kirchner to rescind a
multitude of laws that prevented full justice in those
cases. That process is currently under way in
Argentina.

Because the complexity and special
characteristics of each conflict situation make every
national reconciliation unique, there is no one formula
that guarantees success. But it is our conviction, based
on our experience, that nothing lasting can be
constructed unless it is based on applying the same law
to everyone and on rejecting any type of pressure or
collective threat aimed at exonerating those responsible
for human rights violations.

Mindful of the scope of this subject, my
delegation would like to confine itself to a few
observations on lessons learned from recent
reconciliation processes and on the role of the United
Nations. Restoring mutual trust between the parties to a
conflict requires that we clarify what happened in the
past, identify those responsible for human rights
violations and other atrocities, apply justice and
establish compensation and restitution programmes for
those who were the main victims of violence and
injustice.

From my country's perspective - and here, I
wish to touch upon what the representative of Human
Rights Watch said to the Council in January - truth
commissions have been useful mechanisms that have
enabled us to irrefutably and objectively clarify the
facts and have created a social awareness about the true
scale and social impact of the Violent past. The United
Nations should and can provide advice about creating
such commissions and can contribute to their
establishment by facilitating dialogue among various
sectors to achieve broad social acceptance of the
mechanism.

With regard to adopting legal solutions aimed at
clearing up grave crimes, the international community
has been making significant progress for more than a
decade. Its ultimate aim in creating the International
Criminal Court, international and local tribunals with
international components and of various innovative
initiatives is to help restore trust. A basic premise for
the success of those courts is that the method chosen
must enjoy the broadest possible social consensus.

One of the lessons learned in the past few years is
that national reconciliation cannot be imposed from
outside. That is why the international community must
adopt a cautious approach and respect the principle that
a genuine and lasting process must be generated within
society. Notwithstanding that fact, the international
community has an extremely important role to play by
supporting and monitoring local reconciliation
processes, offering advice and training, and providing
material and human resources.

Finally, given the many experiences in this area
and the differences and similarities among various
national reconciliation processes, it might be a good
idea for the Secretariat to consider establishing national
reconciliation mechanisms to systematize the lessons
that various nations have learned and to formulate
recommendations for United Nations bodies with
competence in this area. My country is fully prepared
to share with Member States and the Organization what
it has learned from its own terrible experiences.

