Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation to Ms.
Safiatou Ba-N'Daw and the other members of the
Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the significant
amount of work they have done pursuant to the
mandate given to them by the Security Council. The
report they have prepared is an extremely important
document.

My delegation would also like to welcome the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda, the Special Envoy
of the President of Rwanda and the Minister of Finance
of Burundi. Their presence here today bears witness to
the importance that those countries attach to this
meeting and to this issue. Their contribution to our
debate is essential in clarifying certain aspects of the
matter under consideration so that we can objectively
assess the situation.

Our meeting is taking place at a decisive moment
in the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. This meeting is also being held just before the
Council's mission to the region to evaluate progress
made in the peace process. The Council's mission will
take account, inter alia, of the links between the
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the continuation of the
fighting.

In its report, the Panel of Experts provides
sombre information about the scope of the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and about the continuation of
the conflict. It also identifies a correlation between the
economic interests of certain outside actors and the
continuation of the conflict.

We attach the greatest importance to ending the
illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to putting an
end to the war once and for all. It is a question of
reasserting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
sovereignty over its natural resources, as the Council
has affirmed in its resolutions on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Unfortunately, as the Panel notes, it is the
Congolese people that is suffering the consequences of
the pillage of its resources and of the continuation of
the war. The people of Congo, who desire a better
future, are counting on the support of the international
community to end the war and the pillage of its
resources, and to restore peace, security and stability to
the region.

The conclusions and recommendations of the
Panel of Experts are of great importance and could
have significant consequences for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for the region and for the
Security Council's efforts with respect to the situation
in the region. They therefore merit our careful
consideration and frank and constructive dialogue with
the parties concerned.

We have heard the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo express his Government's
satisfaction with the report and describe the
expectations of the Congolese Government. We have
also heard high-level representatives from Burundi,
Rwanda and Uganda explain the views of their
respective Governments. Indeed, the aim of today's
meeting is to enable the States named in the report to
provide the clarifications they deem appropriate or
useful with respect to what is very serious information.

Today's meeting and the talks the Security
Council mission will have in the region will enable
more in-depth discussion of Council follow-up to this
matter in the light of additional information from the
Panel of Experts and of its assessment of the situation.
In our view, the report should encourage the parties to
genuinely implement Council resolutions and to take
concrete steps to advance the peace process. In that
context, we expect the withdrawal of foreign forces
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo to be
swift, complete and final. Any new initiative by the
parties to that end would certainly be welcome.

While there has been progress in the
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
and of Security Council resolutions, a heinous crime
has disrupted that progress: last week's murder, at
Bunia, Orientale Province of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, of six members of the staff of the
International Committee of the Red Cross - four
Congolese, one Colombian and one Swiss - who gave
their lives in the cause of peace. Last Friday, the
President of the Security Council, on behalf of the
members of the Council, condemned that heinous and
cowardly crime.

In the light of that grave event, we reaffirm the
need for all parties to respect the principles of
neutrality and impartiality in the provision of
humanitarian assistance. We recall that it is the
responsibility of all parties to ensure the safety and
security of United Nations and associated personnel.

