Mr. Smith: I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak to the Council today about the effect of climate-related impacts on peace operations in Somalia. This is a glimpse into the world of tomorrow, in which peace operations will be undertaken in security environments that are increasingly influenced by climate and vulnerable to its vagaries. The mandate renewals in 2018 and 2019 for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) referred to the impact of climate change. Against that background, my institute, the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, has explored the evidence of climate impact, assessed the risks it poses and identified responses. We released our report in late 2019, and my briefing today summarizes its findings. In a nutshell, floods and droughts in Somalia exacerbate conflict and displacement, thereby increasing the risk that the efforts of UNSOM and the work of the Federal Government of Somalia to build peace will be undermined. The pressure of weather events is part of what challenges the current power- sharing agreement, providing, inter alia, recruitment opportunities for the Al-Shabaab terrorist organization. Turning that around, so that the response to climate variability creates opportunities for peacebuilding, isperhaps the essence of the challenge facing the Federal Government of Somalia and UNSOM. Addressing the negative impact of environmental change on peace operations could offer an opportunity to build a positive relationship between environmental resilience and sustainable peace. I do not need to explain to the Council the contours of conflict in Somalia. Conflicts persist among competing clans and ideological and political groups. There are both national and local conflicts, and both types feed each other. The local conflicts are often closely linked with access to natural resources, especially land, fisheries and water. The ownership of resources is closely linked to livelihoods and ways of life and therefore to markers of communal identity, which makes conflict particularly hard to resolve or even manage and embeds the influence of climate deep within the factors that shape the prospects of security and insecurity - peace or conflict - in Somalia. Let us therefore turn to the country's climate. Our report does not argue that climate defines everything in Somalia or elsewhere. But the evidence is that if our analysis leaves out nature, including climate, then the analysis is incomplete. Somalia experiences some of the world's highest mean annual temperatures and has long been prone to extreme weather conditions. In the six decades since 1960, the country has experienced a gradual and continuous increase in mean annual temperature. While the conflicts have made data collection and tracking difficult, in 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projected a temperature increase of between 3.2°C and 4.3°C by the end of the twenty-first century - far exceeding tolerable levels. Meanwhile, rainfall is erratic and varies widely between the seasons and from year to year. In 2014, the IPCC projected more rain for Somalia in the coming decades, with the rain falling more intensely, thus generating a high and growing risk of flooding and soil erosion. Consequently, seasons and weather are hard to predict. This uncertainty has a direct impact on everyday life for a people who are highly dependent on agriculture for their livelihoods. It intensifies competition for natural resources and _ generates conflicts because, as herders shift away from traditional grazing routes due to unexpectedly changed conditions, so farmers find themselves having to defend their land and crops against extra pressure. Herders are more inclined to sell livestock in times of extreme weather, which depresses local prices, weakening an already weak market, which closes options for a dignified livelihood for young men. It therefore indirectly encourages criminality and creates opportunities for recruitment by armed factions. In short, local climate realities feed Al-Shabaab with a pool of potential recruits. Of course, the influx of small arms into the region offers armed factions additional opportunities for building their strength. Further, local conflicts can quickly escalate to become conflicts at the national level. Disagreements on natural resources are absorbed into Somalia's larger political dynamics and have led to some of its deadliest violence. And worryingly, at the same time as resource-based conflicts have both deepened and escalated, migration to the cities and internal displacement have had the effect of weakening traditional means of managing and resolving conflicts. The evidence is clear that climate-related shocks and stresses can destabilize Somalia's prospects for peace. Extreme weather events create water and food insecurity that give Al-Shabaab the opportunity to act as service providers, which allows the group's political narrative to gain support and decreases trust in the peacebuilding efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia and the United Nations. UNSOM and the United Nations country team have responded to the increasing pressure and recurrence of extreme weather events and their knock-on effects. Based on the lessons learned from the 2011 drought and its catastrophic consequences, initiatives were developed that curbed the potentially severe famine in 2016 and 2017. The key was timely information and effective interagency cooperation across Somalia. This is the basis for forming the Disaster Operations Coordination Centre, working with the comprehensive recovery and resilience framework for Somalia. It is also important that the role of an environmental security adviser was created, so as to address the need for coordination. UNSOM is therefore taking steps to address climate-related risks. Together with the United Nations country team, what more can it do? First, the Mission can focus on improving coordination between the Government and humanitarian and security actors, both Somali and international. To be sure, care must be taken not to undermine humanitarian neutrality, but assistance in a humanitarian emergencycan be accepted from different quarters. Preparation for this will reduce the impact of future shocks and can be done without compromising humanitarian principles. Secondly, it can remain alert to the need to adapt its response structures to evolving conditions. Part of its long-term strategy and part of the recovery and resilience framework for Somalia should be to build the capacity to receive, process, disseminate and act upon information that reflects the changing on-the-ground realities in the dual context of a changing climate and protracted conflicts. Thirdly, climate and climate change cross national boundaries and so does the impact. Broader regional responses are required. Through the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, appropriate inter-State frameworks exist, with which UNSOM can cooperate. If I may, our report also contains relevant input for similar United Nations missions in vulnerable areas. Accordingly, and fourthly, the case of UNSOM in Somalia exemplifies what we have also identified in other operations in the Sahel, in the Middle East and in Asia - the imperative of preparing now for climate impacts. The first step is to increase capacity to assess climate-related security risks. A good starting point is to step up the dialogue on this issue among United Nations agencies working in-country. It is or should be a central plank of the sustaining peace and conflict prevention agenda. Fifthly, by increasing information exchange between missions, knowledge about what works and what does not will be brought together and can be more widely shared. And sixthly, dare we say it, we should dare to find new responses. Some tried and tested measures are still relevant, but, all other things being equal, a changing world requires some new responses. Knowing what does not work means it is time to find something new, even experimentally. Finally, there are implications for the wider United Nations system. To synthesize climate-risk-assessment capacity, risk-assessment information should be made available to those that need it via the United Nations system and the climate security mechanism; we must ensure that the training of peacebuilding personnel includes a specific focus on climate sensitivity; and lastly, we must carry out the systems adjustments needed so that funding streams can support integrated responses to climate-related security risks and prioritize programmes that promote climate resilience. In sum, the case of Somalia shows us the future of peacebuilding. There are practical steps decision makers can take to address the negative impact of today's environmental crises to improve tomorrow's prospects for peace and security. UNSOM and the Federal Government of Somalia have both made important steps in this direction, and there is room for more. I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the Security Council, whose attention is greatly appreciated.
