Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I,
too, should like to thank Ambassador Denisov for his
excellent presentation of the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and for his efforts as
Committee Chairman. I should also like to take this
opportunity to express my delegation's appreciation to
the delegations of Angola, Chile, Germany, Pakistan
and Spain, which have left the Council and which,
during their mandate, showed great commitment and
spared no effort to carry out the CTC's mandate. In
addition, I should like to welcome the CTC's new
members. Finally, I cannot fail to welcome the
presence of Ambassador Ruperez, Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
(CTED), and to thank him and his team for their efforts
and their contribution to the implementation of the
CTC's mandate.

The number of reports submitted by Member
States under resolution 1373 (2001) is significant. The
CTC is preparing to receive the fifth series of reports,
and we hope that the necessary resources, including
human resources, will be made available to it so that it
can carry out its mandate. We note, however, that 75
Member States have not fulfilled their obligations by
submitting their reports on time. That is a source of
concern for my delegation, since most of those States
are developing countries, particularly African
countries. We note the willingness shown by the
Committee, through the efforts of its Executive
Directorate, to provide them with the assistance and
advice needed for the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). We hope that a proactive approach is
taken to engage in direct dialogue with those countries,
including by raising the awareness of regional
organizations.

It goes without saying that implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) is not limited to
reviewing reports, but also requires additional and
tools resources. That is why we welcome the fact that
the CTC has already begun an analytical effort to
assess States' assistance needs, which will be
integrated into the report review process.

In the past, my delegation has called on the
Committee to organize visits to selected States as a
means of direct dialogue with them to strengthen the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to assess
technical assistance needs to ensure such
implementation. The CTC has already adopted general
guidelines and procedures for the preparation, carrying
out and assessment of such visits. These are tools that
will enable it to better perform its tasks under
resolution 1535 (2004) and 1566 (2004). We are
pleased that, beginning in March, the CTC has
scheduled a number of visits to States in various
regions. That effort, which forms part of the
implementation of the goal of revitalizing the CTC,
deserves to be encouraged and reaffirmed.

Furthermore, we welcome the fact that the CTC
will hold its fourth special meeting with international,
regional and subregional organizations in Almaty,
Kazakhstan, from 26 to 28 January 2005. In that
regard, we appreciate the offer by the Commonwealth
of Independent States and the efforts of the Kazakh
Government to prepare that meeting, which seek to
develop the relations between the CTC and
international and regional organizations and hence to
strengthen global counter-terrorism efforts.

We note with satisfaction the informal contacts
between the Chairmen of the CTC, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). In that connection, we believe that the
coordination of the schedule of visits deserves
particular attention. Moreover, we would like to see
greater interaction among those bodies and between the
CTC and the various United Nations structures
involved in the fight against terrorism. We approve the
fourteenth work programme for the next trimester and
the goals set out therein. Now that the budgetary and
administrative provisions have been finalized, we are
confident that the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate will become fully operational.

Finally, Algeria, which is firmly committed to the
fight against terrorism and which voted in favour of
resolution 1566 (2004), believes that that resolution's
main objective was to reaffirm the mobilization of the
international community in fighting against that
scourge and not to provide a definition of terrorism,
which is the sole prerogative of the General Assembly,
the Organization's legislative and deliberative body,
which, we hope, will be able to arrive at a consensus
definition of the phenomenon of terrorism as soon as
possible.

