Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Historically, Iraq has been an important
factor for stability in the Middle East. Russia supports
constructive steps aimed at strengthening Iraq's
domestic political situation and ensuring the country's
security and socioeconomic development in full
respect for its sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. We note the enormous contribution of the
United Nations and Special Representative Kubis in
stabilizing the situation in Iraq. We know that this
is a result of his ability to establish constructive and
mutually respectful dialogue between all the political
stakeholders in Iraq.

We were pleased to see that the parliamentary
elections held in May culminated in the election of the
Republic's top leadership. We emphasize that Russia
respects the sovereign choice of the Iraqi people and we
urge everyone to do the same.

We welcome our Iraqi partners' successful and
decisive efforts to combat the terrorist threat. Much
has been done on the counter-terrorism front, and the
so-called caliphate of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) has been dealt a crushing blow.
We believe that this was achieved partly thanks to
the uncompromising war on terrorism being waged
in neighbouring Syria. Russia has contributed to
that effort. But despite these successes, the security
situation in Iraq remains fragile. ISIL members remain
active in a number of Iraqi provinces, hiding in areas
that are hard to reach or posing as refugees or locals.
Terrorist attacks are still their weapon of choice. We
categorically condemn any acts of terror, express our
sympathies with the Government and the people of Iraq
and the families of victims, and wish the wounded a
speedy recovery. We believe that the only effective way
to combat this challenge is by coordinating our counter-
terrorism efforts. The initiative of President Putin of
Russia to create a broad coalition of States to fight
terrorism is as relevant as ever.

Restoring the economy, the social arena and
national livelihoods generally is crucial for the Iraqi
leadership. The international community should help
Baghdad to develop comprehensive measures aimed at
improving socioeconomic conditions, and in that regard
we acknowledge the International Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq held in February in Kuwait.

We want to draw attention to the priority of
providing assistance to refugees and internally
displaced persons, which, incidentally, is highlighted
in the Secretary-General's latest report on the situation
in Iraq (S/2018/975). Needless to say, it must be done
jointly and without double standards, whether in Iraq,
Syria or any other similar context.

Russia has been supporting the Iraqi leadership's
efforts on the security front and on long-term
normalization of the situation both politically and
practically. We are helping to strengthen the Iraqi
army and implementing effective collaboration on
regional security issues within the framework of the
quadrilateral coordination centre in Baghdad, and we
are expanding bilateral trade and economic ties. We
welcome Baghdad's use of bilateral communication
channels with partners in the region, its implementation
of a good-neighbourliness policy and normalization of
relations with regional Powers. Baghdad and Kuwait's
willingness to work to resolve as soon as possible the
legacy of all the problematic issues resulting from the
first Gulf War deserves particular support. As United
Nations High-level Coordinators at various stages of the
process, Russia's Ambassadors Vorontsov and Tarasov
also contributed to resolving this humanitarian issue.

We are concerned about the possible negative
effects on Iraq's fragile internal political situation as
a result of the artificial intensification of the situation
surrounding the Islamic Republic of Iran. Iraq has
the right to build and develop normal relations with
its Iranian neighbours, and no one has the right to
undermine those relations. We want to emphasize
once again the importance of launching dialogue
mechanisms in the region rather than sanctions and
threats, especially since the experience of that kind of
cooperation exists and has been developed.

Russia will continue to play an active role in the
Middle East, based on its historically friendly and
healthy relations with Iraq and other States of the
region. We are open to collaborating with regional
and international partners. Our shared efforts would
be seriously helped by the promotion of a security and
cooperation architecture based on the assumption that
any issues that might arise would be resolved through
mutually respectful dialogue, not threats of force.

We would like to conclude on a positive note with
regard to the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq. We believe that it should continue to
prioritize assisting in the promotion of the national
reconciliation processes that are essential to achieving
the country's long-term stability. For our part, in
all our contacts with all of Iraq's political forces, we
encourage them to unite their efforts through inclusive
dialogue aimed at reaching consensus agreements that
take the interests of all ethnic and religious groups into
consideration. We want to express our gratitude to all
the Mission staff working in difficult conditions, and
personally to Special Representative Kubis. We very
much appreciate his professional and personal qualities,
which have enabled him to earn the respect of all Iraqi
political forces, and we wish him every success in his
new important post.

