Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank
the Chinese presidency for convening this meeting,
which makes us reaffirm our commitment to the
Charter of the United Nations. This year, we usher in
the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations and
the transformational post-2015 phase. We realize the
absolute unparalleled importance of the United Nations
as the only universal Organization in the world that can
address pressing issues of regional and global security
and provide concerted momentum for sustainable
development.

Being a responsible, supportive and highly engaged
State Member of the United Nations has been one of
the highest priorities of my country's foreign policy.
Kazakhstan sees the Charter, the conventions and the
legal instruments as a guideline for its work at the
United Nations for maintaining peace and security,
sustainable development and humanitarian action.
We share with others the deep conviction that the
fundamental principles of the Charter emphasizing
the sovereign equality of States, the rule of law in
international relations, non-interference in internal
affairs and respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, together with the peaceful
settlement of disputes, are more relevant than ever.
Our commitment to multilateral diplomacy, mutual
trust, confidence-building and international fairness
and justice must therefore be unfailing with an honest,
impartial and balanced brokerage.

Kazakhstan has endeavoured over 23 years to
develop friendly relations with all States. We have
learned from our experience that all countries, large
and small, need protection and should have their voices
heard in the Security Council and other United Nations
bodies on international policies of peace and security,
as well as sustainable development. That is because of
the close nexus between the two, acknowledging that
without peace there can be no development and vice
versa.

As for the component of development, global
cooperation and partnerships with an outreach to
support Africa, the land-locked developing countries,
least developed countries and small island developing
States (SIDS) in areas ofnuclear, food, energy and water
security - and especially climate change mitigation
for SIDS - will promote social progress and better
standards of life in larger basic freedom for all.

The tasks before us can be effectively achieved if
all the principal organs of the United Nations - the
General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council, the International Court of Justice
and the Secretariat - work in close cooperation with
the specialized agencies and regional organizations.
The good offices of the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoys, as listed in the Charter, should also be
availed of to the fullest.

The Charter gives the Security Council primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In fulfilling this mandate it must
adopt judiciously a range of measures, including
the establishment of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The comprehensive and hybrid nature of
peacekeeping operations today call for greater global
solidarity to meet unprecedented challenges and must
be in consultation with the troop-contributing and host
countries.

Force must be used only as a last resort when all
attempts at diplomacy and negotiation have failed and
must be so done if authorized by the Council. We also
abide by the basic directives of human dignity and
fundamental human rights of both men and women.
The protection of civilians, especially women and
children, is an imperative, with a halt to all forms of
gender violence and impunity.

If preventing succeeding generations from the
scourge of war was the main motivation for creating
the United Nations, then Kazakhstan had the moral
courage to close down in 1991 its nuclear-weapon test
site in Semipalatinsk, the second largest in the world,
and renounced its nuclear arsenal, the fourth largest in
the world. Along with other countries in our region,
the Central Asian nuclear-weapon-free zone was
established as a means of regional and global security.
My country is presently working with stakeholders on a
universal declaration for the achievement of a nuclear-
weapon-free world to make our world safer.

To conclude, Kazakhstan remains steadfast in its
pledge to be part of the multilateral action to uphold the
highest principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

