Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing on the Middle
East. It confirmed our concerns regarding the limited
prospects for a resumption of the peace process, the
continuing repression in Syria and the resulting and
growing threats to the stability of the region.

We hail the diplomatic efforts conducted under
the auspices of the King of Jordan, but our
expectations are limited. The absence of a renewed
method for bringing the parties back to the table is, for
us, a serious stumbling block. For a year we have been
asking that parameters adopted by the international
community frame this resumption of negotiations by
giving the parties a solid basis for trust. Neither the
Quartet nor the Council has been able to achieve this
objective. These failures have demonstrated that the
will of the parties is not enough.

France believes that only a follow-up mechanism
enlarged to include all stakeholders able to contribute
to a definitive solution, including the United Nations
and this Council, will enable the creation of the
dynamic needed to resolve issues that touch on the
foundations of Israeli and Palestinian national identity.
That said, this is not to lift responsibilities from the
parties themselves. It is to launch a call to all
stakeholders, in this year laden with internal
constraints, to make possible the emergence of
conditions that will allow a credible resumption of
peace talks.

The will of the parties is not enough, but it is
essential. We were struck by the dangerous
developments that characterized the situation on the
ground in 2011, particularly the acceleration of Israeli
settlement activity to a level not seen for a decade. Last
20 December, the four European members of this
Council noted their concern regarding a systematic,
premeditated and deliberate policy of illegal
construction, contravening the vision of a two-State
solution and in violation of international law and the
resolutions of this Council. In the West Bank as well as
in East Jerusalem, the Israeli authorities must
immediately end this policy, which is a threat to the
territorial and economic integrity of the future
Palestinian State.

Regarding the attempt to isolate East
Jerusalem from the rest of the West Bank or the forced
displacements of the Palestinian population in Area C,
the changes in the demographic realities on the ground
in violation of the Geneva Convention - as noted by
my Azerbaijani colleague - must be condemned by
the international community. We deplore that the
Council has not been up to the task of issuing a
judgment, of reasserting the principles at the heart of
the two-State solution, when those principles are
threatened.

In Gaza, a radical change in policy is also
required. Ms. Amos indicated this to the Council. In
2011, the blockade, far from having been lifted as
called for in resolution 1860 (2009), instead became
stronger with the closure of the Karni crossing. The
dependence of the economy of Gaza on international
aid has been reinforced, as has the control of Hamas
over the destiny of the population.

It is not a question of compromising the security
of Israel, which continues to be the target of rocket
attacks, which we condemn. However, measures must
be undertaken quickly to lighten the weight of the
blockade on the people, who are held hostage. The
viability of the political process also depends on our
support for the partners in the peace process, in
preserving their legitimacy, given the hopes expressed
by their populations.

France is committed to supporting the Palestinian
Authority and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas,
in particular in the context of the Paris Conference,
which contributed to efforts to build Palestinian
institutions. But financial assistance, like the reforms
implemented by Prime Minister Fayyad, come up
against the lack of political perspectives. While
President Abbas has revived efforts to foster
Palestinian reconciliation, he must be supported be so
that the principles of negotiation and peaceful
settlement of conflict, endorsed by the Palestinian
Liberation Organization, may prevail.

I now to turn another topic of concern and
indignation, and that is the situation in Syria. The
repression led by the Syrian leaders against their
people and the systematic and massive violations of
human rights to suppress the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people continue with complete impunity.
More than 5,500 Syrians have lost their lives since last
March in what now can be characterized as crimes
against humanity.

The Syrian regime is dragging its people into
chaos, and the entire region is threatened: refugees
flow into neighbouring countries, Lebanese
sovereignty is repeatedly challenged, fears for the
future of minorities and of fragile religious
equilibriums are growing, and there are known
violations of the arms embargo imposed on Iran, with
arms flowing to Syria. It is unacceptable that certain
countries, including some in this Council, continue to
provide the very means by which violence is
committed against the Syrian people.

Given the silence of the Council, the Arab League
has taken up the issue. It proposed an action plan to the
Syrian regime last November and sent a monitoring
mission to guarantee the implementation of the plan on
the ground. This weekend, one month since the
mission's deployment, the Arab League could report
only the failure of Damascus to uphold its obligations.
None of the League's four requirements - cessation of
violence, withdrawal of armed forces from cities,
release of political prisoners and free access to the
international media - has been met. The Arab League
has drawn the inevitable conclusions and called for a
peaceful political transition by which President Bashar
Al-Assad would hand over power.

We fully support the Arab League's plan for
resolving the crisis. It is the only way likely to return
stability to Syria and to preserve stability in the region.
We welcome the Arab League's request that its
Secretary-General, along with the Chair of the
Interministerial Committee on Syria, be allowed to
report to the Security Council on the situation. It is
indeed crucial that the United Nations to provide all
the necessary assistance to the regional organization
concerned. It is still more necessary that the Security
Council get past the blockages so as to underscore the
legitimacy of this initiative by providing it unanimous
support of the United Nations.

The Council's ability to contribute to the
resolution of these crises is also a matter of the
credibility of its action at the regional level.

Lebanon, to which the Secretary-General has just
paid a visit, is a country threatened by the spectre of
the civil war unleashed in Syria. In this context, we
call on the Lebanese authorities to continue to work
with all the component parts of Lebanese society. We
hail their commitment to respect all their international
obligations, including those pertaining to the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon.

In Egypt the people voted in elections that met
the criteria for free democratic expression. The
elections were an important step in the democratic
transition, which must be continued. Power should be
transferred to the elected civilian authorities. The
rights of women and minorities, the rules of free
democratic expression and the basic principle of
rejecting all violence must all be upheld.

In conclusion, I appeal for consistent action on
the part of the Security Council. The Arab Spring has
brought unprecedented upheaval to the Middle East.
The Council must necessarily adapt its actions to the
new reality. We now have a moral obligation to address
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people.
That obligation underscores the absolute necessity for
the Council to respond unanimously to the crisis in
Syria, which is threatening the entire region. While the
Arab League and the Gulf Cooperation Council of Arab
States are actively contributing to resolving the
regional crises, it is a matter of the very legitimacy of
the Security Council in the region for it to fully uphold
its responsibilities to maintain international peace and
security.

