Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Indonesia would
like to welcome and thank Mr. Stefan Lofven, Prime
Minister of Sweden, for presiding over today's open
debate. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2018/465), as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
in Armed Conflict, the Executive Director for UNICEF
and Ms. Londofio for their briefings

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and I would like
to add the following remarks in my national capacity.

Promoting and protecting children's rights to
ensure their well-being is a moral obligation that all
countries must fulfil. While every achievement is good
news, the persistence and scope of the violence against
children in armed conflict, particularly in relation to
recruitment, killing and maiming, cannot be ignored.
Every violation, including those committed by armed
groups, such as acts of terror, mass kidnapping and all
sexual abuse and exploitation, must be condemned in
the strongest language possible.

Indonesia believes that given the changing and
complex nature of current conflicts, the international
community must intensify its efforts. As a country
that considers this issue as a core one, Indonesia has
become a pathfinder country in the global effort to
protect children from violence and exploitation. It
has also become a party to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We continue
to support the promotion and protection of the rights of
children agenda to achieve a sustainable future for all.

Concerning the way forward, allow me to share
some pertinent points.

First, it is the central responsibility of Member
States to protect children. No country should spare any
effort in promoting the rights of children and ensuring
their growth and development. On the other hand,
building the capacity of Member States in the area of
child protection is also a key component that requires
international cooperation.

Secondly, children will remain vulnerable to
exploitation unless the root causes of conflict are
addressed. Investing in development and meeting social
and economic needs are important factors in bringing
stability and progress to societies. More importantly,
there is an urgent need to maximize efforts to prevent
the recruitment, radicalization and widespread
dissemination of terrorist ideology among children and
young people.

Thirdly, the full protection of and respect for
the best interests of children should be paramount in
counter-terrorism efforts and in peace and ceasefire
agreements, including their treatment as primary
victims and not as perpetrators when associated with
non-State armed groups. During their reintegration, the
aim should be to create the basis for a transformative
and durable change in society, leading to long-term
sustainable peace and stability. This implies the
provision of a protective environment, access to quality
education and provisions for specific physical and
mental health needs.

Fourthly, we encourage all Member States
to universally ratify and implement the relevant
international treaties and to enact related
national legislation.
Lastly, Indonesia is committed to ending violence
against civilians in armed conflict, particularly women
and children. We would like to encourage the sharing of
best practices among the United Nations peacekeeping
forces to strengthen the role of peacekeeping missions
in the protection of children. Indonesia would also
welcome the inclusion of personnel specifically
dedicated to child protection in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

