Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Libya, Mr. Salame', for his
informative briefing. I reiterate Cote d'Ivoire's support
to efforts towards peace and stability in Libya. I also
commend Ambassador Olof Skoog for the quality of
his briefing.

My country would like to take the opportunity
of this meeting on Libya to strongly condemn the
attack perpetrated at the headquarters of the Libyan
High Commission for National Elections on 2 May.
That attack, claimed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, underscored the fragility of the security
situation and called on us to engage in joint efforts to
response appropriately to terrorism and the issue of

armed groups, which pose a real threat to the Libyan
peace process.

While the security situation remains cause for
concern, we must not lose sight of the progress made
in the ongoing political process. In that regard, my
delegation would like to welcome the meetings between
members of the House of Representatives and the High
State Council with a view to reaching compromises on
important provisions of the Libyan Political Agreement
that are subject to controversy. The Agreement,
endorsed by the United Nations, remains the only valid
reference framework to lead Libya towards a credible
and inclusive democratic transition.

We welcome the fact that the Libyan Supreme
Court has been able to remove judicial obstacles to
pave the way for the forthcoming referendum on the
new constitution, which will be the cornerstone of the
rule of law to which all Libyans aspire.

We also commend Libyans' support for the ongoing
political process and their clear desire definitively
to bring to an end the situation of instability and
insecurity in their country. That desire is reflected in
the high rate of voter registration among Libyans; the
reconciliation between the armed groups in the cities
of Misrata and Zintan; and the measures taken by
mayors and local elected representatives to hold timely
municipal elections. Libyans' desire for peace also led
to the high participation in 42 meetings in 27 localities
of the country, the first phase of an inclusive political
process leading to a national donference.

The significant progress we are seeing on the ground
augurs well for a successful outcome of the efforts of
Mr. Salame to restore peace and stability in Libya. My
delegation would like to reiterate its congratulations
on the progress he has made in what is a particularly
difficult situation.

I also take this opportunity to recall that resolving
the Libyan crisis is of great importance for all ofAfrica,
including for its effects on the Sahelo-Saharan region,
which led to the 17 April meeting ofthe High Committee
of the African Union on Libya in Addis Ababa.

My country takes note of the arrest warrants issued
by the International Criminal Court with a view to
ending a long period of impunity in Libya.

Cote d'Ivoire commends the efforts made by the
Libyan Government to put an end to the trafficking of
migrants in that country. In that regard, we welcome the
decision by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to consider the possibility of extending
the ICC's jurisdiction to cover crimes committed
against migrants. We continue to support the inclusion
of persons or entities engaged in the trafficking or
smuggling of migrants on the list of sanctions of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

My delegation is also extremely concerned about the
siege of the city of Derna by the Libyan National Army.
We call on the warring parties to move to a ceasefire
and to pursue dialogue to overcome their differences.

On the humanitarian front, my country urgently
calls for the effective implementation of the 2018
Libyan humanitarian response plan to meet the urgent
needs for this year of 940,000 Libyans throughout
the country.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support
for the action plan of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. We urge the international
community to lend him its full support in order to
advance the national reconciliation process and lay
the foundations for lasting peace and stability in Libya
through an inclusive democratic process. My delegation
would also like to commend the work being carried out
by the staff of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, who have just begun their deployment in Tripoli.

