Mr. De Mistura: I thank Minister Rassoul for
being with us today. His presence sends a strong signal
at a time when, as the Lebanese presidency has
reminded us, Afghanistan is going through a terrible
time. His presence reminds us of the departure of
Mr. Rabbani, and we need to hear from him about how
Afghanistan will once again confront a difficult
moment.

We meet today at a sad moment indeed for the
people of Afghanistan. The recent killing of former
President and head of the High Peace Council,
Mr. Rabbani, who was a friend to many of us and
2

highly respected by us all, was a shock to all of us. But
Afghanistan and the Afghans have shown so many
times over thousands of years the capacity to recover
again and again from tragic and sad losses, and we
know and feel that their resolve in the search for peace
will not be deterred. That was said recently by
President Karzai himself.

It remains unclear who was behind this attack. As
Mr. Rabbani's son said at the funeral in Kabul, we
must continue to work for peace - the same peace that
Mr. Rabbani had started and to which he had
committed himself and sacrificed his life in his role as
Chairman of the High Peace Council. History shows
that reconciliation efforts are particularly vulnerable to
attack when they start to gain traction and precisely for
that reason. In recent years, there has been increased
interest shown by many relevant parties in the idea of a
peace process. Under Mr. Rabbani's leadership, the
High Peace Council in fact started to generate a form
of dialogue that was definitely needed to address the
trust deficit before talks could become more concrete.

The road to peace is never smooth. We know that.
The death of Mr. Rabbani is not the end of the peace
process. That has been said by many Afghans, in
particular the highest authorities of the country. This is
a moment for the Afghans to recalibrate - a moment
that calls for national unity among the leaders and
people of Afghanistan as they again endure another
tragic loss.

I myself was recently invited to a showing of an
Afghan film celebrating the achievements of four
young Afghans who, with no previous experience and
without the support of outsiders, were able to
overcome the highest physical obstacle in Afghanistan
to become the first team of Afghans to stand on the top
of Mount Noshaq, the highest mountain in the country.
That serves as a reminder to all of us that the Afghan
Government and people, with the support of others like
us, will eventually be able to work together to find a
peaceful solution to their problems.

There is no alternative to a political solution.
There is a window of opportunity, albeit very narrow
and clearly fragile, for talks to begin, and we need to
pursue it. Peace is not an event but a process that, if it
is to be sustainable and deliver lasting results, must be
broad-based and include Afghans from all walks of
life, including civil society. The priority must continue
to be a dialogue among and led by Afghans themselves,
11-52328
with non-Afghans like us playing a supporting role, if
and when required.

At the national level and as proof of its continued
commitment to searching for peace, we support the
Afghan Government and hope that it will proceed with
the swift appointment of an authoritative voice not to
replace Mr. Rabbani - who is not replaceable - but
to persist in the efforts he led within the High Peace
Council.

Peace efforts are also very much about redressing
local grievances. Here, I should like to pay my respects
to and single out Minister Stanekzai, who is a friend to
whom we wish a swift recovery from his wounds. His
efforts to advance the Afghan Peace and Reintegration
Programme as a critical process at the local level have
been crucial and need to continue as a dispute
resolution mechanism, in addition to other, similar
mechanisms. That is why we wish to praise and
commend the timely convening of a recent conference
on the Afghan Peace and Reintegration Programme in
Kandahar, which offered an opportunity to further
promote reintegration, particularly in the South where,
in all frankness, there has been less progress than in the
northern part of the country.

Furthermore, regarding the Programme, we
should remain vigilant in ensuring a proper and
rigorous vetting mechanism. Our memories of the
tragic events in Kandahar, along with our experience in
Mazar-e-Sharif and now with Mr. Rabbani, remind us
of how important vetting can and should be.

On a positive note with respect to the Afghan
National Police and the Afghan National Army, we
have noticed increasing positive progress in the
development of both institutions. They have been
showing that they are capable of taking on more
security responsibilities and of becoming more self-
sustaining. That is why, in spite of all these incidents,
the transition is going forward. Recent security
incidents, while regrettable due to the loss of life, have
also shown the increased ability of the Afghan national
security system to manage such incidents in a
controlled and proportionate manner. I shall give
another personal example of that, if I may.

In August, among the many attacks that had taken
place, there was an attack in Abdul Haq Square that
lasted several hours. On that occasion, a Lieutenant
Colonel who was the chief police officer in the area
embraced the suicide attacker who was moving
11-52328

towards the people in the square; he exploded with him
and died. In doing so, he saved many lives, including
those of his own team. These are the types of incidents
that make us foreigners in Kabul feel that it is not mere
rhetoric to say that the Afghan National Police is
growing in the respect it enjoys from the people and in
the fulfilment of its functions.

The human cost in terms of the lives of average
Afghans is still too high, as President Karzai is
constantly reminding us. While security incidents, and
certainly military incidents, may be fewer in
number- and there is no question about that, as
compared with the past - the overall level of civilian
casualties, is still, unfortunately, too high; even one
civilian casualty is one too many. We are increasingly
concerned about the rising number of casualties and
the use of certain tactics, particularly by the Taliban
and by the insurgents, because - and we have been
seeing this - they are indiscriminately targeting the
civilian population.

Errors still occur, but there is an improvement in
the right direction; however, the need for a surge in the
protection of civilians needs to be our constant focus.
The Afghan State, which has done a great deal, must
continue to distinguish itself by putting respect for
universal human rights at the centre of its own policies
and practices, including in the treatment of prisoners
and detainees, an area in which we have already seen
substantial and encouraging movement in the right
direction. And when such progress takes place, we
should acknowledge it, as in the case of the very
encouraging improved regulation on women's shelters,
which could potentially go a long way towards
protecting Afghan women and girls, who often have
been at risk of violence and abuse.

Today we are having an important meeting at a
very sad and important moment in Afghan history. This
is one of the meetings being held in preparation for two
crucial meetings that will be convened later this year,
one in Istanbul and the other in Bonn. We hope that
they will be an opportunity for a collective
determination to support and reassure the Afghan
Government and people that we will be with them in
the long run. It is our responsibility to ensure that the
upcoming conferences, particularly the two that I
mentioned, are not ceremonial - we know that they
are not going to be ceremonial - but complementary,
substantive and forward-looking.
3

The Istanbul Conference on Afghanistan, to be
held on 2 November, will be an important rendezvous
that we hope will represent an opportunity for
representatives of the region to gather in Istanbul with
the intent of setting in motion measures to establish
what is being defined as a benign regional order, one in
which Afghanistan and its neighbours will exchange
mutual assurances aimed at creating a stable and
prosperous heart ofAsia.

Afghanistan feels, and we share those feelings,
that it should not be the subject of but the catalyst for
this conference, at which the region can discuss
concrete, not theoretical, ways to develop confidence-
building measures aimed at addressing common
challenges. A great deal of constructive work has been
done already, particularly on the economic side. I think
that is what the Istanbul conference aspires to address,
in keeping with the wishes of the Afghan people. We
want to thank the Turkish authorities for their
hospitality and their vision in offering this opportunity
to address political and security issues as well as
economic ones.

We believe that the upcoming preparatory
meeting in Oslo, to be held in two days' time, will
ensure that there is a clear idea among regional players
and others about the possibility of brainstorming on
this issue, so that we can come up with a stronger
declaration, or something along those lines, in Istanbul,
and possibly some type of follow-up structural
approach in order to ensure that whatever is discussed
in Istanbul does not remain just a statement.

UNAMA encourages and supports those efforts,
of which it is a part, while, of course, recognizing the
strong leadership of the two co-chairs, particularly
Afghanistan and Turkey. We support all initiatives,
including the New Silk Road, that are in the interest of
Afghanistan, its neighbours and the broader region, in
areas where we should be investing our attention.

Only trust among Afghanistan and its neighbours
and trust among individuals can create an atmosphere
in which private investment becomes more active and
thrives, as we hope it will.

We are looking forward to the Bonn conference,
to be held on 5 December. It has the potential to have a
historic impact, although, as always, we should be
cautious in our expectations; but our hopes are very
high. This will be a crucial opportunity for assessing
the transition, which is moving ahead. By that time we
will also have had other meetings in other forums
where the Afghan authorities and the International
Security Assistance Force will make clear their views
on how to substantially, we hope, increase the
transition momentum; promote support beyond 2014,
because they need to feel that they will not be
abandoned once again; and facilitate whatever progress
has been made, hopefully in the direction of
reconciliation.

There were clouds on the horizon last time I had
the honour and the privilege of meeting with Council
members here. The first cloud was the electoral follow-
up and the parliamentary crisis, and the other was
related to the Kabul Bank. I do not wish to be
perceived as overly optimistic, but I think that I am
honest enough to tell the Council that both clouds are
dissipating.

The first cloud is dissipating thanks to a very
courageous and wise decision by President Karzai.
Indeed, the Independent Electoral Commission was
recognized as the final authority on electoral issues, as
in any other part of the world where democracy is
moving in the right direction. We have therefore come
to the conclusion of a difficult but probably useful trip
related to the electoral process.

I believe that we will be on a much smoother path
for the next elections, whenever they take place,
because recognizing that the Independent Electoral
Commission is the final authority is a very good
starting point for future elections and for the
democratic process of the separation of powers in
Afghanistan, like anywhere else. So there is good
movement in the right direction. Nothing is perfect -
of course, nothing is perfect anywhere, not only in
Afghanistan - but there is movement in the right
direction, and we feel that the cloud is moving away.

On the issue of the Kabul Bank, we see light,
strong light coming from behind the cloud, to the point
where sometimes it does not even look like a cloud,
frankly. There is a possibility of seeing an agreement in
principle on an International Monetary Fund (IMF)
programme, and we believe that can be reached
through the ongoing negotiations. An IMF technical
mission will arrive in Kabul tomorrow, 30 September,
and stay there for 10 days to finalize discussions. The
IMF Board meting is scheduled for mid-November.
That also means that another important element, the
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund, which is
basically a special window of financial support for the
short-term funding of key national priority
programmes, is looking much more positive.
Additional funds are required, but already many
countries have indicated that they will continue to fund
it while waiting for the cloud to totally disappear.

In that context, I think that, along with my friend
the Minister of Finance, we are likely to be able to
co-chair and convene a joint coordination and
monitoring board, which is a kind of common board
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community on joint economic activities,
which has been suspended during this period. We hope
to do this in November, before the Bonn conference.

With respect to the review, which, as members
are aware, we take very seriously - and the Afghan
authorities, rightly, also take very seriously - we will
continue to work to ensure that the terms of reference
are satisfactory to everyone, in particular to the Afghan
authorities, and work in close cooperation with them
and, of course, with full respect for the Security
Council mandate.

On the humanitarian front, although we recognize
that there are many other areas in the world where
humanitarian priorities require the Council's attention,
we believe that the drought is an issue of concern. The
humanitarian community, together with the Afghan
authorities, will need to keep a close eye on the
situation since, in addition to insecurity, the drought
may produce food shortages. That is why we look
forward to seeing the outcome of the 2011 consolidated
appeals emergency revision, which focuses particularly
on the issue of drought.

With regard to combating narcotics, I will never
cease to remind the Council that current efforts are not
sufficient and that the issue remains serious both for
the Afghans as well as, quite frankly, neighbouring
countries and their people.

Finally, the next three months are likely to be
very challenging. From a security point of view, I am
afraid, the writing on the wall is clear. We will have to
endure, resist and go forward even if a pattern of
security challenges is likely to emerge. We are also
going to have other kinds of opportunities, such as
transition, second tranche, Istanbul and Bonn. When I
will have the honour to return here in December to
deliver my last briefing in my current capacity, I hope I
will be able to bring good news. The Afghans deserve
nothing else.

