I would like to commend the Estonian presidency for having convened this meeting on the protection of civilians, a topic that lies at the heart of the Security Council's mandate. Allow me also to express my deep appreciation for the informative briefings given by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer; and by Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union. I will now make a few remarks in my national capacity. This year's debate on the protection of civilians is taking place in a particularly challenging context, namely, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is a stress test for the United Nations system as a whole and which poses a particular challenge as regards the protection-of-civilians mandate. The current crisis has the potential to place at higher risk the already vulnerable populations that are suffering in conflict-affected areas: the elderly, people with disabilities, migrants and refugees, as well as women and children. In 2019, we celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the Security Council's adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which formally recognized the protection of civilians as a matter of international peace and security. Since then, the Council has adopted multiple resolutions on this topic, enacted a legal framework for strengthening it and mandated peacekeepers to integrate the protection of civilians into their missions. Those developments offered glimpses of hope for an improvement in the safety and security of the millions of people affected by war and violence. However, in spite of this robust normative framework, implementation gaps remain. The latest report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366) describes 2019 as a year of suffering. We continue to witness, on a regular basis, attacks on civilian objects such as schools, religious sites, immigration facilities, markets and towns, as well as widespread and persistent humanitarian access constraints and the perpetration of conflict-related sexual violence. According to the Secretary-General's report, more than 20,000 civilians were killed or injured in 2019 as a result of attacks in 10 countries only: Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Iraq, Libya, Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Ukraine and Yemen. Those numbers are appalling. We continue to believe that those gaps can be addressed, first and foremost through prevention, which remains the most important tool that we have at our disposal for the protection of civilians. It can comprise advancing political dialogue, pursuing reconciliation processes and strengthening security sectors, as well as economic recovery and social development. Secondly, when prevention has failed, ensuring respect for international humanitarian and human rights law is the guarantor that even in the face of war human dignity is still upheld and parties may find ways to coexist once hostilities have ended. That should be even more stringent in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic by guaranteeing protection to health-care workers, facilities and transport. In implementing our commitments, Romania is among the States that have adopted a strategy on the implementation of international humanitarian law, which contains clear regulations on the protection of civilians. The strategy is designed to be implemented both at the domestic level and during participation in international missions. At the international level, Romania has endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration; the Paris Commitments to protect children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or armed groups, and the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups; the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers; the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians; and resolution 2286 (2016), concerning the protection of the wounded and sick and of medical and humanitarian personnel engaged in medical duties. Thirdly, concerning the fight to end impunity, we recognize the primary responsibility of States to promote and ensure accountability and, at the same time, we remain convinced of the promise embodied by the International Criminal Court (ICC) to address the impunity gap for the most serious crimes. Romania continues to encourage the widest possible participation in the Rome Statute and reiterates its support for the Court and its calls for enhanced cooperation with the ICC. Closing an important gap in the Court's jurisdiction, in December 2019 the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute adopted an amendment to the Statute to include the war crime of intentionally using the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare in non- international armed conflicts. Romania was a co-sponsor of the amendment. Romania has been a solid contributor to peacekeeping operations for more than 29 years, deploying in that period approximately 13,000 military staff, police officers and close-protection units. Romania upholds its responsibilities in offering well-prepared and trained officers. In doing so, we organize - prior to the deployment of contingents under the United Nations flag - a rigorous three-month training programme in which the protection of civilians and respect for human rights are central themes. We have also placed particular emphasis on incorporating a gender perspective across operations. In line with the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative, the Ministry of National Defence has made a substantial contribution in the past year to fulfilling Romania's commitments, deploying in Mali, between October 2019 and October 2020, a detachment of helicopters for medical evacuation and transport operations in support of the Malian armed forces. Currently, the Romanian military and police officers are deployed in four United Nations missions with a mandate to protect civilians - the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. The culture of protection has been instilled in the mindset of our peacekeepers within the process of pre-deployment training and also in the field. Our uniformed officers are involved in all three tiers of the protection of civilians: first, protection through dialogue and engagement; secondly, the provision of physical protection; and, thirdly, the establishment of a protective environment. Romania supports the recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's report and will continue to advocate and act for the protection of civilians in armed conflicts, in close collaboration with all relevant actors.
