Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): The Council is meeting
today to discuss once again the situation in the Middle
East following the escalation of the violence in the past
few days. We have seen such violence before, but
today, if the current situation is not brought under
control, we run the risk of completely compromising
the peace process, and we even face the possibility of
wide-scale conflict.

Mauritius condemns all violence, be it in the form
of reprehensible terrorist attacks and suicide bombings
or in the form of the unchecked and disproportionate
use of military force. Mauritius condemns, in the
strongest terms, the continued siege and the systematic
destruction of Chairman Arafat's compound in total
defiance of resolution 1402 (2002), and we demand an
immediate end to the blockade as well as the
withdrawal of the Israeli Defence Forces from
Ramallah.

We fully understand and support Israel's need to
provide security to its people, and we deplore and
condemn the attacks on its civilians. What we cannot
understand is the unwarranted and unjustified siege on
the Palestinian Authority, which still represents the
only authority with which any peace agreement can be
contemplated. The surgical destruction of the buildings
around Chairman Arafat's compound, aimed at
isolating and humiliating him, constitutes a serious act
of provocation that, in the mildest terms, not only is
most unhelpful and will not stop the cycle of violence,
but in fact will lead to more uncontrolled violence and
more terrorist attacks. Mauritius recognizes Chairman
Arafat as the elected and legitimate leader of the
Palestinian people; subjugating the latter will only
incite hatred and violence and will therefore serve only
the motives of the extremist groups.

Mauritius is convinced that Israel's legitimate
concerns will be met only through cooperation and
dialogue, rather than by destroying the Palestinian
Authority. The continued siege on the Palestinian
headquarters will also seriously undermine and slow
the reform process, the importance of which we all
underscore. The need to build a new and efficient
Palestinian security capability on a sound basis of
unified command, transparency and accountability
should be the number-one priority. We call on Israel to
review its conduct and strategy in dealing with the
Palestinian Authority. Israel must realize that an
improvement in the security situation can come about
only if the Palestinian security institutions are not
undermined and if they are allowed to operate freely
and effectively.

A few months before the January elections, it is
all the more important that all necessary precautions be
taken to create an atmosphere conducive to the
organization of those elections, in respect of which we
call on all parties to ensure that they are free and fair
and that nothing is done that could potentially
predetermine their outcome.

As long as we do not address the root cause of the
Middle East problem, we will not be able to find a
long-term, durable solution. The problem of occupation
and the need for the Palestinians to have their own
homeland must be seriously considered. While we fully
support the vision of the two States living in peace
with secure borders, it is imperative that that vision be
given some material shape.

In that respect, we support the efforts of the
Quartet for a solution to the Middle East crisis based
on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002), as well as the road map outlined at its
meeting last week. We equally support the Quartet's
vision of a three-phase plan of action for achieving a
two-State solution. But we believe that the first priority
after the elections of January 2003 should be a
declaration of statehood for the Palestinians, with
provisional borders. Such a step will be the single most
effective confidence-building measure, which, in our
View, will go a long way in curbing the violence, as the
people of Palestine will thus be given a real ray of
hope.

In order to make that happen, however, there
must be strong commitments on both sides to achieve
those goals. Israel should immediately stop the siege of
the Palestinian Authority, withdraw its forces from the
occupied areas and return to positions held prior to
September 2000. It should also stop the illegal
settlements. We call on the Palestinians, on their side,
to honour their commitment to renounce violence and
terrorist attacks.
The chilling briefing by Mr. Roed-Larsen on the
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories last
Friday highlighted the need for urgent action by the
international community. It is important that we take a
fresh look at the recommendations contained in the
Bertini report and that we harness all efforts towards
the alleviation of the sufferings of the innocent
Palestinians. The statistics showing 50 per cent of the
population living on food hand-outs, a 50-per-cent
unemployment rate, 70-per-cent poverty levels and an
acute shortage in the food supply should not go
unheeded. We call on the international community to
assist the Palestinian people by implementing without
delay the recommendations of Ms. Bertini, the Personal
Humanitarian Envoy of the Secretary-General. We also
call on Israel to lift the restrictions imposed on the
Palestinian people and to continue releasing funds -
collected as tax revenues - that are due to the
Palestinians, in order to relieve their economic
hardships.

Six weeks of calm in the Middle East has not
helped in making any significant headway in the peace
process. It proves that a sequential approach is not
going to work. Mauritius therefore supports the
strategy outlined by the Secretary-General for a
parallel approach, rather than a sequential one, to deal
with the Middle East situation in a comprehensive
manner. The diplomatic and political process should
continue, along with discussions on the security and
economic dimensions.

Mauritius believes that the Council must send a
clear message to both sides that violence will not help
to bring peace: it must be stopped, and negotiations
must continue. At a time when so much importance is
being given to the need for Members to respect and
comply with all Security Council resolutions, it is
essential that the centrality and the credibility of the
Council be made to be unreservedly and
indiscriminately respected by one and all.

