Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Our meeting today underscores the fact that it
is unacceptable, against the backdrop of the upheavals
in the Middle East, to relegate the Israeli-Palestinian,
and the Arab-Israeli settlement more generally, to
the back burner. They are key to the stability, well-
being, prosperity and flourishing of all people and
Governments of the Middle East.

The international community is shocked by the
scale of the human tragedy in the Gaza Strip. The
dead number in the hundreds and the wounded in
the thousands. The majority are peaceful Palestinian
civilians killed as a result of the disproportionate use of
force by Israel. There is also continuous rocket fire from
Gaza into Israel, and civilians there - Israelis - are
also targeted. These actions are inadmissible and cannot
be justified. There must now be a speedy end to the
suffering of peaceful Palestinians and Israelis and to
the destruction of State infrastructure. The scale of loss
and destruction requires urgent action on the part of the
international community.

We welcome the Secretary-General's mission to
the Middle East. We support Egypt's efforts to achieve
a ceasefire between Gaza and Israel. We thank the
United Nations agencies in the Gaza Strip for their
activities to minimize the humanitarian impacts of
the current dangerous spike in confrontation. For our
part, we continue to work actively through all channels
with the parties to the conflict and representatives
of the international Quartet of mediators to end all
violence in a timely manner, de-escalate the situation,
lay the foundation for a subsequent ceasefire, and
facilitate the establishment of conditions necessary to a
comprehensive negotiating process between Palestinian
and Israel. Consultations are currently ongoing in the
region with the special representative of the Russian
Minister for Foreign Affairs, who plans to engage in
contacts with Israel and Palestinian, as well as with
United Nations personnel.

Two days ago, the President ofthe Security Council
called for a swift cessation of military confrontation
on the basis of a return to the agreement of November
2012. We are convinced that a swift and viable
ceasefire would ensure the security of Israel and all its
citizens, the security of the people of the Gaza Strip,
an improvement in the humanitarian situation there,
and the possible lifting of the blockade of Palestinian
territory.

We feel that the appeal of Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas to the Secretary-General for Palestine
to be made an international protectorate should be
accorded serious attention. We are ready to consider the
proposals being prepared by the League of Arab States
regarding the role to be played by the Security Council
in the current situation. We are frankly surprised
that we heard no reference to those proposals in the
statement made today by the representative of Jordan.

There is a need to move forward towards resolving
the issue of a lasting Palestinian-Israeli settlement,
which should be based on the concept of two States
living side by side in peace and cooperation and the
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, and with close international support
for the peace process from the Middle East Quartet, in
close cooperation with the League of Arab States. The
task of intra-Palestinian reconciliation is of particular
importance in that regard, especially to establish
an integral, sustainable and properly functioning
Government of national unity. That would be in line
with the interests of Israel's security concerns.

We welcome the appointment of Staffan de Mistura
as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria.
We hope that he will make a significant contribution
to the Syrian political process. Unfortunately, however,
the situation on the ground continues to be of great
concern. We are especially concerned about terrorist
activity gaining ground in Syria and in the region as
whole. We condemn last week's abduction by fighters
of the Islamic State of a large gas field in Shaar, Homs
governorate. That was accompanied by a massive attack
on soldiers and rebels guarding the facility, as well as
staff. According to various sources, approximately
300 people were killed. The incident once again serves
to underscore the imperative need to adopt Russia's
draft presidential statement on the inadmissibility of
engaging in oil transactions with terrorist organizations
in Syria and Iraq.

We are insulted by the odious threat of acts of
terrorism against United Nations staff in the Golan
Heights. We call on those who sponsor or train
terrorist fighters in the region, first and foremost the
Jabhat Al-Nusra, to rein in their subordinates and to
make it absolutely clear to them that threats against
United Nations peacekeepers are brazen threats to the
international community.

Recent events underscore the worrying trend of
the region becoming an epicentre for terrorist activity.
Extremists of various types are attempting to capitalize
on the turbulent events in the Middle East, which are
rooted in social problems, in people not having a choice
of lifestyle other than crime, and the fanning of the
flames of inter-ethnic and inter-religious conflict. The
fabric of terrorism is being woven at breakneck speed
in areas of conflict. Terrorism is spilling over beyond
State borders, including extremist organizations and
foreign fighters. The so-called management of terrorist
flows has demonstrated its fallacy when organizations
such as Jabhat Al-Nusra or the Islamic State are banned
in one country but it is felt that it is possible to live with
their activities in other countries, such as in Syria, or
even to fuel them. A business approach to the issue is
unacceptable.

