Mr. Kawamura (Japan): Japan deeply appreciates
Kazakhstan's active leadership as the Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. Japan
also commends the work of the Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea.

Japan extends its full support to President Farmajo
as Somalia charts a new course towards peace and
prosperity. Many challenges lie ahead, including
the need for a national security framework and a
representative Somali National Army. There is also the
importance of combating Al-Shabaab, building a solid
budgetary base through federal State mechanisms and
facilitating universal suffrage in 2020. Al-Shabaab, in
particular, continues to pose a grave threat to the peace
and security of Somalia. The sanctions regime, which
includes an exception for the Government of Somalia,
remains an effective measure. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has also been key in
combating extremist groups, including Al-Shabaab.
Japan looks forward to the Somali National Army taking
responsibility for the security of the country, including
through agreement on the security framework among
regional leaders. The London Somalia conference in
May would be a perfect opportunity to build political
will among Somali leaders, as well as among the
international community.

The ongoing famine poses an imminent threat to
progress in State-building since the establishment
of the Government in 2012. Since January, Japan has
provided more than $30 million in humanitarian and
security assistance. Japan welcomes the willingness
of the Federal and regional Governments to remove all
impediments to humanitarian access and hopes that
such commitments are implemented fully.

In addition, recent reports of the hijacking of
commercial vessels off the coast of Somalia highlight
the need for continued international counterpiracy
efforts in the region. Japan will continue its warning
and surveillance activities and escort operations,
while also supporting social services and economic
development in the coastal regions. The international
community should also bolster its support to the
Government of Somalia to address illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing.

Concerning Eritrea, we hope to see progress
in locating combatants missing in action since the
Djibouti-Eritrean border clashes.

Also, Japan attaches importance to the visits by the
Chair of the Sanctions Committee and the coordinator
of the Monitoring Group to Eritrea. We strongly hope
that the Eritrean Government will accept such a visit
in the near future. Japan looks forward to the midterm
update by the Monitoring Group to review measures
on Eritrea.

