Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to explain the reasons for which my delegation
abstained in the voting on resolution 2385 (2017), on
the renewal of sanctions against Somalia and Eritrea
and the extension of the mandate of the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea.

We would have preferred greater balance in the
drafting of the resolution and that it take into account
some ofthe points made in the report of the Monitoring
Group on Eritrea (S/2017/925), particularly those
pertaining to the absolute lack of proof of Eritrea's
support for Al-Shabaab. This is the fourth consecutive
year that the Monitoring Group has made the point
that there is no conclusive evidence. That was the
primary and original reason for imposing sanctions
against Eritrea in 2009, which is that it was supporting
Al-Shabaab. Presently, we have no evidence to support
that claim.

There is also the issue of supporting regional armed
opposition groups, which must be addressed without
bias or partisanship if it is a concern. Addressing
such a concern means confronting the root and real
causes so as to stamp out the phenomenon of regional
non-State armed groups and its ensuing instability
for the broader region. We would have liked to have
seen the resolution serve as an opportunity to review
sanctions against Eritrea and conduct such a review
based on clear criteria that would have allowed Eritrea
to continue to cooperate with the Security Council in
such a way so as to strengthen peace and stability in
the Horn of Africa and properly consider the concerns
of all parties in the region, particularly as they pertain
to humanitarian issues. To cite an example, I would
point out the need to solve the issue of the disappeared
soldiers from Djibouti. There is also a need to step up
efforts to resolve peacefully the border dispute between
Eritrea and Djibouti.

I would also like to affirm that Egypt's abstention
in the voting is in line with our clear position on the
issue of sanctions, which is that they are not an end
in themselves. They are temporary measures to be
resorted to only in exceptional circumstances in order
to achieve a political result. Sanctions should not last
indefinitely, with no stated limits. They should also
be flexible enough to enable them to be revised based
on changing circumstances on the ground. Despite the
efforts that have been made and our willingness to be
flexible in order to enable us to reach a consensus,
the draft submitted failed to take into account various
members' proposals, including Egypt's, whose
thoughts on the subject are based on what I have just
outlined. That is why we were unable to vote in favour
of resolution 2385 (2017).

With regard to Somalia, we reaffirm the importance
of maintaining the sanctions regime as outlined in the
resolution in order to prevent arms reaching terrorists
and to cut off their financial and material support, with
the goal of eliminating terrorism and strengthen peace
and stability in Somalia.

