Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Chairs of the Council's three counter-
terrorism committees for their comprehensive briefings.

As several other colleagues have mentioned, the
threat of terrorism is still a reality. We are all deeply
enraged by the abduction of more than 200 schoolgirls
by Boko Haram, which has renewed our determination
to fight against terrorism. Any violence committed by
terrorists against innocent people cannot be justified on
any grounds or for any purpose. Japan firmly condemns
any act of terrorism.

The international community should continue to
work together to eliminate all kinds of violence. In that
context, since the fourth review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is now under way,
there is no doubt that such an opportunity can serve
to enhance awareness of the importance and necessity
of counter-terrorism measures and to further promote
the efforts of Member States in that regard. Japan has
participated in the process in a constructive manner in
order to achieve such objectives.

I would like to take this opportunity to suggest a
renewed focus on the importance of each relevant body
working not only individually in an effective manner
but also in close coordination with other relevant
bodies in order to generate synergy. For example, Japan
highly appreciates the initiative of the Chair of the
1540 Committee in organizing the briefing to Member
States on 28 February, with the presence of Mr. Kunio
Mikuriya, Secretary General of the World Customs
Organization. Japan would like to support such ongoing
cooperation among the three committees and other
relevant organizations.

In commemorating the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), Japan highly
appreciates the initiative of the Chair of the 1540
Committee to hold an open debate on 7 May (see S/PV.7169) and strongly supports presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/7, adopted on that occasion. As many
States stated at the open debate, and as mentioned in
the presidential statement, resolution 1540 (2004) has
played a significant role in promoting the importance
of non-proliferation efforts. At the same time, we have
to make further and continued efforts with a view to
achieving its full implementation. In this context, we
commend and fully support efforts of the Chair of the
1540 Committee to strengthen its activities, such as
raising awareness of the importance of non-proliferation
efforts, in particular among high level policymakers.

For its part, Japan intends to advance its activities
in support of resolution 1540 (2004), inter alia by
collaborating with the 1540 Committee and its Group of
Experts, and in organizing relevant seminars in Tokyo
and in New York. I would like to reconfirm Japan's
strongest support for and continued commitment to be
deeply involved in the long-term process towards the
full and universal implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

Finally, let me introduce briefly our recent efforts
to fight terrorism. Japan has continued support for
the international community, especially in the field
of capacity-building. After the latest briefings, Japan
newly pledged approximately $3 million to support
capacity building through the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in the Middle East and Africa, and to
strengthen the legal regime against terrorism, as well
as criminal justice and law enforcement capacities.
Japan has also conducted dialogues and consultations
with several countries to enhance capacities to cope
with terrorism and share the practices and lessons
learned. Last December, the leaders of Japan and the
countries ofthe Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) decided to strengthen cooperation in this
area at the Japan-ASEAN Commemorative Summit in
Tokyo. Tomorrow, we are going to hold the ninth Japan-
ASEAN dialogue on counter-terrorism in Singapore.

Japan expects that the three committees will
continue to carry out their roles actively, and we will
continue to support the efforts of the three committees.

