Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2381 (2017) this afternoon. We
commend the strong commitment of the parties in
Colombia to peace. It is important that the Council
stand with them.

The United Nations Mission in Colombia has
played an important role in supporting the peace
process. We would like to thank the Mission and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jean Arnault
for their excellent work. We would also like to thank the
Special Representative for the efforts of the Mission on
the inclusion and participation of women and we trust
that this will be continued in the second mission.
We are happy to see that the Security Council
could once again show its unity and strong support for
the peace process in Colombia by quickly adopting a
resolution that approves the recommendations of the
Secretary-General to verify the ceasefire between the
Government of Colombia and the Ej e'rcito de Liberacion
Nacional (ELN) - a ceasefire that once again shows the
commitment of Colombia to moving forward, building
on the momentum of last year. We want to praise the
courage and leadership of the Colombian Government
in that regard.

In our discussions as a Council, we repeatedly say
that mandates must be clear, realistic and up to date,
and that we must allocate the necessary resources for
missions to deliver on those mandates. In this instance,
that means making sure that the mandate to verify
the ceasefire agreement with the ELN is realistic,
including with regard to allocating the right resources.
It also means making sure that the United Nations
Verification Mission can live up to the mandate to carry
out the additional task of verifying the ELN ceasefire
agreement without affecting the implementation of
its previously mandated tasks under resolution 2366
(2017).

We look forward to the Secretary-General's report,
expected on 8 December, which will give us the
opportunity to review the situation in order to ensure
that the resource allocation is realistic and that the
mandate is up to date.

