Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): The
Kingdom of Thailand shares the concern of the
international community on the issue of the alarming
escalation of violence in several cities in Israel and the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, which erupted in
October last year with no sign of ending. We therefore
commend China's initiative to convene this debate, and
we thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

As a friend of both Israel and Palestine, we reaffirm
our strong support for a two-State solution, with a
vision of the Israelis and the Palestinians living side
by side in peace, harmony and prosperity. However, the
ongoing violence and the absence of genuine political
dialogue have dimmed the prospects for such a solution.
It is therefore a high priority for all stakeholders and the
international community to revitalize the peace process,
starting by promoting an atmosphere conductive to
a resumption of dialogue. As our contribution to this
debate, allow me to highlight the following points.

First, as a prerequisite for future negotiations, we
must de-escalate the situation on the ground and end
violence. Incitement and hate speech, coupled with
unhelpful rhetoric, have led to confrontations and
inflamed violence. We urge all the parties concerned
to exercise maximum restraint and to refrain from any
provocative acts. The sanctity of all holy sites must
be respected and safeguarded. All attempts to alter
the status quo at those sites, including Jerusalem and
Hebron, must cease immediately.

Secondly, the ongoing settlement activities and
home demolitions in the occupied territories are most
worrisome and have caused the massive displacement
of people. That practice has heightened tensions and
undermined the possibility of a resumption of the peace
process. Therefore, we urge strict implementation of
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions in that regard.

Thirdly, we are particularly concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation and the deterioration of the
living conditions ofmore than 1 million people affected

by the long-standing conflict, including the Palestinian
refugees and prisoners. We stress the need for all parties
to respect international humanitarian law and to ensure
unimpeded access for all to humanitarian assistance.
We stress as well that there is an urgent need to rebuild
public facilities and the basic infrastructure necessary
for better livelihoods and economic development. In
particular, we join the international call for the lifting
of the Gaza Strip blockade to allow the resumption of
normal economic activities there.

We take this opportunity to reaffirm our continued
support for the tireless efforts of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East to ease the humanitarian crisis in Gaza,
the West Bank and Jerusalem. We also commend the
countries of the region and beyond for their generosity
and contributions to assist millions of Palestinians
affected by the conflict, and we will continue to work
closely with the international community to help
alleviate the humanitarian crisis in the region.

The conflict has been at the top of the Council's
agenda for decades. More than 200 resolutions have
been adopted, but the situation on the ground remains
alarming. The Council must live up to its responsibilities
and address this issue in a more efficient manner so as
to bring about peace and security and ensure the safety
and well-being of the peoples of the region.

To conclude, we reiterate our firm conviction that
a two-State solution is the best path to peace. We must
intensify our efforts to break through the political
impasse and reinvigorate the peace process. Thailand
urges all parties to make a genuine commitment
to rebuilding trust and confidence and to working
together towards a just and lasting solution through
peaceful means.

