Mr. Ipo (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the convening of this debate on
strengthening multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations. We are grateful to Mr. Antonio Guterres,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, for the
quality of his briefing and the relevance of his analysis.
We also express our gratitude to Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif
Al-Thani, representing the President of the General
Assembly, Ms. Inga Rhonda King, President of the
Economic and Social Council, and Judge Abdulqawi
Ahmed Yusuf, President of the International Court of
Justice, for their insightful briefings.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the African Union.

This debate comes at a time when humankind is
undergoing remarkable sociopolitical, economic and
scientific transformations, which are sources ofhope for
our societies and the drivers of our common aspiration
for a world of shared peace, stability and prosperity.
However, my country also expresses its concern about
the gradual erosion of the multilateral order, which
is jeopardizing international peace and security. The
multilateral order that was born of the lessons of the
Second World War is today far from reflecting the
enthusiasm and hope generated by the prospective vision
of those who drafted the Charter of the United Nations.
In that context, it is up to Member States to rekindle the
spirit of the Charter, which enshrines multilateralism
as an approach par excellence in our common quest for
solutions to contemporary challenges.

It is through concerted action that we will together
find lasting responses to current challenges, including
poverty, youth unemployment, climate change, violent
extremism and terrorism. The founding text of the
Organization establishes the United Nations a centre
for harmonizing the efforts of nations in order to
safeguard international peace and stability and, in our
day, to enable the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063 of the
African Union. My country therefore calls on Member
States to give priority to concerted and coordinated
cooperation frameworks, in which consensual
strategies are being developed to meet current and
future challenges.

The multiplicity and complexity of the current
challenges to peace, security and sustainable
development require the pooling of efforts and
synergy of the actions of Member States, as well as
regional and subregional organizations, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter. In that regard, the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhancing Partnership on Peace and Security, which
was signed on 19 April 2017 by the United Nations
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, emerged as a positive example
of multilateralism between the United Nations and a
regional organization, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter.

That model of cooperation has even shifted the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union from an ad hoc approach to a more structured
and predictable joint approach. Cote d'Ivoire therefore
expresses its satisfaction at the outstanding progress
made in the operationalization of the Joint Framework,
in particular in strengthening the cooperation between
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, as well as regular consultations between
the United Nations Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. My country
hopes that that cooperation, based on mutual respect and
the comparative advantages of the two organizations,
will be further materialized in the specific areas of
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm its strong support for the Secretary-
General's initiatives aimed at reforming the peace and
security pillars of the United Nations and peacekeeping
operations. We remain convinced that those ambitious
reforms will help to strengthen the role and centrality of
our common institution in finding lasting solutions to
current problems. In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire wishes
to reaffirm its faith in the virtues of multilateralism
and constant and constructive dialogue as a means of
preventing and peaceably resolving conflicts.

