Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Mr. President, I
hope you will permit me to make a few introductory
comments before I go to the body of my remarks. First,
we would like to join our colleagues in paying a tribute
to Ambassador Jorge Navarrete. In his short time here,
he has made a difference. He led a masterful campaign
to get Mexico elected to the Council, even though the
odds were initially against him. Also, during his short
stay here, he has demonstrated that it is important for
every ambassador not just to defend his national
interests but also to defend the other hat he wears as a
common stakeholder in the United Nations community.
And this is what Ambassador Navarrete has done in
trying to strengthen that community, especially the
Security Council. We will miss him.

Secondly, Mr. President, we would like to praise
you for the format you have adopted today in calling
on three speakers from the Council and three non-
member speakers. I think you are symbolically
demonstrating the importance of both working together
on this issue.

Thirdly, I would also like to say that my
delegation associates itself fully with the statement to
be made later by the Permanent Representative of
Brunei Darussalam on behalf of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations. Here, I guess we are
echoing the appeal that Ambassador Greenstock just
made on the importance of regional cooperation.

Turning now to my remarks, I would like to begin
by thanking Ambassador Greenstock for his clear and
useful statement made on behalf of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We certainly join our colleagues
in commending him for the sterling work he has put in
as the Chair. I think he has successfully carried out a
very difficult balancing act of ensuring that the work of
the Committee remains transparent, and at the same
time, of course, also remains efficient and effective. As
we all know, he has worked very hard. Indeed, if he
puts up a case to his Government to double his salary, I
will personally support it! We are certainly fully
committed to the work of the Committee.

We know that since 11 September 2001, the
Security Council has taken on significant additional
responsibilities. In the past, Mr. President, if you had
suggested one or two key areas of unique Council
responsibility, we would have mentioned, for example,
peacekeeping operations. This was an activity for
which the Security Council had a unique mandate for
which no other body could assume responsibility.
However, since 11 September, we have, of course, now
taken on new responsibilities, and the traditional
definitions of "threats to international peace and
security" no longer hold. Whereas terrorism was
previously an item discussed primarily in the Sixth
Committee of the General Assembly, it is now a major
agenda item of this Council.

As a subsidiary organ of the Council, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, as we have discovered,
is actually sui generis. The closest precedents to such a
Committee could be the committee set up by resolution
421 (1977) on South Africa or the one established by
resolution 446 (1979) on occupied Arab territories.
However, neither of these committees matched the
breadth and depth of the mandate of the Committee on
Counter-Terrorism, which, frankly, has taken the
Council into uncharted territory. Because it is leading
us into this uncharted territory, it is actually even more
important that both members and non-members of the
Council remain fully engaged in its work.

Right now the Counter-Terrorism Committee is
mandated to monitor the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) by all States. But as we all know, this
resolution is very wide-ranging and, hence it has been
given a very powerful mandate.

We have begun phase one of our work, which is
to assess the reports submitted by Member States.
Unfortunately, not all Member States have met the
deadline for submission. We hope that they will
provide their reports as soon as possible. After the
initial assessment, certain States may still require
assistance in specific areas. In some cases, the Council,
on the basis of information provided by this
Committee, may have to consider further action to
ensure full compliance with resolution 1373 (2001).

A counter-terrorism expert once observed that
fighting terrorism is like being a goalkeeper. You can
make a hundred brilliant saves, but the only shot that
people remember is the one that gets past you. In this
regard, therefore, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
can be considered a special coach for those tending
goal in Member States. While the Committee cannot
directly prevent terrorist attacks, it is its job to ensure
that all States implement the necessary legislation,
regulations and framework to prevent another
September 11. Where these are lacking, the Committee
will have to step in to direct States to the relevant
organizations for assistance.

One point that we would like to emphasize in
today's debate is the importance of practical
cooperation in combating terrorism. Indeed, at the
Council's last ministerial meeting on counter-terrorism,
on 12 November 2001, our Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Professor Jayakumar, noted that two common
threads had emerged from the discussions on terrorism
in the various regional and international forums held
since 11 September. First, there had been a clear,
universal condemnation of terrorism; and second, a
clear resolve to make common cause against it. He
stressed that

"The challenge now is to translate statements of
outrage and declarations of resolve into coherent
and coordinated international action." (S/PV44I3, 
p. 12)

In this regard, while the Counter-Terrorism
Committee remains crucial in coordinating global
action against terrorism, each and every Member
State~ and, frankly, each regional organization i
also has an important role to play in rooting out and
destroying the driving forces behind international
terrorism.

Singapore is a small country lacking in natural
resources and therefore heavily reliant on cross-
boundary flows of goods, services, technology and
people. We recognize that security, once measured by
the strength of a nation's army, is now a matter of
protecting innocent individuals against the risks of
living in an open, global community. That is why we
have taken an active part in counter-terrorism
discussions, no matter where they take place.

For instance, we participated in the Ministerial
Conference on Transport and Environment in Tokyo
just this past week. We also look very much forward to
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
high-level meeting in Montreal next month.

At the regional level, Singapore is an active
participant in the yearly Association of South-East
Asian Nations (ASEAN) Chiefs of Police Conference.
During those meetings, law enforcement agencies of
ASEAN members share intelligence on wide-ranging
issues and develop important networks for joint
enforcement actions against perpetrators of crime and
terrorist acts. Indeed, when the Permanent
Representative of Brunei speaks later, he will give
further information on what ASEAN has been doing in
this area. We believe that these and other regional
efforts are building-blocks for coordinated
international action against terrorism.

In this debate we would also like to share with
our colleagues a recent experience that we had in
Singapore, which, I think, has been reported widely.

International terrorism is not a problem that
began on 11 September 2001, and no one is immune.
Singapore has always been alert to the possibility of
terrorist attacks. Last month, our security agency broke
up and arrested a terrorist group that was planning
attacks against Americans and American assets in
Singapore. Unfortunately, there was significant
misreporting of what happened. Some media reports
created the impression among their audience that it was
the discovery of the videotape in Afghanistan by the
United States authorities that led to the arrest of the
Jemaah Islamiyah. This gave the wrong impression.
The Singapore authorities are not aware of any
information received from foreign sources which led to
the arrest of the 15 persons for terrorism-related
activities in Singapore. Indeed, the arrest of those 15
terrorists in Singapore was not based on the video or on
any other information provided by foreign liaison
sources.

It may be useful for us to spell out the chronology
of these events. The group was uncovered by our
security agency following the surveillance of
individuals with suspected links to Al-Qaeda several
months ago. When it became clear that the group
members had begun active preparations to conduct
bomb attacks in Singapore, our security agency moved
to pre-empt their actions. The operation to round up the
group members began on 9 December 2001, with the
last member arrested on 24 December. While the
operation was in progress, our security agency briefed
its foreign intelligence partners about the case on 14
December 2001. It was at that briefing that our security
agency was informed by its foreign intelligence
partners that a videotape and some debriefing notes
pertaining to a planned terrorist operation in Singapore
had been discovered in the house of a senior Al-Qaeda
leader in Afghanistan. Our security agency then
requested copies of the tape and notes, which we
received on 28 December 2001 - which is, of course,
long after the 15 individuals had been arrested.

I know that members of the media are watching
our proceedings today. I hope that they will rely on
their fact-checkers when they report this story in
future.

We will prevail against terrorism only through
closer and deeper coordination between our law
enforcement and intelligence agencies. Beyond
practical cooperation, we should also be aware of the
context in which terrorism flourishes. We do not wish
here to start a debate about the root causes of terrorism,
but it may be useful to put our current efforts against
terrorism in perspective.

The rise of extreme groups has been a problem
throughout history. They did not start recently. Where
they are allowed to grow and ferment because the
majority fails to act, they have pernicious effects on the
rest of humanity. Indeed, Singapore's Minister of State
for Community Development and Sports, Mr. Yaacob
Ibrahim, said the following about the role of the
majority:

"The majority were insecure about the pace
of change in the modern world, and about their
economic livelihoods. Extremists took advantage
of these psychological insecurities to push their
violent solutions."

Hence, in our efforts against terrorism, we should
reflect on what psychological insecurities we may need
to address in order to prevent the eruption of violent
solutions. As the Secretary-General said earlier this
morning when he addressed the Council, "Terrorism is
a weapon of alienated, desperate people, and often a
product of despair". (supra)

In conclusion, we would like to stress that, in
dealing with terrorists, we face a shadowy and elusive
quarry. Countering terrorism must be a global
endeavour. The terrorists have built up a complex
international network. In our mission to defeat
international terrorism, a Vigorous, sustained and
global strategy is needed. A concerted effort,
coordinated by the Counter-Terrorism Committee with
the rest of the United Nations organs and relevant
international organizations, is one key way to eradicate
this global cancer.

It may also be helpful to bear in mind that the
struggle against terrorism is unlike a war against drugs
or crime in one crucial respect. Indeed, in an article
published in this month's issue of Foreign Aflairs, Sir
Michael Howard writes that

"it is fundamentally 'a battle for hearts and
minds' without hearts and minds one cannot
obtain intelligence, and without intelligence
terrorists can never be defeated."

In maintaining transparency through frequent
consultations with non-member States, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee plays a crucial part in ensuring
that our struggle against terrorism enjoys the full
support of Member States. Indeed, in organizing a
concerted response to the global threat of terrorism, we
are actually acting in the spirit in which the United
Nations was created.

I should like to end by quoting once again from
the Secretary-General's remarks:

"Through the work of this Committee,
Member States are, for once, really using this
Organization in the way its founders intended - as
an instrument through which to forge a global
defence against a global threat." (supra)

