The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Security Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 981 (1995), 982 (1995) and 983 (1995),
document S/1995/987.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 5/1995/994, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Argentina, the Czech Republic,
France, Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

Honduras has joined as a sponsor of the draft
resolution contained in document S/ 1995/994.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document 8/1995/951, which contains the
text of a letter dated 15 November 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Croatia to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.


