Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Please allow me, at the
outset, Mr. President, to express my delegation's
appreciation to the Secretary-General on the
presentation of his annual report to the Security
Council on children in armed conflict (S/2011/250).
We also appreciate the important role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Child and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, in monitoring the state of children in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank Mr. Anthony
Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, for his presence
and remarks. I commend the Security Council for
adopting resolution 1998 (2011) today.

In her speech this morning, Special
Representative Coomaraswamy stated,
"During my visits to conflict areas, I have
personally seen the devastation - schools
completely destroyed, bombed or burnt to the
ground. I have also seen schools with broken
window panes and empty classrooms where
children have been recruited as child soldiers. I
have met girls whose colleagues stay away from
schools because, as female students, they may be
victims of acid attacks."

I would like to state that nothing like that is happening
in Iraq, because Iraq is not a conflict area. However,
my delegation is pleased to make the following
observations about the section on Iraq in the Secretary-
General's report on children and armed conflict.

The report covers the situation during 2010 and
emphasizes that children were used by the terrorist
group Al-Qaida and the affiliated terrorist group, the
Islamic State of Iraq. We would like to note that the
security situation in Iraq has continued to improve
since 2003. The year 2010 witnessed a very low rate of
terrorist attacks and casualties, as a result of the
growing capabilities of the Iraqi security forces, the
pursuit of Al-Qaida and pre-emptive strikes against it,
and the capture of most of its leaders in Iraq.

The year 2010 also witnessed the killing of
Al-Qaida in Iraq leader Abu Ayyub al-Masri and the
leader of the Islamic State of Iraq, Abu Omar
al-Baghdadi, who were both killed in mid-April 2010.
These strikes and arrests have dispersed Al-Qaida's
strength, disrupted its strategies and revealed to Iraqi
security agencies Al-Qaida's plans, thus weakening
Al-Qaida's ability to finance and recruit terrorists in
Iraq.

The year 2010 witnessed a lot of security
achievements, the most prominent of which was the
safe atmosphere surrounding the general election held
on 7 March, which clearly indicated the great
improvement in Iraq's security situation and the
growing capabilities of the Iraqi security forces to
maintain order throughout the country. The Secretary-
General mentioned this fact in his report to the
Security Council on the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), stating that

"the overall environment in which the poll was
conducted was relatively free of violence and
without any major security incidents that affected
the polling itself' (S/2010/240, para. 6).
In paragraph 16 of the same report, the Secretary-
General further states that
"the Iraqi security forces have demonstrated their
increased capacity to assume greater security
responsibilities, evidenced by their successful
maintenance of security during the March
elections".

Paragraph 97 of the report contained in document
S/2011/250 states that there were consistent reports
from many parties during 2010 that Al-Qaida forces in
Iraq were managing a wing of its organization called
"Birds of Paradise". The same paragraph also refers to
the difficulty in obtaining information concerning that
group and identifying its leadership.

In that connection, we would like to note that the
report covers the year 2010 and that the wing was
discovered before 2010. According to reports from
Iraqi security forces, the intensive security campaigns
carried out by Iraqi forces at the beginning of 2010
resulted in the elimination of most of the forces of Al-
Qaida, the dismantling of the majority of cells and the
arrest of its leaders, including members and leaders of
the Birds of Paradise. This wing did not commit any
terrorist attacks in 2010. We thus believe that there is
no need to refer to this wing of the organization in this
report.

Paragraph 97 of the same report also refers to
information that was based on allegations and not
evidence: "In other instances, insurgents have allegedly
used children as proxy bombers who did not know they
were carrying explosives".

Paragraph 98 of the report indicates that a
number of children were killed or injured as a result of
the continued conflict in Iraq. In fact, the losses
incurred in 2010 were the result of attacks carried out
by terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida and its affiliated
groups, including the Islamic State of Iraq, and were
not due to any conflict.

Paragraph 98 mentions that access to many parts
of Iraq is limited and that the verification of all
incidents was not possible. The United Nations thinks
that the figure may underrepresent the actual numbers.
What is stated in this paragraph gives a picture that is
contrary to the reality of the Iraq situation in 2010,
witnessed by the current stability and the inability of
terrorists to have a public presence in any region of
Iraq. The security forces control all areas of Iraqi.
Civilians and security forces have ease of movement,
especially in areas that were previously reported to be
dangerous.

Paragraph 98 also speaks about child casualties
resulting from their presence in areas of armed clashes
or during confrontation at checkpoints. We reiterate
that the improvement in security in 2010 prevented
direct clashes between security forces and terrorists
because the terrorists have lost control of the ground as
a result of the dismantling of their groups by security
forces. Therefore, terrorists started to attack randomly
and in a way that did not reveal them to the public.

Paragraph 99 refers to the danger that prevents
children from going to schools, while paragraph 98
refers to the incident that took place at the Church of
Our Lady of Salvation. The report states that some
schools were closed in Baghdad for a few weeks
because they were located next to churches.
Throughout 2010, there were no general school
closures, despite the fact that there were such closures
for weeks in many countries throughout the world due
to all kinds of disasters, such as floods, epidemics,
hurricanes and so on.

The report does not mention the efforts made by
the Iraqi Government to combat the remnants of
terrorist groups and improve security in all areas of the
country, nor its success in limiting the recruitment of
children by terrorist groups. As I said earlier, we feel
that the report's section on Iraq is in need of more
accuracy, especially as regards the monitoring of the
situation of children in Iraq. This section of the report
contradicts some information contained in reports of
the Secretary-General on UNAMI that point to an
improvement in the security situation in Iraq, including
facts. We therefore hope that, in the future, the Office
of the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict will be able to provide more accurate
information in order to give a clear picture to members
of the Security Council.

I would like to conclude by extending our thanks
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and her Office for
their efforts. I would like to invite her to visit Iraq
again. Since her last visit, three years ago, a lot of
improvements have taken place in Iraq. We will
continue to cooperate with United Nations bodies to
ensure human rights in general and the rights of
children in particular as priorities of the Iraqi
Government.

