At the outset, let me thank the Permanent Mission of Indonesia for organizing today's open debate. Our special appreciation also goes to Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General; Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General; Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director, Centre on International Cooperation, New York University; as well as all the other speakers, for sharing their perspectives on this important subject. My delegation would like to make the following additional remarks in its national capacity. The surge of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in the early months of 2020 is already reshaping our politics, societies and economies both domestically and globally. However, owing to lack of immunity within populations, it is likely to remain a global threat for a protracted period. This situation has also fundamentally affected the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with this impact being more pronounced in fragile and conflict-affected States. The crisis created by the pandemic is beyond the immediate health impact. Governments' initial responses to the deadly virus, which included immediate shutdown of borders and of formal and informal sectors, have affected economies worldwide, leading to food insecurity, job losses and deepening inequality. These issues can intensify pre-existing social-structure challenges in any country, creating additional layers of grievances, as the most vulnerable populations become more disproportionately affected. In some situations, these issues create new threats to international peace and security, particularly when they take place across sensitive regional boundaries. The resultant effects of the inequalities created by the pandemic within societies, across continents and between countries can be seen in the faces of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, especially refugees, the internally displaced and millions of people eking out a living in informal settlements across the globe. Unfortunately, current responses to the crisis at the international, national and local levels have not adequately demonstrated conflict-sensitivity or taken an inclusive peacebuilding approach. Rather, the lockdowns have led to horrific increases in violence against youth, women and children and had an impact on the social and political tensions that persist in the absence of any meaningful response to addressing these inequalities in protecting human rights even where failure to do so undermines democratic values. In conflict-affected countries where populations already suffer from multiple risks associated with the pandemic, the situation is further aggravated by a lack of access to markets, disruption of supply chains and mobility restraints leading to closure of markets. The inability to maintain social distancing among populations where health and sanitary facilities are inadequate, especially in camps, also presents another challenging security-risk scenario, with a potential for a high rate of infections that could spread to nearby communities. The COVID-19 pandemic has therefore unmasked the gradations of inequality as well as the prospects for resilience and recovery. Women have perhaps been the most affected by the effects of the pandemic. While they have been at the receiving end of having to maintain the socioeconomic fabric of families despite job losses, they have equally been subjected to domestic violence and other unsavoury conditions. However, women bring a unique perspective to the peacebuilding process, which is why gender issues should be institutionalized in policy frameworks that include decision-making and peace-building initiatives. All factors associated with the crisis have highlighted new patterns of exclusion in a very direct way and provide opportunities to create inclusive dialogue around health and socioeconomic issues and the need for Governments to reach underserved areas. Although the risk of violence may have increased during the pandemic, building back better is also an opportunity for the promotion of peaceful societies, in line with Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16. This would present a more deliberate effort by Governments to ensure that countries are able to navigate the health crisis and its socioeconomic consequences, while minimizing social conflicts. Furthermore, the challenges posed by the pandemic have significantly hampered the work of the United Nations system, including peacekeeping operations, special political missions and the Peacebuilding Commission, whose peacebuilding efforts have been disrupted. The lockdowns have limited movements of peacekeeping missions and may have also led to scepticism by local populations towards the peacekeepers for fear of virus transmission. This has also put on hold person-to-person dialogues and workshops. Another impediment that has been highlighted on a more operational level among some agencies is the use of protective gear, which prevents the facial recognition of the populations being attended to, thereby increasing a sense of mistrust. The United Nations system can strengthen the advancement of sustaining its peace agenda in the COVID-19 response by continuing to adopt a more integrated and coherent approach. This should involve all United Nations organs and agencies, along with other crucial entities, including regional and subregional organizations, international financial institutions, the private sector and civil society groups. A holistic and systematic approach needs to be harnessed to address the multidimensional risks to peace generated by the COVID-19 pandemic. All opportunities should be exploited to unlock the possibilities for strengthening peacebuilding and sustaining peace. In order to ensure that no one is left behind and for the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs to remain a keystone of an international commitment to sustainable development as the world moves through and beyond the public health emergency presented by COVID-19, we must continue to work towards building peaceful societies, as they are a panacea for the 2030 Agenda in its last decade of action. Nigeria fully supports the Secretary-General's 23 March global ceasefire appeal to combat COVID-19 in conflict-affected countries. It is also heartening to commend the Security Council for finally adopting, on | July, resolution 2532 (2020), demanding a cessation of hostilities in all situations on its agenda and calling for all conflict parties to engage in a humanitarian pause for at least 90 days. It also calls for all relevant parts of the United Nations system to accelerate their response to the pandemic, with emphasis on countries in need. We wish to express our gratitude to the United Nations, the European Union, the United States of America, Norway, financial institutions, et cetera for their contributions to Nigeria's efforts to mitigate the effects of COVID-19. Nigeria, in coordination with the United Nations, is to set up the Nigeria COVID-19 Response Fund as a single national platform and financing framework that will foster coordination, the effective mobilization of resources and the deployment of strategies for an impactful response. Such palliative funds or facilities by international organizations and financial institutions could be sustained within short- to medium- term frameworks, or as dictated by unfolding circumstances, for States in need as they gradually recover from the economic slowdown occasioned by the pandemic. This also reduces conflicts related to the vulnerability of weakened economies. In conclusion, there is no gainsaying the fact that the challenges brought about by the pandemic are enormous and, since no single country can confront the problem alone, we urge for the continuation of the ongoing joint and collaborative efforts towards the mitigation of, and a possible solution to, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic to allow for the timely realization of the Sustainable Development Goals. We therefore wish to thank the President-elect of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, Mr. Volkan Bozkir, for taking cognizance of the need for sustained multilateral action on COVID-19 by adopting the theme "The future we want, the United Nations we need: reaffirming our collective commitment to multilateralism - confronting COVID-19 through effective multilateral action" for the session.
