Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Let me begin, Sir, by
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I thank you for convening this meeting to
consider the topical and sensitive issue of the Middle
East.

The Middle East is once again experiencing a
new bout of violence. The bullets did not spare even a
12-year-old boy, Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra. Nepal is
shocked by the loss of so many innocent lives as
violence sweeps through Jerusalem, other places in the
West Bank and Gaza. Nepal expresses its deep
condolences to the families of those who were killed in
the violence.

We had all hoped, not without reason, that the
Middle East would soon see the dawn of peace.
However, the recent eruption of violence is a disturbing
reminder that the Middle East peace process is still
precarious. There are people who would not mind
derailing it.

We believe that there should be a full
investigation into the flare-up, and that those who are
responsible for precipitating it must be held
accountable for their acts. The excessive use of force to
control the protests has further vitiated the environment
for improving the situation and retrieving the peace
process. Nepal strongly urges all sides to exercise the
utmost restraint, to cease hostilities and to prevent the
peace process from derailing.

Peace might not be so urgent for those who take
ill-conceived trips to sensitive areas, surrounded by a
posse of security personnel. But it is truly urgent for
ordinary people in Palestine and in Israel - for the
people who are tired of living in fear; for those mothers
whose children might be killed in episodes of violence
on their way to school; for those widows who have lost
their husbands to violence; for those old people who
cannot run swiftly from the scenes of violence; and for
those children who would otherwise have a long and
fulfilling life ahead.
The present cycle of violence underscores all the
more the urgency for a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. In this context, Nepal fully
supports the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to return to their homeland
and to have their own independent State, with
Jerusalem as its capital. We also call for the
implementation of all United Nations resolutions on the
question of Palestine and for the withdrawal of Israel
from the occupied territories.

Nepal welcomes the Paris meeting of 4 October
and the Cairo meeting that is taking place today in an
effort to defuse the crisis. We commend the United
States for taking those initiatives. The Security Council
must swing into effective action to bring the situation
under control without delay. Now is the time to leave
mutual animosities behind, to build bridges and to
apply energy and resources to promote peace and
prosperity in the Middle East. All sides must exercise
leadership to preserve the achievements made so far
and move speedily ahead with the peace process,
especially when the region is closer than ever to a
durable peace.

