Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like to thank all the briefers for providing us with
comprehensive and valuable information on the
situation in Yemen.

My delegation's very first statement on this issue in
January (see S/PV.8441) was full ofhope, optimistic and
projected that in the following three months, we would
hear a better story for the people of Yemen. However,
from what we heard from the briefers today, that seems
not to be the case. The calls made in resolution 2451
(2018), which the Council adopted on 21 December
2018, have not been met. That said, and in response
to the briefings, Indonesia would like to underscore
three points.

First, parties must honour their commitments
and push for the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, in particular the Al-Hudaydah agreement.
The Houthis must increase their efforts to redeploy
troops from the ports of Al-Hudaydah and to the city of
Al-Hudaydah and to allow the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hudaydah Agreement to operate fully
and monitor the implementation of the Agreement.

Humanitarian corridors must be established without
further delay to allow the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The exchange of prisoners must urgently
take place, as it is approaching the holy month of
Ramadan. They should have been united with their
families during this month. Before the second dialogue
planned by the Special Envoy starts, the discussion on
the city of Taiz should begin and make progress and the
joint committee should have been established.

Secondly, parties must honour international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Indonesia
is concerned about the information provided by
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, related to the use and unlawful
recruitment of children in armed conflict. According to
last year's report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2018/465), in relation to the
Yemeni conflict the United Nations verified that there
had been 842 cases of the recruitment and use of boys
as young as 11 years old. Of those cases, 534 were
attributed to the Houthis.

We are also concerned over the recent attack that
killed at least 14 people, including children, and injured
others. In that connection, all parties must honour the
rules of engagement and not target schools or medical
facilities. Indonesia also calls on all parties to abide
by their obligation under international law to protect
children from all forms of violence. The protection of
civilians should also be a priority, as tens of thousands
of people, mostly civilians, are reported to have been
killed in the conflict since 2015.

Thirdly, continuous efforts should be made to hold
a second dialogue and to find a comprehensive and
lasting solution to the conflict and crisis in Yemen. As
the Security Council is in the business ofmaking peace,
such negotiation and dialogue should be at the centre
of our work; results should not be achieved through
military pressure. Indonesia therefore fully supports
the Special Envoy's efforts to ensure the holding of a
second dialogue. A continuing and inclusive dialogue
involving women will allow the various sides in Yemen
to come together, and it is hoped that in this way the
confidence-building measures under way will continue
to develop.

As Ramadan - the holy month for the Muslim
sisterhood and brotherhood - will be starting soon,
we hope that the Yemeni people will be able to feel a
difference compared with Ramadan in previous years.
The Yemeni people should start to feel the breeze of
peace and keep their hopes high for a lasting peace and
the reconstruction of their country.

The international community stands with the
Yemeni people, and we are intensifying our efforts to
see progress in the agreement reached last year.

