Mr. Baja (Philippines): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this public meeting to
discuss the progress report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) (S/2004/669) under Security Council
resolution 1543 (2004). It is important and timely to
have more open discussions at this stage of Timor-
Leste's development and journey towards self-
sufficiency, when the assistance of the international
community, on a bilateral and multilateral basis,
becomes more critical than ever. We are also grateful to
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his briefing,
and we take this opportunity to acknowledge the
contributions of former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Sharma and new Special
Representative Hasegawa in the fulfilment of
UNMISET's mandate.

It is noteworthy that some key positions in
Timor-Leste's public administration have now been
turned over to Timorese nationals. However, we also
note the overall assessment that the public
administration still lacks experienced and skilled
personnel in the areas of economic planning and
finance, justice and infrastructure. We support the
Secretary-General's call for external support in those
areas. That is particularly important in the justice
sector, where the development of a modern egalitarian
justice system is crucial. Timor-Leste's long-term
governance hinges on how strong the foundations of
the administrative institutions are built.

With regard to justice in the area of serious
crimes, my delegation awaits the final report of the
Commission on Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.
We note the Secretary-General's observation that the
remaining time frame and the limited resources for the
serious crimes process may not be sufficient to fully
bring to justice those responsible for the Violence in
1999. We join the Secretary-General in his call for
those responsible for the serious crimes in 1999 to be
brought to justice. We believe that that should be done
in the most practical, appropriate and effective manner,
taking into consideration the views, sensitivities and
cooperation of the parties concerned.

The reported continuing problems of the limited
professional skills and experience of the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) underline the need
for more training, including not only skills
enhancement for the police officers and the civilian
support staff, but also human rights education.

My delegation is heartened by the report that,
since Timor-Leste's formal assumption on 20 May of
full responsibility for security, the overall security
situation has remained calm and peaceful. Thus -
notwithstanding initial fears - the significant
reduction of UNMISET's military component has not
led to any destabilization. Of course, the UNMISET
security force and the International Response Unit are
still in a state of readiness and conduct regular patrols.
We note, however, the reported limitations in the
capacity of the Timorese national defence forces
(F-FDTL) resulting from a lack of experienced and
skilled personnel and of proper training and equipment
and a very limited logistical capacity for deployment.

We are also concerned at the very high
unemployment rate and the widespread poverty in the
country. Unless addressed by the Government, these
could pose serious threats to the security and stability
of Timor-Leste. We urge the Government to make use
of unspent revenue to fund capital projects such as the
rehabilitation of roads and other infrastructure, since
such projects would not only generate employment but
also promote economic growth and social development.

It is clear that, while UNMISET has achieved
gains with regard to Timor-Leste's road towards self-
sufficiency and self-governance, the problems
associated with nation-building go well beyond the
remaining period of UNMISET's mandate. As we face
those problems, international assistance and support -
on a bilateral and multilateral basis - is seen to be
picking up where UNMISET leaves off. It is important
to know what has ended and what has begun.

Nation-building is a long and tedious process
fraught with challenges to be overcome. Timor-Leste's
leaders and its people provide us with lessons on how
the ingredients of vision, courage, determination, unity
and hard work all help a country to inch towards
successful nation-building. Countries that are in the
best position to help Timor-Leste achieve the objective
of nation-building are called upon to extend their
support and assistance as expeditiously as possible.
The efforts of neighbours Indonesia and Australia to
resolve remaining transitional issues - particularly
boundary delineations with Timor-Leste - are indeed
welcome.

Finally, my delegation also underlines the
important roles that the United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes - together with the Bretton Woods
institutions and the development partner countries -
now operating in Timor-Leste are playing in ensuring
that Timor-Leste achieves a self-sustaining,
economically independent and socially egalitarian
society.

