Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to welcome and
thank the Presidents of the two Tribunals, Judges Pocar
and Byron, and the Prosecutors, Mr. Brammertz and
Mr. Jallow, not only for their comprehensive briefings
to us but also for the outstanding work they and their
staff have carried out.

We know very well that, in 2003 and 2004, the
Security Council determined the time frame for the
completion strategy for the two Tribunals. It called for
a commitment to this framework, urged States to
cooperate with the two International Tribunals and
underscored the development of the judicial capacities
of the national jurisdictions concerned.

The assessments before us, and particularly the
valuable briefings that we have heard today, testify to
the evident progress made in implementing what has
been decided, particularly the accomplishments of the
Tribunals in the many tasks involved in the
implementation of their completion strategies. There
have been numerous acquittals, convictions and
appeals, and there are many ongoing trials in which
judgement has yet to be delivered.

Despite this progress, the inability to arrest some
of the fugitive indictees and the resulting impunity are
a source of concern and preoccupation to us. Yet this
unfortunate reality, for which we see no end, cannot be
a reason for not implementing the completion
strategies as expeditiously as possible, within the
prescribed time frames. Such implementation requires,
in addition to the efforts of the two Tribunals and their
staff, the continued provision of any financial and
human resources support that the two Tribunals require
to complete their work.

In our opinion, this implementation would be
facilitated if as many possible pending cases as
possible are referred to courts of national jurisdiction,
once those courts' commitment to the principles and
procedures of fair trials has been verified. Such an
approach would definitely reduce the volume of work
of the two Tribunals. But every effort must be made to
observe the principle of equality, uphold the rule of law
in the concerned States and ensure the protection of
archives whose importance in the history of these
States and their ongoing reconciliation processes is
even greater than that of the archives of ordinary
judicial proceedings.
Circumstances have changed since the
establishment of the two Tribunals as non-permanent
jurisdictions at the end of the last century. Judicial
institutions and legislation have been developed in
States where war crimes have been committed, and
where the evidence and witnesses are available, which
would allow these States to deal with pending cases
with the assistance of the two Tribunals within the
framework of their completion strategies and with the
support of the international community.

Our keen interest in the expeditious
implementation of the completion strategies stems
from our desire to decide at an early date on the
legacies of the two Tribunals and the residual
mechanisms, once the completion strategies are over.
Ambassador Verbeke's statement during Council
consultations last month dealt with the various aspects
of this issue. We have nothing to add to it today, except
to voice our appreciation for the impressive work
accomplished by the two Tribunals, their respective
Presidents and the Working Group of the Security
Council.

