Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing this
timely debate. I extend a warm welcome to Prime
Minister Jean-Max Bellerive. His leadership is and will
continue to be central to Haitian reconstruction efforts.
My delegation is also grateful to Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and, more important, for his dedication and
for the excellent work that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has been
doing in rather difficult conditions.

I reiterate Brazil's unwavering support for Haiti.
We share Mr. Bellerive's vision for a transformed
Haiti, as contained in the national Action Plan: one in
which stronger institutions, decentralization and
regional development help lay the foundations for a
prosperous and stable country. We also share the clear
vision just expressed by Mr. Mulet on behalf of the
Secretary-General on how the United Nations can best
support such a process.

The 12 January earthquake struck at the political,
social, economic and cultural heart of Haiti. Whatever
figure one takes - the number of deceased people, the
percentage points of gross domestic product wiped out
in a few seconds, the institutional capacity lost for
many years to come, or any other - it is painfully
clear that the word "devastation" does not overstate
what happened in the country. As pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2010/200), the
statistics do not reveal the full human dimension of the
disaster or of the efforts that will be required to cope
with its consequences.

Yet tragedy also creates opportunities. The
successful conclusion of the Haiti reconstruction
conference, held in New York on 31 March, is very
promising, as billions of dollars were pledged to help
Haitians build back better. Our greatest challenge now
is to translate the world's solidarity into reality. We
urge donors and partners to disburse their pledges
without delay and stress the need to expeditiously
adopt the governance structures of the Haiti
reconstruction fund. We welcome the recent adoption
by the Haitian parliament of the legislation that
establishes the Interim Haitian Reconstruction
Commission.

Political stability is of paramount importance for
the country's reconstruction. We call upon all actors in
Haiti to work together to promote the long-term
national interests of the country. We support the
Government's intention to hold general elections as
soon as possible in 2010, so as to allow for the full
reconstitution of both houses of parliament and the
timely transfer of power to a new elected President by
February 2011. Brazil supports the coordinating role of
MINUSTAH in the organization of the future elections,
in cooperation with other stakeholders such as the
Organization of American States, whose assistance to
Haiti continues to be of great value.

MINUSTAH continues to be a central part of
international efforts and strategies towards the
reconstruction of Haiti. Its role in supporting stability,
security and the rule of law is unique. Also unique is
the environment in which it now operates, one that
demands increased political, human and material
resources across the whole spectrum of the Mission's
comprehensive mandate.

We support the approach outlined in the
Secretary-General's report, including the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 49 to 75
concerning the future role of MINUSTAH in support of
the Haitian Government. We concur with the
assessment that the earthquake has not destroyed the
gains towards stabilization made in the past few years,
but has created new obstacles. MINUSTAH will be
instrumental in helping the Government preserve those
gains and enabling a smooth transition to long-term
reconstruction.

In Brazil's view, the role of MINUSTAH in the
coming months will be particularly important in the
following areas.

In terms of security, the Mission should continue
to support the Haitian National Police in maintaining
security and public order, including in the camps for
displaced persons, and to build the capacity of the
Haitian National Police. We support the Secretary-
General's recommendation of an expansion of the
police contingent, which was also mentioned by Prime
Minister J ean-Max Bellerive.

In terms of humanitarian assistance and recovery
efforts, MINUSTAH should coordinate and, where
needed, provide logistical support to humanitarian
operations. We support the Secretary-General's views
on the critical enabling role that the Mission can play
in the recovery efforts by making full use of its
resources, including its military engineers, where
required.

Concerning political stability and elections, the
Mission's role in this regard will continue to be very
important in assisting the Government, through the
good offices of the Special Representative, and in
providing support for the preparation of the elections.

Concerning State capacity and transformation, we
support the Secretary-General's views regarding the
need for a surge to restore and strengthen the
operational capacity of Haitian institutions and the
expanded assistance recommended in paragraph 71 of
the report.
If I had to single out one overarching priority
among the many needs the international community
must address in Haiti, I would mention State-building.

For far too long, we have tried to assist Haitians
without the direct involvement of the Government and
State institutions. We now have the opportunity to gear
our efforts towards supporting the vision of a renewed
State capable of delivering services and opportunities
for all its people, as presented by the Government of
Haiti during the conference of 31 March. That is by far
the most sustainable and cost-effective investment the
international community can make in Haiti.

