Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
Madam President, my delegation would like to begin
by telling you how pleased we are to see your country
presiding over the Security Council in January of 2004
and to see you personally chairing our meeting. We are
grateful to you for your initiative in organizing an open
debate on post-conflict national reconciliation and on
the role that the United Nations is called on to play in
that regard.

This is, indeed, a particularly important theme for
the larger United Nations family, and my country is
pleased to have the opportunity to take the floor in the
debate on this question. As we saw during my
country's term in the Security Council, which has just
ended, this body, which has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
is devoting most of its time to considering conflict
situations and crises throughout the world and to
finding solutions to them that are just and lasting.

In regard to Africa, most of these conflicts and
crises, depending on the specific case, pit ethnic
groups, factions, militias, armed groups and
Government and rebel forces against one another. The
quest for solutions to these conflicts and to such crises
necessarily requires identifying their root causes. In
this regard, the report of the Secretary-General on the
causes of conflict in Africa sheds light on the full
spectrum of causes of the conflicts that are tearing
apart many African countries, such as poverty, bad
governance, inter-ethnic strife and struggles for power
and the control of wealth.

This shows, then, the diversity of these causes
and the specific nature of these conflicts; but whatever
the specific causes of a particular conflict, national
reconciliation is at the very heart of the quest for
possible solutions. The United Nations, because of its
immense experience in managing conflicts, thus plays a
basic role in promoting national reconciliation in
countries torn apart by conflict. Without national
reconciliation, it is impossible to restore the normal
functioning of institutions and guarantee the basis for a
modern, democratic State that respects rights and
freedoms.

My delegation would like to pay tribute to United
Nations activities in this regard. Indeed, there are many
examples of this on the African continent, such as
Angola, Central African Republic, Democratic
Republic of Congo, Congo, Burundi, Chad and Sierra
Leone.

The United Nations, through various main bodies
and specialized agencies, is making laudable efforts for
national reconciliation. The promotion of such
reconciliation encourages actors to agree to settle their
disputes peacefully and to ensure the prevalence of
dialogue and power-sharing over the temptations of
confrontation, vengeance and violence. It can also take
the form of the implementation of economic and social
projects; support for the establishment of institutions, a
national army incorporating different factions and
ethnic groups, and an electoral process; the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement of ex-
combatants; demining; the resettlement of refugees and
displaced persons; the rehabilitation of infrastructure;
and assistance for economic recovery and
reconstruction.

Furthermore, Ambassador Abdallah Baali of
Algeria this morning clearly identified the post-conflict
role of the United Nations by referring to the
Millennium Declaration. Any enhancement of that role
will require an increase in resources allocated to
reconciliation efforts and improved cooperation in the
activities of the structures of the Organization. Indeed,
we constantly deplore the lack of resources necessary
to the implementation of operations in several
countries emerging from conflict. In Africa, the
examples are many in that regard.

It is also absolutely essential that, from the very
onset of a conflict, mediation efforts focus on the ways
and means of promoting national reconciliation.
Diligent activity in that regard can only help to hasten
the end of a conflict. Moreover, we feel it to be crucial
at a very early date closely to involve civil society in
the quest for solutions to a conflict and to promote
national reconciliation. In particular, in Africa, women
and young people - the primary victims of armed
conflict - always and quite rightly call for greater
involvement in peace processes and in the search for
appropriate ways and means to promote national
reconciliation.

The United Nations can and must also play a role
as a catalyst for and coordinator of the activities of
other members of international society - States, non-
governmental organizations, humanitarian associations
and regional and subregional organizations - that
contribute to a return to peace and security and the
promotion of national reconciliation.

The problem of impunity must also be addressed
in that framework. Indeed, it is absolutely necessary to
reconcile the desire for national reconciliation with the
campaign against impunity. Can we allow, in the name
of national reconciliation, those who are responsible
for massive violations of human rights and other
crimes against humanity to escape justice? Moreover,
we believe that the provision of justice to the victims
of many atrocities in contemporary conflicts can
guarantee genuine and lasting national reconciliation.

We agree nevertheless with the statement made
this morning by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Kalomoh, that there is a need to
be pragmatic in finding a settlement process for every
conflict that is viable, appropriate and enduring.

In conclusion, I would stress - as many
representatives have done before me - that, however
important it may be, the activity of the United Nations
and the international community will never be
sufficient to ensure genuine national reconciliation.
Indeed, without the sincere and lasting dedication of
the various actors to the cause of peace and
harmony - without their genuine understanding of the
virtues of dialogue, reconciliation, power-sharing,
compromise and forgiveness - the efforts of the
United Nations and the international community will
be futile.

It is therefore necessary for the parties to a
conflict to become fully aware of that need,
demonstrate determination and courage, and agree to
make the necessary efforts for tolerance and dialogue if
they are to establish for their sorely-tried peoples an
environment of peace, security, justice, prosperity for
all, and respect for human rights and democratic
principles - in a word, an environment conducive to
their prosperity and well-being. National reconciliation
is thus a long-term endeavour that cannot be
determined in advance and that requires the unflagging
support of the United Nations and the international
community.
