Mr. Krivas (Lithuania): My delegation would like
to commend the presidency for steering the negotiations
that led to the adoption of resolution 2253 (2015) and
for organizing this timely debate. We hope that this
innovative format, with the participation of senior
officials in charge of the subject matter, will become
a tradition for the Security Council, which strives
for practical impact. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and the President of the Financial
Action Task Force for their insightful briefings.

The resolution adopted today clearly identifies
countering the financing of terrorism as one of the
priorities in the fight against terrorism. The financing
of terrorism and its connections with organized crime
represent a widespread and very complex phenomenon.
We should protect the integrity and stability of the
international financial system, cut off the resources
available to terrorists, deny possibilities for those
engaged in terrorism financing to profit from such
activities and, ultimately, hold them to account.

Money-laundering represents a significant part
of the funds raised to finance terrorism. We therefore
acknowledge the important role of banks and other
reporting industries in the identification and tracking
of terrorist financing activities. In that regard, we
welcome the steps taken by the Council - including
its resolutions 2191 (2015), 2199 (2015) and 2253
(2015), the last of which includes a major review of
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. We also welcome the
work and recommendations by the Financial Action
Task Force, which enable Members States to effectively
counter the financing of terrorism, including by Daesh,
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities.

As a member of the European Union (EU),
Lithuania supports and actively participates in the
EU's engagement with regional and global partners
on the issue of countering terrorism financing, such
as the United States, the Council of Europe, the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the United Nations. The
EU has taken a number of important steps in that
regard, including securing effective implementation
of anti-money-laundering/countering the financing of
terrorism mechanisms, advancing the establishment of
financial intelligence units and much more.

At the same time, we spare no effort in stepping
up internal preparedness by Lithuania. Back in 2013,
Lithuania revised its legislation to bring the measures
against the financing and support of terrorism into
full conformity with its international obligations, as
well as with the recommendations of the Committee of
Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money-laundering
Measures and the Financing of Terrorism. Lithuania
is now well-positioned for international cooperation in
that regard. Our institutions now focus on the effective
implementation of the revised legislation. To raise
awareness, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has included
detailed information about it on its Internet site.

As a practical step of implementation, the director
of our national financial intelligence unit has issued
an order that establishes a list of 50 criteria related
to clients' behaviour, the nature and background of
monetary transactions and geographic aspects. It gives
clear guidance for reporting entities on recognizing
suspicious transactions and on reporting suspected
terrorist financing.

While countering money laundering and the
financing of terrorism is one of the priorities, we
also recognize that terrorism can be defeated only
by a comprehensive response. That means that every
aspect - from conditions conducive to terrorism to
incitement to commit terrorist acts, from terrorists'
military infrastructure to large-scale offensives, from
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters to the supply of arms
and other non-financial support - must be addressed
in its own right. We must maintain commitment to
bringing terrorists and their accomplices to justice, and
send out a strong and clear message that support for or
carrying out terrorist activities will never be tolerated.

The essential element ofall these efforts remains the
long-term commitment of States and their cooperation.
We note especially the significant and admirable efforts
that have been made by the countries neighbouring
conflict zones. But we also recognize that individual
States may lack capacities to address those aspects
adequately, and therefore we support a call to the donor
community and the United Nations to help build the
capacities of States in need.

