Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone): My delegation
appreciates the opportunity that you, Mr. President, and
the other members of the Council, have afforded us to
make a modest contribution to this new debate on the
important issue of the safety of civilians in armed
conflict. At the outset, we acknowledge and commend
the efforts of the United Nations system, in particular
the Office of the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, in accentuating the benefits of developing
a culture of protection in the international community.
The Organization as a whole has come up with
guidelines and principles, including the aide-memoire
adopted by the Security Council last year, and various
recommendations made by the Secretary-General
himself, for alleviating the plight of civilians in areas
of armed conflict. We would also like to express our
thanks to Under-Secretary-General Egeland for his
comprehensive briefing this morning, and for the
updated version of the aide-memoire, as well as the 10-
point platform for future collective action on this
matter, which is of serious concern to all States.
As long as armed conflicts continue, incessantly,
to take their toll on innocent people in various parts of
the world, between and within States, and as long as
some parties to such conflicts continue to ignore the
basic principles of international humanitarian and
human rights law, the Security Council must continue
to undertake periodic reviews and in-depth assessments
of measures that have been devised to ensure the
effective protection of civilians in armed conflict.

First, we know that the tactics employed in
deliberate acts of violence against civilians are
changing rapidly. Secondly, as the Secretary-General
reminded us recently, many of the political and legal
instruments at our disposal for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict are outdated. These periodic
assessments by the Security Council should serve as a
reminder of the need to adapt and update the
appropriate instruments and guidelines to meet the new
challenges posed by both State and non-State actors in
areas of armed conflict.

The Sierra Leone experience, covering more than
a decade of rebel atrocities, is a chapter by itself in
what has become a voluminous record of lessons
learned in the area of civilian protection in armed
conflict in the post-world-war period. We understand,
for instance, that the aide-memoire, which the
Secretary-General once described as the centrepiece of
a strategy for civilian protection, was usefully applied
to the situation in Sierra Leone. My delegation believes
that the authors ofthe document must also have learned
from our experience in the difficult task of defending
our people against the ruthless rebel attacks on the
civilian population over a 10-year period. Indeed, the
machinery established to address impunity - namely
the Special Court - is itself unique in the annals of
current and emerging international humanitarian law.
Whether or not this hybrid court concept could be
applied in other situations is debatable. Meanwhile, we
are confident that its effectiveness as an instrument of
protection will be realized in due course.

In reviewing and updating the aide-memoire,
especially in the context of peacekeeping mandates of
the Security Council, my delegation would like to draw
attention to two elements pertaining to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

First, we strongly believe that emphasis should be
placed not merely on the obligation and responsibility
to protect, but also on the capacity to provide
protection. That applies to virtually all the internal and
cross-border armed conflicts that have been raging, for
example in our part of the world, the West African
subregion.

Often the capacity of Governments, including the
Government of Sierra Leone, to comply with
obligations of protection under relevant international
humanitarian law in the face of rebel atrocities
perpetrated with the support of external elements is
extremely - extremely - limited. We welcome the
assistance provided by the international community to
facilitate humanitarian emergency assistance to areas
where the population was caught in so-called rebel-
controlled areas.

Imagine the number of innocent civilians that
could have been saved in Sierra Leone if, for instance,
the democratically elected Government of Sierra Leone
had had the capacity to respond to and avert rebel
atrocities, including amputation, rape and many of the
crimes now before the Special Court. Imagine the
number of innocent lives that could have been
protected and saved in the beleaguered city of
Monrovia, next door to Sierra Leone, a few months ago
if the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) had had the capacity to respond rapidly -
and I emphasize the word rapidly - to the serious
humanitarian crisis that was evolving in that city. By
capacity we mean not just the humanitarian or physical
or monetary capacity, but also the moral and political
capacity to avert humanitarian crises and protect
innocent civilians.

It may be recalled that it was not until August
2000, and long after the rebels had begun their heinous
crimes, that the Security Council, in resolution 1313
(2000), authorized the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) "within its capabilities and
areas of deployment, to afford protection to civilians
under threat of imminent physical violence". The
dilemma was that while it was the responsibility of the
Government to afford protection to its citizens, its
capabilities for doing so throughout the country were
limited.

What inference do we draw from this in trying to
develop the so-called culture of protection? We realize
that those who are called upon or deployed to provide
protection to civilians are themselves becoming targets
of armed attacks. That is a challenge the Security
Council must meet as part of its responsibility in
developing the culture of protection.

The second element I would like to emphasize is
this. We can establish legal instruments, develop
appropriate guidelines and principles and establish
special courts and tribunals. We can also continue to
take concrete measures to separate civilians and armed
elements in conflict situations and then give special
attention to the specific needs of vulnerable
populations such as women, the aged and children. We
can facilitate the stabilization and rehabilitation of
communities through disarmament, demobilization and
resettlement programmes. All this can be done in the
context of protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Those are all laudable measures, and no one should
underestimate them. However, we must admit that all
those actions are essentially reactive. They have been
devised in response to conflicts.

In the view of my delegation the most effective
and lasting means of protection that States and the
international community can afford to civilians lies in
the prevention of armed conflict. A culture of
protection is inextricably linked with a culture of
prevention. This morning we heard representatives
from Guinea, Chile, China, Angola, Cameroon and
Pakistan all make references to the idea of prevention
of conflicts.

In this regard, we recall the various
recommendations of the Secretary-General for conflict
prevention, including the 10 principles that he suggests
should guide the Organization's approach to conflict
prevention. We also recall the latest comprehensive
General Assembly resolution on the prevention of
armed conflict, resolution 57/337 of 3 July 2003. We
therefore call on the Security Council to take those
recommendations into account in its review and
consideration of future activities pertaining to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Given the international dimension of most armed
conflicts in the world today, and realizing the complex
and deep-rooted causes of those conflicts, we believe
that the Security Council should assume a greater role
in the peaceful settlement of disputes. As a result, it
would be averting war, as well as the humanitarian
consequences of armed conflict.

