The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Sudan in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdalla
(Sudan), took a seat reserved for him at the
Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultation among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
agreement on security arrangements reached in
Naivasha, Kenya, between the Government of the
Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM/A). The Council
reiterates its welcome for the signing of the
Machakos Protocol, which represents a viable
basis for a resolution of the conflict in Sudan.
The Security Council looks forward to the
successful conclusion of a comprehensive peace
agreement, based on the Machakos Protocol. The
Council further expresses its appreciation of the
key role played by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), under the
leadership of the Kenyan President, the Kenyan
Special Envoy, the envoys of the other IGAD
member States and the International Observers in
the Sudan Peace Talks.
"The Security Council also welcomes the
continuation of the ceasefire and the
establishment of the Verification and Monitoring
Team, Joint Monitoring Commission and the
Civilian Protection Monitoring Team and
encourages Member States in a position to do so
to contribute financial and logistical resources.

"The Security Council assures the parties of
its readiness to support them in the
implementation of the comprehensive peace
agreement and requests the Secretary-General, in
this connection, to initiate preparatory work, as
soon as possible, in consultation with the parties,
the IGAD facilitators and the International
Observers, on how the United Nations could best
fully support the implementation of a
comprehensive peace agreement."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2003/ 16.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

