The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Belgium, Croatia, Germany and Italy,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Simonovic
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Reyn
(Belgium), Mr. Eitel (Germany) and Mr. Fulci (Italy)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium, documents S/ 1997/953 and Addendum 1.
Members of the Council also have before them document
S/ 1997/990, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
Portugal, the Russian Federation, Sweden, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document 8/1997/913, which contains the
text of a letter dated 20 November 1997 from the
Permanent Representative of Croatia addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting the text of a letter of the
same date from the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Croatia to the Secretary-General.

The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Croatia, to whom I give the floor.


