Mr. Abdalaziz (Egypt): At the outset, I would
like to express my delegation's appreciation to Bosnia
and Herzegovina for convening this important debate
on the theme of "Post-conflict peacebuilding:
institution-building", emphasizing the consistent
priority that has always been stressed by Governments
in post-conflict countries. I would also like to associate
my remarks with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Bangladesh in his capacity as
coordinator of the Non-Aligned Movement for
peacebuilding activities.

Over the past six years, the United Nations has
been successfully shaping its peacebuilding
architecture, adjusting it to address the challenges and
fill in the gaps emerging from past experience in
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations, as identified
in the recommendations of the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the ongoing
review of the international civilian capacity. We are
confident that Member States will continue to support
international efforts through the Organization's
principal organs, which significantly contribute to
peacebuilding in post-conflict countries, in particular
those of the Peacebuilding Commission, along with the
efforts by the Secretary-General.

In that context, Egypt is confident that the
implementation of the recommendations of the
Peacebuilding Commission review will contribute to
further strengthening the role of the Commission in
establishing the vital peacebuilding platform. Egypt is
coordinating on this issue with the African Union and
will present, at the African Summit to be held in a few
days at the end of this month, a proposal to establish a
regional centre in Cairo to support peacebuilding and
institution-building capacities on the African continent.

The success of institution-building in post-
conflict situations largely depends on a strategic Vision
that should be established on the fundamental pillars of
national ownership, innovative approaches,
comprehensiveness, and multi-pronged partnerships.
The doctrine of transferring responsibility for
peacebuilding, and consequently institution-building,
to the international community is a falsely premised
one. National ownership is a sine qua non for a
successful peacebuilding process. In no case can the
international community, even at the stage of conflict,
provide services that would otherwise be provided by
national or transitional Governments. Accumulated
international and regional expertise have proven that
national ownership of all phases of any peacebuilding
process, including institution and civilian capacity-
building, is the essential requirement for the success of
such efforts.

National and transitional Governments in post-
conflict countries must have the responsibility in
identifying peacebuilding priorities and should be at
the core planning and implementation of peacebuilding
strategies, supported by a vibrant national civil society
and assisted by the international community. They
should always maintain the ability to terminate any
peacebuilding activity at any time, in true reflection of
the principle of national ownership.

In this context, institution-building represents a
vital component of peacebuilding strategies, requiring
innovative methodologies beyond traditional
approaches. The requirements for stabilizing a newly
established peace in a post-conflict situation extend
beyond the traditional goals of security sector reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and the
rule of law.

If the aforementioned goals are to be successfully
realized, other vital priorities must be achieved in
tandem, in particular the strengthening of economic,
financial, social and political institutions and civilian
capacity-building in all fields. Such an approach
requires a thorough analysis of existing national
capabilities and resources, as well as the challenges
facing successful, comprehensive and gradual
institution- and civilian capacity-building on a case-by-
case basis.

The efforts of post-conflict countries to address
institution- and civilian capacity-building and to
respond to these challenges should be supported from
the early stages by multi-pronged partnerships within
and outside the United Nations system among the
relevant United Nations bodies and the United Nations
field operations. Furthermore, the United Nations
should not be the only player in institution- and

ll-21268
civilian capacity-building. This responsibility should
also be shared by the donor community, international
institutions - in particular, international financial
institutions - and relevant regional and subregional
organizations, drawing in particular on the vast pool of
regional and international expertise and resources.

Establishing the appropriate environment
required for exit strategies of peacekeeping operations
necessitates the active involvement of peacebuilders
and development actors at the early stages of any
peacekeeping operation. Providing the needed support
to the efforts of national Governments and civil society
in post-conflict countries requires innovative
coordination and collaboration among the principal
organs of the United Nations and within the United
Nations system, as well as maximizing the benefits
from the established peacebuilding architecture.

Finally, efforts to rehabilitate and establish
national institutions and the capacities needed to
support them, as well as creating the enabling
structural, economic and social environments for their
sustenance, will not meet with success without
adequate, reliable, predictable and flexible funding,
without conditionality or earmarking. In addition, we
need to establish monitoring and follow-up
mechanisms to ensure the fulfilment of national and
international financial commitments needed to realize
the nationally agreed institution- and civilian capacity-
building priorities. They would also ensure the
consistency of the priorities of international funding
mechanisms, including the Peacebuilding Fund, with
the national peacebuilding priorities of the concerned
countries, and address the need to consider innovative
methods to strengthen the resources of such
mechanisms, particularly the Peacebuilding Fund.

In this connection, at the sixty-fourth session of
the General Assembly, Egypt suggested the convening
of an annual donors' conference for the Peacebuilding
Fund, similar to the annual pledging conference for the
Central Emergency Response Fund, in order to ensure
the mobilization of increased funding for future
peacebuilding activities. We hope that this proposal
will garner the necessary support for its full
implementation.

