Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My
delegation is particularly pleased to welcome the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma. We thank
him for his exhaustive and detailed briefing, following
the excellent report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).

Seventeen months ago we witnessed the
restoration of independence to Timor-Leste and the
transformation of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) into
UNMISET. Since then substantial progress has been
made to put this young, friendly country on the path to
political and security stability and economic and social
development.

The Secretary-General's report gives an objective
overview of the situation in Timor-Leste and makes
recommendations with which my country fully agrees.

My delegation will concentrate briefly on the
political and diplomatic activities of the Timorese, the
fruitful interaction between UNMISET and the
Timorese Government, and the country's short- and
medium-term economic prospects.

On the whole, since 20 May 2002 the Timorese
authorities have not proved unworthy of their task.
They have been able to overcome their differences, and
the main leaders have wisely chosen to put their strong
personalities at the service of the Timorese people.
Today the President and Government are cohabiting in
a constructive manner and are mobilizing as many
citizens as possible for involvement in local
government.

After an inevitable running-in period, the
judiciary has now begun to work, and, happily, one
area in which it has been very active has been in
combating impunity.

We also welcome the regional foreign policy of
Timor-Leste. Its cooperation with its neighbours,
Australia and Indonesia, is exemplary and may quickly
have an impact on its economy, national policy and
security. Cameroon encourages this trend, and pays
tribute to Indonesia and Australia for their positive
contribution to Timor-Leste.

The report of the Secretary-General gives a vivid
picture of the implementation by UNMISET of the
various programmes under way to strengthen the
institutional capacities of public administration and the
judiciary. Cameroon joins the appeal to donors to
finance the posts of civilian advisers, whose crucial
importance for the establishment of a competent,
efficient and effective Timorese Administration has
been emphasized. Likewise, we believe that substantial
resources are urgently needed for the training of
judges, of legal personnel and of other key elements of
thejudicial system.

The fight against impunity in the context of grave
crimes - a fight that the Council demands of the
Timorese authorities - cannot be conducted
successfully to its completion unless support for the
judicial system is strengthened. At this stage, we
should duly appreciate the progress and results
achieved.
In the area of internal and external security, my
delegation would like to congratulate UNMISET on the
work accomplished in training both the police and the
army. However, one might well wonder about what will
happen after May 2004 - that is, following
UNMISET's departure - particularly with regard to
establishing an army capable of shouldering its
responsibilities throughout the territory. Here, as
elsewhere, support on the part of the international
community is absolutely necessary if we wish to
accelerate the appropriation process.

That leads me to my last essential comment.
Timor-Leste possesses real economic potential, and the
arrangements concluded with Australia in the
hydrocarbon sector give rise to optimism for the
medium term. Unfortunately, in the short term, the
country's financing needs cannot be met without
external support. The report emphasizes a regular
decline in gross domestic product, which will continue
next year. Unemployment remains significant, and
social sectors such as education and health are
encountering real difficulties. As we wait for the
Timorese "oil bonanza", the international community
must lend sustained support to the Timorese
Government and economy. The real efforts by the
authorities on the ground justify that support.

I welcome the fact that the Special Representative
and the entire UNMISET team are so resolutely
committed to the Timorese. Because they are doing
useful work, they deserve our full appreciation.

