Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): First, let me congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January and for the
excellent work that you and your delegation have
accomplished during that period.

As coordinator of the caucus of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) in the Peacebuilding Commission, I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement
regarding the activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

There can be no denying that, in the recent past,
the United Nations has seen a surge in the requirements
for peacekeeping operations around the world. The role
of those operations has become more complex and
demanding, placing a huge responsibility on the United
Nations, and as a consequence has led to a tremendous
strain on existing resources. We recall that it was in
response to that development that the concept of a
Peacebuilding Commission was introduced in
December 2004 as a result of a high-level United
Nations report. It subsequently gained momentum in
March 2005 when then Secretary-General Kofi Annan
released his report entitled "In larger freedom".

In due deference to and respect for the
prerogatives of the Security Council and the role of the

presidency in advancing initiatives relating to
international peace and security, the Non-Aligned
Movement is concerned that the Security Council
should at this stage find it necessary to review the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission. While it is no secret
that the Commission has experienced some difficulties
with its internal operations and processes, we think that
it is both lacking in merit and premature to have the
Security Council review or evaluate its activities at this
juncture, in particular in the light of the stipulation by
General Assembly resolution 60/ 180 that the
Peacebuilding Commission shall submit an annual
report to the General Assembly, which shall hold an
annual debate to review it.

Since its establishment by General Assembly
resolution 60/ 180 - which also established its modus
operandi, among other working parameters - the
Commission has met four times on matters concerning
its core functions. The Commission has examined the
situations in Burundi and Sierra Leone, and has
approved the disbursement of much-needed finances to
support crucial areas identified by key stakeholders and
the Governments of both countries. The key areas are
those pinpointed as most likely to lead to a relapse into
conflict.

The Non-Aligned Movement places significant
value on the Peacebuilding Commission, in particular
its role in support of national ownership of post-
conflict peacebuilding priority planning and initiatives.
Notwithstanding the fact that the Commission is still in
its formative stages and still going through the
expected teething processes, it has worked as closely as
possible, under the circumstances, with national
authorities to ensure national ownership of the
peacebuilding process. There is concurrence, and
indeed broad consensus, within the Commission that
economic reconstruction and rehabilitation and a
comprehensive set of risk-reduction strategies should
be at the forefront of all efforts aimed at sustaining
peace, initiating development and promoting post-
conflict recovery.

The Non-Aligned Movement emphasizes that due
respect and regard must be shown for the role of the
Organizational Committee in the preparation of
country-specific meetings and in evaluating the
progress made and charting the way forward after each
country-specific meeting, based on the summaries of
the meetings prepared by the respective Chairpersons,
in addition to the full participation of the countries
under consideration in the decision-making process.

It is also useful to remind ourselves that the
Peacebuilding Commission is not a donor agency, as its
activities are carried out in a far broader and more
comprehensive and participatory context, consistent
with its mandate. Decisions regarding the provision of
financial resources should therefore be guided by
national priorities and be based on the collective
decision of members of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Recommendations for assistance must
highlight the priority areas established by the
Government of the country under review by the
Commission. The matter of Government guidance
should also be uppermost in planning the way forward,
and will certainly serve to strengthen the process of
national ownership. The holistic and inclusive
approach to evaluation and recommendations adopted
at country-specific meetings can only add to the
integrity of the process within the Commission.

The Non-Aligned Movement would also further
like to reiterate that the Peacebuilding Commission's
involvement in reconstruction efforts is based clearly
on General Assembly resolution 60/180, which
stipulates the need for a dedicated mechanism to
address the special needs of countries emerging from
conflict towards recovery, reintegration and
reconstruction, and to assist them in laying the
foundation for sustainable development.

Despite the seemingly clear channels for the
Peacebuilding Commission to work towards achieving
its objectives, the Non-Aligned Movement is of course
concerned at certain shortcomings that, if not
addressed, could have the unwanted effects of stifling
its work or threatening to undermine its capability and
effectiveness. The Movement would therefore like to
see an increase in the frequency of meetings of the
Organizational Committee to assess and evaluate
strategies, attend to reconstruction and institution-
building efforts and work towards developing
recommendations and information to improve the
coordination of all relevant actors within and outside
the United Nations, among other things.

Additionally, the Peacebuilding Commission
must identify the means by which funds that are
approved for disbursement reach recipient countries in
the shortest possible time. It is not sufficient to identify
the urgency of the need while paying scant regard to,
or becoming lax in, follow-up actions at the most
crucial stage.

It is necessary to strengthen the role and the work
of the Organizational Committee as the entity
governing the work of the Peacebuilding Commission.
In that regard, the Commission is the body responsible
and entitled to elaborate on the guidelines regarding
meetings in the country-specific format, as well as the
work of the Peacebuilding Support Office. We would
therefore call on all to avoid any action that could be
construed as undermining the authority of the
Organizational Committee.

Looking ahead, the Non-Aligned Movement is
convinced that the upcoming debate in the General
Assembly will undoubtedly enrich the awareness of the
general membership as to the progress being made
within the Peacebuilding Commission, notably in
addressing the outstanding organizational and
substantive issues. That debate will of course add value
to the open debate now taking place in the Security
Council, and will not only increase the momentum of
the follow-up to the multi-dimensional aspects of the
cases under consideration within the Commission but
will also enhance its effectiveness, in line with the
respective prerogatives and responsibilities of both
organs.

The caucus of the Non-Aligned Movement in the
Peacebuilding Commission would like to take this
opportunity to express its appreciation to the
Ambassador of Angola, Chairperson of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as to the Chairpersons of the
country-specific meetings and the Peacebuilding
Support Office, for the successful outcome of the
country-specific meetings held to date. The Movement
would also like to encourage the wider membership of
the Peacebuilding Commission to remain unrelenting
and vigilant in efforts to consolidate the gains and
achievements made to date, so as to mitigate the
possibility of countries under consideration relapsing
into conflict.

