Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): I would like to welcome the
convening of this meeting. We believe it is important that
the Security Council meets and discusses various issues
in public. In particular we welcome this moving further
from briefings on thematic issues to discussions of
situation-specific issues. I think that the meeting today
provides a very welcome innovation, which I hope will be
followed in the coming months.

I would like also to congratulate Ambassador Fowler
for his report and to express the particular gratitude of my
delegation for his hard work and innovative approach, an
innovative approach that he developed in addressing the
question of sanctions against UNITA.

I do not wish to add anything to the remarks made
by various members of the Council on the purpose and
nature of sanctions or on the need to make the sanctions
effective. I think that this is fairly clear. And it is also
clear that the sanctions are an important instrument
intended to help in the effort to stop the war in Angola
and to bring peace negotiations to a successful stage.
What I would like to do is to make a few random
remarks regarding sanctions and issues that come to mind
when reading the very interesting report of Ambassador
Fowler.

I think that one of the thoughts that comes to mind
is that it is impossible to overlook the fact that in the past
the implementation of the sanctions regime shared the fate
of the overall context of the efforts to implement the
Lusaka Protocol. Sanctions are an important policy
instrument, but they are only one in a series of policy
instruments and share the fate of the overall policy
approach to a given situation. I think this is something
worth keeping in mind.

Secondly, each sanctions regime, in my opinion, is
unique, and I think one has to be careful about what
degree of generalization it is possible to make on the
basis of an experience with a particular sanctions regime.
The content of the measures varies very widely. The level

 

of control by Governments over the prohibited activities is
not the same with different sanctions regimes. The
relevance of intelligence data and other factors varies again
from one situation to another. To give an example, flight
bans against a State may be less difficult to enforce than,
for example, the prohibition of diamond selling. There are
inherent differences here, and I think that the Council has
to be very careful in understanding and fully appreciating
those differences - and, of course, in recognizing the need
to make additional efforts when additional difficulties arise.

There is, however, one common denominator in all
efforts to implement sanctions regimes. The cooperation of
States is of critical importance. States need to cooperate
with the Security Council, with its sanctions committees.
And, as Ambassador Andjaba said before, there are States
that may need particular assistance in ensuring that their
cooperation is adequately effective. Of course these are
matters that require innovative proposals, such as those
made by Ambassador Fowler, but also strong commitment
and persistence on the part of the Security Council and of
the United Nations more generally.

We are grateful to Ambassador Fowler for his
recommendations, which, I think, provide another important
innovation for the Council's method of work. We can
support many of these recommendations, and there are
some that, in our opinion, will require some further study
and discussion. I understand that the recommendations will
be discussed by the panels and by the sanctions Committee.
I also agree with Ambassador Andjaba, who spoke about
the possibility of having a more detailed discussion on
some of these recommendations at a later stage in the
Council itself. I think Council members should be fully
aware and fully involved in the process of refinement and
implementation of these recommendations. There is, I think,
a good case for making these recommendations a subject
for subsequent discussions in the Security Council.

I would like to mention just two examples. There may
be more. As regards all the possible improvements in the
area of border monitoring, the United Nations has had
experience with border monitoring in earlier sanctions
regimes. I think it would be interesting to see in what ways
those experiences may be useful in developing a new
approach regarding UNITA, based on the recommendation
of Ambassador Fowler. The questions related to the
diamond industry and diamond trade are, I believe, very
new for the Security Council. Maybe implementation of
those recommendations will require a more continuous
involvement on the part of the Security Council.

There may be other matters of this sort, and I do not
want to give an exhaustive list at this stage, but I think
that there is a good case for more intimate involvement of
the Security Council in the process of the discussion and
refinement of the recommendations.

Finally, I think it would be appropriate to say at
least one word on the future role of the Secretariat. An
expansion of demands regarding sanctions policy places
additional burdens on the Secretariat. We all know that
the Secretariat works on a variety of sanctions committees
with extremely limited resources. I think that as we
proceed with the new approach we need to keep in the
mind the very legitimate needs of the Secretariat and give
due attention to possible improvements and expansion in
that regard.

