Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank the Special Envoy of the
United Nations Secretary-General for his particularly
important and enlightening briefing concerning
progress in the political process and, more broadly,
for his tireless efforts, which deserve and enjoy our
full support.

We requested this meeting in response to the
proposal made by Staffan De Mistura last week. We
did so because Syria is currently at a crossroads: it
could either tip into military escalation in Idlib, which
would open up one of the darkest chapters in the Syrian
tragedy, or it could take the difficult path of genuine
political momentum for a settlement to the conflict.
We are deeply convinced that today, perhaps for the
first time in seven years, there is a narrow window
of opportunity to achieve that. Both scenarios, the
encouraging one and the bleak one, are possible today;
the choice depends a great deal on us and on the ability
of the Council to come together around the option
of peace.

The establishment of the constitutional committee
can and must be the turning point that we are looking
for, a first step in a process of genuine political
momentum. Such establishment as soon as possible
is therefore our priority today. To be clear, given the
choice between war and peace in Syria, the key lies
largely in the land of Tolstoy; the establishment of the
constitutional committee requires that Russia leverage
its full weight in Damascus in this respect, just as we are
doing for our part with our partners in the small group.
After all, the idea of the constitutional committee came
out of an initiative of Russian diplomacy, and today all
the members of the Council, without exception, have
advocated for its establishment.

So what are we waiting for to move forward?
I should like today to make three points: to clearly
identify the responsibilities ofthe Syrian regime, whose
obstruction is continuing to block the launch of the
political process; to share with the Council the efforts
made by France and the small group to achieve this; and,
lastly, to briefly lay out possible subsequent solutions.

Our friend Staffan went to Damascus to hear the
expectations and positions of one of the parties to the
conflict. From the picture that he has just painted, it
seems, as was, unfortunately, predictable, that the
regime does not consider itself bound by a commitment,
even though a few months ago it transmitted its list to
the Special Envoy, and that it is rejecting the list of the
third third of the constitutional committee proposed by

the Special Envoy, in so doing not hesitating to trample
the rules laid down in Sochi.
The conclusions of his visit provide clarification
concerning the responsibilities at play and require us to
redouble our efforts to finally get the political process of
the ground. The United Nations has made considerable
efforts to achieve a composition of the constitutional
committee that represents all components of Syrian
society. Here once again, on behalf of France, I would
like to pay tribute to Staffan de Mistura for his work.

Staffan has conducted in-depth consultations,
adjusting his proposals several times so as to achieve
a balanced, universally acceptable composition of the
constitutional committee. The offer currently on the
table meets those requirements. He was mandated to
carry out this work and to achieve the establishment of
the committee, and he has our full support for inviting
the participants without delay to a first meeting in
November. We strongly request that he move forward
in this respect.

France has spared no effort to encourage progress
in the political process. The ministers from the small
group issued a joint communique on the margins of the
General Assembly calling for the early creation of the
constitutional committee. The members of the small
group, whose representatives all spoke last week in the
Security Council (see S/PV.8373), demonstrated their
unity and support for that agenda along with the vast
majority of members of the Council.

President Macron spoke on the telephone with
President Trump at the beginning of the week on the
subject of Syria, and the urgent need to make progress on
the political track was underlined. Our determination to
ensure that the constitutional committee is established
is therefore very clear. The Istanbul summit, which
will take place on Saturday and will bring together
France, Germany, Russia and Turkey, must also allow
for progress to be made on this specific point and, of
course, on the subsequent political process. The small
group will meet once again before the end of the month,
and there is therefore unprecedented mobilization for
the committee to meet. So let us come together to push
ahead with all of our strength in this direction so that
we do not allow this very fragile window of opportunity
to close.

What do we need to do now? As confirmed by the
Special Envoy's visit to Damascus, the top priority is
for all actors to at last bring the necessary pressure to
bear on Damascus so that the committee can meet in
November. That is the only possible path. Together we
must show that we are firm and mobilized to ensure
the implementation of the objectives that we have
clearly endorsed.

The Council's convergence of views on a
proposal initially made by Russia represents a unique
opportunity; to fail to seize it would be irresponsible.
We cannot allow the regime to ruin our collective
efforts; if that happened, the conflict would continue
for years, with no financial resources to rebuild the
country and refugees Ieft unable to return.

In summary, our friend Staffan de Mistura's road
map is clear and in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
which is more than ever our common compass, and
he has our full support in implementing it. I will
conclude with a solemn appeal to everyone's sense of
responsibility: we must remain fully aware that the risk
of a new escalation in the Syrian tragedy cannot be
ruled out. The only definitive way to avoid that is with
a credible and inclusive political solution. That means
that the coming weeks are crucial, and that is Why we
will not hesitate to convene the Security Council as
often as needed during the coming period to mobilize
the international community in support of mediation
on the part of the United Nations and to finally
achieve the delayed establishment of the constitutional
committee. I remind the Council that the establishment
of that committee will be only the first step in the long
process ofbringing back peace to Syria, which includes
elections and the establishment of a safe and neutral
environment on the ground. We are counting on our
friend Mr. De Mistura, just as he can count on our full
support until the end of his mission.

