Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important debate on one of the most
crucial issues: children and armed conflict. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/181). I am
grateful too for the efforts of the Working Group on
Children in Armed Conflict and of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

I pay tribute on behalf of the State of Qatar to the
progress made through the signing of action plans with
various parties to armed conflict in order to put an end
to the recruitment and use of child soldiers and to
ensure their release by armed forces and groups.
However, despite the progress, which demonstrates the
determination of the international community to deal
with grave violations of the rights of children in armed
conflict, we note the fragility of the international
community's determination to protect children in
situations of foreign occupation.

The report of the Secretary-General notes
developments in the occupied Palestinian territory and
indicates that 374 Palestinian children were killed and
over 2,086 injured during the period covered by the
report, including at least 350 killed and 1,815 injured
in the Gaza Strip during the military operation
launched by Israeli forces.

In Qatar, under the wise auspices of its Emir, His
Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, we are
convinced that education is the best means to control
violence and ensure peace and security. We reaffirm
the importance of taking measures to implement the
recommendations of the Secretary-General calling
upon all parties to armed conflict to respect
international standards guaranteeing the protection of
students, teachers and schools against attack. We also
note that, despite international appeals that the
educational needs of children be met during conflict, a
large number of children in many regions are still
deprived of education because of armed conflict.
Schools, including United Nations schools, continue to
be targeted by some parties to armed conflict.

Today's debate on this theme offers an
opportunity to pose questions about the report of the
Secretary-General's board of inquiry into the direct
attacks against schools in the Gaza Strip belonging to
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Those
attacks were carried out by the Israeli army. The
Security Council should determine responsibility for
those crimes so that the perpetrators can be brought to
justice.

At a number of international forums, Her
Highness Sheikha Mozah Bint Nasser al Missned, the

wife of the Emir of Qatar, who is UNESCO Special
Envoy for basic and higher education, has expressed
her concern about the harmful impact of armed conflict
and violence on education. She has supported the
Al Fakhoora Campaign, a broad international
movement that seeks to promote and ensure freedom
and access to education for Palestinian students in the
Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Among its far-reaching
activities, Al Fakhoora has recently announced
60 grants to Palestinian students in Gaza out of the
100 grants that the organization provides, to the
amount of $100 million.

In addition, Reach Out to Asia, an international
non-governmental organization under the auspices of
the Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and
Community Development, is working hard to increase
educational opportunities for young people and
children in many countries affected by crises and
natural disasters. Before the Israeli war in Gaza,
together with Save the Children, the Foundation
implemented a welfare programme to promote areas
safe for education in the Gaza Strip. Following the war,
the Foundation opened 11 schools in Gaza out of the
22 that are being equipped and renovated jointly with
the International Islamic Aid Agency. The project seeks
to make a real change in the lives of 21,000 students
and 126,000 families living in very difficult conditions
in order to restore normalcy in the Gaza Strip.

On the basis of that commitment and convinced
of the importance of education in areas of conflict, the
State of Qatar, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Costa
Rica, Nicaragua and Norway are preparing a draft
resolution on the right to education in crisis situations
that will be submitted to the General Assembly for
adoption at its current session.

Finally, we reaffirm that we in Qatar are working
on this issue because we believe that children are the
most important resource in creating peaceful societies.
We are working with international partners to
guarantee the right to education in areas of armed
conflict.

