I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her nineteenth report and her informative briefing today. I also acknowledge the presence of the Permanent Representative of Libya and welcome him to the Council. Let me begin by expressing Tunisia's unwavering commitment to the Rome Statute and voicing our support for the ICC in the fight against impunity. The advent of the only permanent international criminal court has been a major achievement in the development of the international criminal justice architecture. Supporting its independent and impartial work is essential to bring to account individuals responsible for the worst crimes known to humankind and so to help prevent the commission of such crimes in future. Nearly a decade after the Council referred the Libyan situation to the ICC's Prosecutor, prospects for justice and lasting peace in Libya remain regrettably elusive. Tunisia remains gravely concerned about the endemic cycle of violence, atrocities and impunity in Libya, which is causing unspeakable suffering for the brotherly Libyan people. The report of the ICC Prosecutor lists a wide-ranging spectrum of crimes allegedly perpetrated in Libya, including indiscriminate attacks on civilians, unlawful killing, torture, abduction, enforced disappearance, unlawful detention and other serious human rights abuses, including against migrants and refugees. Tunisia reiterates its call on all parties to respect the key international humanitarian law principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution and to take constant care to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure during military operations. A sustained period of calm leading to a permanent ceasefire in Libya cannot be overemphasized. Tunisia appreciates the ongoing mandated efforts of the ICC's Prosecutor and her Office in Libya, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) and the Rome Statute, in deterring would-be perpetrators, thus contributing to the prevention of future atrocities. While being mindful of the apparent lack of enforcement of ICC arrest warrants and the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on its fieldwork, Tunisia appreciates the progress that the Office of the Prosecutor has made towards bringing additional submissions before the ICC concerning migrant-related crimes, based on a flexible and evidence-based process. The drafters of the Rome Statute mandated the ICC to be complementary of States, acting as a last resort - giving the primary responsibility to national courts where they are willing and able to genuinely prosecute international crimes. Tunisia supports the ICC Prosecutor's efforts to actively encourage Libyan- led prosecutions of crimes within the ICC's jurisdiction, in accordance with the complementarity scheme and taking into consideration the humbling realities of Libya's transition. We welcome Libya's commitment to justice and the continued engagement of its competent authorities with the ICC as set out in the ICC Prosecutor's report, including on assistance requests. It is essential that the international community provide all assistance and support needed for empowering Libya's judicial system so as to enable genuine and consistent national proceedings according to the highest standards, thus further strengthening the principles of cooperation and complementarity with the Court. In this delicate context, the most pressing priority in Libya remains a commitment by the Libyan parties to a permanent ceasefire, creating conditions conducive to the political process and the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. Tunisia reiterates its call for a comprehensive and lasting political solution based on an intra-Libyan dialogue, free of any foreign intervention, that would preserve Libya's territorial integrity and sovereignty and spare its people the effects of conflict and chaos. In closing, let me say that Tunisia believes that in transitional contexts, peace and accountability must be seen as mutually reinforcing in a way that uses appropriate mechanisms and ultimately promotes conflict transformation, victim healing and social harmony.
