The Secretary-General: I welcome the decision of
the Council to hold a ministerial meeting on Africa. Africa,
and Africa's relations with the rest of the world, are
changing. Many developments are positive. It is therefore
timely and appropriate for the international community to
examine carefully how best it can support and assist Africa
at this time of change and of hope.

Ten years ago, many African countries were in crisis.
Bloody conflicts raged in various parts of the continent.
Economies stagnated. The spectre of famine, malnutrition
and disease stalked several African nations.

But now Africa has turned an important comer. Africa
is rediscovering stability. Investment is returning to many
African countries. Millions of Africans are recovering hope
for themselves and their families as reform helps bring
growth to African economies.

There is a new drive to democracy in much of Africa.
Multiparty elections have underpinned democratic rule in
some countries; in others, the democratization process is
under way. The link between the democratization process
and efforts to ensure social justice and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms is recognized and
understood. The Swahili proverb says, "you cannot turn the
wind, so turn the sail". Africans are working the winds of
change blowing around our globe and they are beginning to
reap the benefits.

As a result, there is a shift in perceptions. There is a
new consensus that the primary responsibility for the
solution of Africa's problems rests with Africans
themselves, as we have heard from President Mugabe. This
new realization also calls for a re-evaluation of the role of
the international community in support of Africa's goals. It
places responsibilities as much on the shoulders of
Governments outside Africa as on African Governments. It
challenges us to think precisely how best we can
accompany the Africans on their path to lasting peace,
stability, justice and sustainable development.

In place of interventionism, it promises a mature
relationship based on mutual support and trust. In place of
papers, studies and documents, it offers the prospects of
targeted assistance and support based on common goals and
shared analysis.

Formidable challenges remain. Despite all the
advances that have been made, armed conflict, political
instability and retreats from democracy are still preventing
some African countries from moving forward. Too often,
economic development remains fragile. In some parts of
the continent, vast movements of refugees and displaced
persons continue. In some African countries, political
instability and conflict have worsened. Nationalism is on
the rise in some countries, with cleavages between ethnic
groups as they battle as much for economic as for
political power. Internal conflicts are threatening the
cohesion, and even the survival, of those countries.

The challenges of development are formidable. Of
the 48 least-developed countries, 33 are in Africa. This
year's Human Development Report from the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) shows that of
the 45 countries in the "low human development"
category, 35 are in Africa. Statistics reveal that the gains
of the 19605 and l970s have been reversed in a number
of African countries. There have been falls in per capita
income, in the number of people with access to clean
water, sanitation and health services, in school enrolment
and in life expectancy. Africa is the only region of the
world where, if present trends continue, poverty is
expected to increase in the next century.

We have dissected and debated Africa, and studied
and summarized its challenges, for decades. Now is the
time for action. We - and I speak not only of this
Council but of the United Nations and the international
community generally - must respond promptly and
effectively to Africa's call. We must do so with specific
measures and clear proposals for action. This is our
agenda. I, for my part, will continue to bring to the
attention of the Security Council developments relating to
peace and security that require timely action to prevent
conflicts escalating.

After the unprecedented humanitarian crises of
recent years, preventive diplomacy is not an option: It is
a Vital necessity. That is why I ask you to support the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) in its efforts to
strengthen its capacity for preventive diplomacy.

We have established a close partnership between the
Organization for African Unity and the United Nations.
We can build, therefore, on very firm foundations. The
OAU has opted to concentrate on preventive diplomacy
and peacemaking; the United Nations has experience and
preeminence in peacekeeping, peace-enforcement and
peace-building. In several countries, United Nations

 

peacekeepers are helping to ensure that armed conflict is
replaced by the search for peace. Regional efforts have
been important, notably in Liberia and in the Republic of
the Congo. The United Nations has worked to support those
efforts. I believe that there is scope for enhanced
partnership between regional organizations and the United
Nations in African peacekeeping.

I welcome the initiatives of interested Member States
to strengthen Africa's peacekeeping capacity. With your
continued moral and material support, and undertaken in
consultation with the OAU, such activities are beginning to
make a real difference to Africa's capacity for
peacekeeping.

Peace-building embraces a wide range of activities,
including rehabilitation, reconstruction, the maintenance of
law and order, and good governance. But the crucial
underlying need is for security in the lives of ordinary
people: security in the form of access to health, education,
clean water and a decent standard of living.

Security is no longer confined to preventing invasions.
True security is built on a firm foundation of sustainable
development. The pursuit of peace and security and the
building of societies based on justice, democracy and
human rights are not mutually exclusive. They are mutually
supportive and reinforcing. Indeed, the goals of our Charter
cannot be placed in order of priority. We have to pursue
peace and security, and economic and social development,
together and at the same time. Without peace, development
is not possible; without development, peace is not durable.

Because the best way of ensuring peace and security
in Africa is to promote sustainable development, I urge you
to do all in your power to increase official development
assistance to African countries. Africans and African
Governments share the primary responsibility, which is to
mobilize and maximize their internal resources. But, over
and above the increasing flows of inward private
investment, external financing, from both public and private
sources, will continue to be of vital importance for years to
come.

Only a comprehensive approach combining poverty
eradication and growth will succeed. Growth-oriented
strategies need to ensure that the results of growth are
equitably distributed. To alleviate poverty in the short run,
and to eradicate absolute poverty, development assistance
should be directed to poor rural areas. Greater resources
must be allocated to health, education, water supply and
other basic infrastructure, as well as to capacity-building
and job-generating activities. That is the approach of the
United Nations New Agenda for the Development of
Africa in the 1990s. This is being put into effect by the
United Nations operational arm and through the United
Nations System-wide Special Initiative for Africa.

More assistance should be given to African countries
to help create an enabling environment that will release
the creative and entrepreneurial energies of their citizens,
their non-governmental organizations, the private sector
and society at large.

If Africa is to face the challenges of the global
economy, including the need to diversify its economies,
secure wider access to existing markets and develop new
markets, external assistance will be needed. Legal
frameworks, infrastructure, education and training,
transparency in business and in government affairs all
have a part to play. Technical assistance and advice in
such fields can make a crucial difference.

Another urgent priority is to relieve African
countries of their heavy debt service burden. The initiative
of the Bretton Woods institutions for the highly-indebted
poor countries is a step in the right direction. But more
needs to be done.

Members of the Group of Seven have expressed
support for Africa's development agenda. They have
called for a new partnership involving developed and
developing nations and the multilateral institutions. I
welcome these initiatives. The United Nations stands
ready to contribute to their speedy implementation.

We have a wealth of international instruments,
agreed at the intergovernmental level, focusing on African
development priorities. Development is a necessity in
itself; it is also the only effective, long-term guarantee of
lasting peace and security on the African continent.

Those are my views and my proposals. I stand ready
to take whatever action the Council may require of me.

Africa is showing the way. Today the international
community is called to action. Let us work together in
response. Let us respond by producing an operational
agenda with clear and specific steps which we can take.

Let us not only pledge, but also act, to work better
together - with Africa, and for Africa.

 

