The President: I wish to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, the ministers and other
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their participation is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

Under rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the representatives of Armenia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Portugal, Qatar, Senegal, Spain, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania, Turkey,
Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to
participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to
participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, to participate in this
meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ekmeleddin
Ihsanoglu, Secretary-General of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas,
Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/75, which contains a letter dated
4 February 2013 from the Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Korea to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.

I sincerely hope that today's open debate will
contribute to sharing the urgent sense among the United
Nations membership that the situations endured by
civilians in many of today's conflicts require renewed
attention. At the same time, we hope that such attention
can translate the progress that has been made in the
normative framework of international humanitarian
law into concrete action. It is my firm beliefthat today's
debate will be a valuable and timely opportunity to
renew our joint resolve on the issue.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

