Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/522) and also his Special Representative,
Ameerah Haq, for her briefing today and thanking her
and her colleagues in the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for their dedicated
service. The United Kingdom aligns itself with the
statement to be given later this morning by the
European Union delegation.

Like others, the United Kingdom is encouraged
by the continuing stability in Timor-Leste. The security
situation is calm and has shown clear and steady
improvement since 2006. Once again, it is particularly
pleasing to note that there has been no increase in
crime or disorder following the gradual transfer of
policing responsibilities back to the Policia Nacional
de Timor-Leste (PNTL). We are encouraged by the
continued progress towards the full handover of
policing responsibilities. We note that there are still
challenges to overcome in some parts of the country
and, as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General noted, there have been difficulties with the
certification of some serving PNTL officers. We
therefore call on the Government of Timor-Leste to
give priority to resolving those outstanding issues. It
was good to hear what the Permanent Representative of
Timor-Leste had to say on that score. In parallel, the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) should continue to build the capacity of the
PNTL and focus on providing a high standard of
training, mentoring and support.

In addition, the United Kingdom looks forward to
a clear, phased timetable for the withdrawal of the
United Nations police (UNPOL) officers. UNPOL
personnel should already be drawing down in districts
where they have successfully handed over to the
PNTL. A sudden withdrawal in 2012 would be more
destabilizing than starting the phased reduction now,
which would in itself demonstrate the Council's belief
in the PNTL's ability to re-establish itself. The
Government of Timor-Leste can play an important role
in this regard by ensuring that the police have
sufficient equipment and logistical support.

We continue to highlight the importance of
tackling impunity and bringing perpetrators of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide to
justice. We particularly welcome the news on the
progress of the follow-up to the Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and hope that Parliament
will prioritize its consideration of the draft laws. We
welcome the recent messages from Parliament and the
Prosecutor-General speaking out against impunity, but
like my United States colleague, I note with concern
that the recent commutations of some sentences may
send out a negative message on the robustness of
Timorese justice and accountability.

The wider United Nations system must now work
towards addressing the nation's longer-term needs in
close collaboration with the Government of Timor-
Leste. In this regard, we are encouraged that the United
Nations is actively thinking about how it can best
continue to support Timor-Leste, once UNMIT has left.
Detailed recommendations should be developed and
shared with Security Council members in due course.

The 2012 elections are, of course, the most
significant milestone on the horizon. The United
Kingdom will continue to support UNMIT and the
people of Timor-Leste throughout this transitional
period. Our hope is that, once credible and peaceful
elections have taken place, Timor-Leste will have a
safe and secure future.

