Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Madam President, I would like to congratulate
you personally and your country, Poland, on your
assumption of the rotating presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. You can count on the
full support and cooperation of my delegation for the
remaining days of your mandate. Through you, I would
also like to thank the other members of the Council
that have always supported respect for the principles
and values of the Charter of the United Nations in
addressiing the situation in Burundi - although
some delegations remain imprisoned or brainwashed
in their 2015 rhetoric without moving in parallel with
the evolving situation in the country. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, my colleague
from Switzerland, Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for his positive
and growing role in the peacebuilding process in my
country, Burundi. I cannot help but thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michel Kafando,
for his briefing to the Council this morning.

The purpose of my statement is to share with the
Security Council the latest developments in Burundi
since the Council's previous briefing, three months ago
here in the Chamber, on the situation in my country
(see S/PV.8189).

On the political front, on 17 May, Burundi concluded
its constitutional referendum with resounding success.
According to the provisional national results announced
on Monday, 21 May by the Independent National
Electoral Commission, the "yes" to Burundi's new
Constitution won by a large margin, with 73.26 per
cent of the vote, as well as with a record participation
rate of 96.24 per cent. Through the referendum, the
Burundian people demonstrated to the international
community their political maturity and their capacity
to organize free, transparent and peaceful democratic
elections, and especially with a budget made up entirely
of Burundian funds.

The referendum and the two-week campaign
preceding it took place in very good conditions
throughout the country and across the diaspora.
No major incidents were reported to the Electoral
Commission during the entire process up to election
day. The campaign was very lively, pluralistic, colourful
and inclusive. In total, in addition to the ruling party, 25
political parties and opposition coalitions participated
in a peaceful election campaign throughout the country,
with a high sense ofpolitical tolerance between those in
favour of the "yes" side and those in favour of the "no"
side as to the revised Constitution.

By voting 73.26 per cent in favour of the new
Constitution with such record participation, the
Burundian people once again reaffirmed their
sovereignty, unity in diversity, social cohesion, political
tolerance, patriotism, bravery and will to definitively
take ownership of their country's political, economic
and cultural governance. The date of 17 May 2018 will
remain an unforgettable red-letter day in Burundi's
political history.

My delegation recalls in passing that the
constitutional reform that was just successfully
completed was the result of broad consultations
conducted over more than a year with the Burundian
population in all its diversity. That was an exercise
aimed at the country's long-term stability, in particular
by ending the transitional period under the current
2005 Constitution.

At the substantive level, the new Constitution fully
respects the 2000 Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi, to which the Government
attaches great importance. All the substantive
articles - I repeat, all the substantive articles - of the
Arusha Agreement guaranteeing democratic principles,
sovereignty, social cohesion, political stability, national
unity, socialjustice, the protection of minorities, ethnic
and gender quotas in institutions, term limits and the
protection of human rights have been maintained or
even strengthened. What is being said about supposed
non-respect for the Arusha Agreement is manipulation
of opinion and the will of certain outside actors to
destabilize our country. That behaviour, which has
manifested itself since 2015, is not dead and buried.
Of that we are very aware. The people of Burundi
remain very vigilant so as to safeguard their unity and
cohesion. The degree of patriotism that has developed
among Burundians since 2015 will leave no cracks for
any attempt from abroad to destabilize the country to
exploit it.

So far, only one political actor, the leader of an
independent coalition called Amizero y'Abarundi, out
of the 26 parties that took part in the elections, has
contested, without convincing anyone, the outcome
of the referendum. That was done even before the
provisional official results were published by the
competent body, the Independent National Electoral
Commission. It should be recalled that that political
actor has never recognized any electoral results
since he entered politics. His denial of the results is
a repeat offence in that he has denied the results of
all the elections in which he has participated. In the
event that that recidivist actor does not withdraw his
groundless challenge, wisdom and the rule of law quite
naturally oblige him to comply with the electoral code
by using the competent legal mechanisms for litigating
electoral disputes.

A few delegations in the Chamber today made
statements taking shots at the recently concluded
referendum process. They are the same delegations that
put forward alarmist scenarios before the referendum,
which nevertheless, fortunately, took place under very
good conditions. I would say to those delegations that
the referendum is a victim of its own success.

With regard to media coverage of the referendum,
my delegation commends the outstanding synergy
between the public and private media. As soon as
polling stations opened, 15 public and private radio
stations provided live coverage of the elections in
real time in the four most widely spoken languages in
Burundi. That ongoing media presence reinforced the
degree of transparency of the voting, as did the major
presence of the political representatives of each party
and political coalition in all polling stations - with
the right to confirm the results of the voting operations
after counting the votes.

Speaking of the media, I would note that Burundi
was recently unfairly and prematurely condemned by
some of its partners for having temporarily suspended
the broadcasting ofthe British Broadcasting Corporation
(BBC) and the Voice of America for flagrant violations
ofjournalism standards. After a rigorous investigation,
the BBC World Service, in its 11 May letter addressed
to the President of Burundi's National Communication
Council, acknowledged that journalists involved in
arranging and conducting an interview with a guest
who had ties to the Burundian radical opposition had
acted in violation of the professional ethics and strict
rules of the BBC.

After the admission of the facts, the management of
the BBC presented its official apology to the National
Communication Council in its 11 May letter. In the same
letter, the BBC undertook to spare no effort to ensure
that such breaches of journalistic ethics would not recur
in future. The National Council of Communication
of welcomed the apology of the BBC and awaits the
follow-up to the right of reply that BBC radio promised
the Government of Burundi to quickly close this issue
in a constructive spirit. My delegation encourages the
Voice ofAmerica, which recognized in its 18 May letter
that it had broadcast biased information on Burundi, to
do the same.

With regard to dialogue as a means of peacebuilding
and the peaceful resolution of political disputes,
Burundi reiterates its commitment to peacebuilding,
unity, stability, social cohesion, national harmony, the
rule of law and the ongoing democratic order through
sustained dialogue.

With regard to the security situation, Burundi
remains firmly committed to peace, stability and
national reconciliation. The security situation is
generally stable throughout Burundi. The successful
holding of a free, transparent, democratic and peaceful
constitutional referendum and the organization, from
22 to 23 May, of the seventy-second session of the
Executive Committee of the African Parliamentary
Union in Bujumbura bear witness to that. At the end of
its session, the African Parliamentary Union welcomed
the positive developments in the political, security
and social situation in Burundi. It believes that the
normalization of the general situation in the country
should push our European Union partners to normalize
their relations with Burundi by lifting the economic
sanctions, which are unfairly causing difficulties for
the Burundian people. The African Parliamentary
Union also regrets the poor understanding of the
political, social and security situation in Burundi
following disinformation campaigns that currently
permeate the international community. During his
statement to the press, the Chairperson of the Executive
Committee of the African Parliamentary Union stated,
among other things, that "what is being said about
Burundi and what we see on the ground is different".
He said that what they had found was "a viable and
peaceful Burundi - a country that needs support in its
reconciliation and development efforts".

With regard to bilateral cooperation with our
partners, Burundi reiterates its commitment to
strengthening its mutually beneficial friendly and
cooperative relations with both traditional and
non-traditional partners in a spirit of constructiveness
and mutual respect. We must together turn the page on
2015 and set ourselves towards Burundi's future, in
particular towards peaceful elections in 2020. We wish
for a peaceful, stable and prosperous Burundi living in
harmony with its neighbours and the other nations of
the world.

In the area of human rights, Burundi continues its
efforts to promote and protect human rights from both
legislative and institutional perspectives. Here and now,
we reaffirm our full cooperation with the international
community in protecting and promoting human rights
in accordance with the ground rules established in the
Charter of the United Nations.
With regard to the return of refugees, the voluntary
repatriation movement that began in 2016 is continuing
at a satisfactory pace with the arrival of several
thousand citizens who had taken refuge in Tanzania in
particular. To date more than 200,000 Burundians have
already returned home on a voluntary basis. Burundi
expects 72,000 returnees by the end ofthis year, mainly
from Tanzania.

On the humanitarian front, Burundi hopes that
any support from the international community will be
primarily directed to the development efforts under
way in the country. Humanitarian aid should be limited
to people in emergency situations.

I cannot conclude my statement without reiterating
our urgent request to remove Burundi from the Security
Council agenda. There are no objective criteria that
justify keeping Burundi on the Council's agenda, per
the provisions ofthe Charter, which everyone is familiar
with. We are not asking for preferential treatment.
Rather, we are asking that Burundi be treated fairly like
the other Members, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

The current situation in Burundi in no way poses a
threat to international peace and security - the main
mission ofthe Security Council. Onthe contrary, Burundi
participates actively and admirably in peacekeeping
missions around the world, with more than 6,000 men
and women deployed, mainly in Somalia and the Central
African Republic. Our participation in peace missions
is to pay back the international community, which
stood by Burundi in the dark moments of its history
before the rebirth of democracy in 2005. The time and
energy allocated to Burundi should be directed to other
areas of conflict and tension, which are increasingly
numerous. I ask the Council to listen to us and consider
our appeal. Otherwise, history will remember that
Burundi was kept on its agenda above and beyond the
criteria established by the United Nations Charter, and
that risks creating a dangerous precedent.

