Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for
his briefing and for his able leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Pakistan has always supported and facilitated the work
UNAMA. We are also encouraged by the positive
feedback about Afghanistan given by Mr. Kubis even
as the Afghanistan Government tackles difficult
problems. We welcome His Excellency Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, in our midst,
and we appreciate his very important statement today.

UNAMA needs the support of all States Members
of the United Nations to ensure predictable funding
for its challenging mandate. Budgetary cuts faced by
the Mission should not compromise its core functions.
With a renewed mandate since March, UNAMA has
continued to align itself with the transition process.
The role of UNAMA should evolve on the basis of the
situation on the ground, emerging realities and, above
all, the aspirations of the people of Afghanistan.

The future role of the United Nations in Afghanistan
is going to be very important, especially in the wake of
the drawdown and withdrawal of international forces in
2014. We urge the continued engagement of the United
Nations in five critical areas: support to Government
institutions, facilitation of the peace and reconciliation
process, counter-narcotics, the return and rehabilitation
of refugees, and the coordination of humanitarian aid,
particularly food aid.

Pakistan reiterates the need to maintain the current
political and financial interest in the transition process
with a view to setting Afghanistan on a sustainable
course. In that regard, the Tokyo Conference and the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework provide a
useful mechanism of shared responsibility. Long-term
international support and private-sector investment in
Afghanistan are extremely important. Donor fatigue
and fiscal constraints in the international economic
climate should not squeeze funding in critical areas of
assistance for Afghanistan.

We have always highlighted the value of dialogue
and reconciliation in addressing the question of Afghan
security and in changing the underlying dynamics of
conflict in Afghanistan. The Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process is the essence of such a dialogue.
It rightly seeks to address the root causes of security
and tackles the fundamental nature of conflict in
Afghanistan.

Pakistan supports an Afghan-led peace process.
We fully support the efforts of the Afghan High Peace
Council under the able leadership of Mr. Salahuddin
Rabbani. His recent visit to Islamabad was productive
and successful. Pakistan will continue to contribute
to the peace process. Efforts in that regard should be
sustained and should be based on solid commitments
and tangible steps by all stakeholders. We hope that
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2082 (2012) will
energize the peace process. The sustainability of our
efforts will be ensured if all stakeholders share the goals
of reconciliation. Afghanistan's international partners
have a crucial role to play in facilitating convergences
and reducing divergences.

The challenges in Afghanistan need a
comprehensive regional approach. We will always
emphasize the importance of regional unity in dealing
with the challenges of security and development in
Afghanistan. Pakistan is engaged in a number of
important regional initiatives on Afghanistan that aim
at greater regional connectivity to promote economic
and commercial cooperation, as well as to root out the
scourges of illicit narcotics, terrorism and extremism.

Last week, the trilateral summit of Afghanistan,
Turkey and Pakistan reaffirmed our vision of regional
cooperation through high-level dialogue, security
cooperation and economic development partnership.
President Asif Ali Zardari participated in the Summit
and held important meetings with President Hamid
Karzai and President Abdullah Gul. The three
Presidents shared and promoted a common vision of
peace and progress in Afghanistan, and they said that
all three leaders, in particular those of Afghanistan and
Pakistan, would work towards the stability of the entire
region.

Last month, Pakistan organized a regional
ministerial conference on counter-narcotics, which was
attended by 13 countries. The conference declaration
seeks to establish a regional contact group on counter-
narcotics as part of a comprehensive regional approach.
It charts a concrete road map based on agreed timelines.

Pakistan's bilateral relations with Afghanistan are
driven by a sense of shared destiny. Our cooperation
spans the entire spectrum of political, economic,
educational and cultural relations. There is continuous
dialogue and a regular exchange of visits, including at
the highest levels. Our documented bilateral trade has
reached $2.5 billion, and the target set by our leadership
is to double it by 2015. Our bilateral assistance to
Afghanistan is the highest we have with any other
country. Parliamentary exchanges between the two
countries are strengthening mutual understanding and
goodwill.

In the area of security, Pakistan has always
sought closer engagement with Afghanistan and
its international partners on real issues that lie
beyond polemics. The interdiction of illegal cross-
border movement is vital to counter-terrorism, drug
trafficking and commercial smuggling. That is a joint
responsibility, which needs to be discharged more
vigorously. Pakistan has established over 1,000 posts
along our border with Afghanistan. More than 140,000
Pakistani troops are deployed on our side of the border,
at considerable financial cost. That needs to be matched
on the other side of the international border.
Our ongoing intelligence and military cooperation
with Afghan and international counterparts is
growing. The Tripartite Commission, which includes
representatives of Afghanistan, Pakistan and the
International Security Assistance Force, is a Viable
mechanism for such cooperation.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is
often eclipsed by the glare of security and political
challenges. That is unfortunate, as the country continues
to suffer from natural calamities, food insecurity and
the impact of conflict. As reported by the Secretary-
General, humanitarian funding in Afghanistan has
suffered a shortfall of 50 per cent, from $900 million
in 2011 to $484 million this year. That is worrisome
for Afghanistan and its immediate neighbours. We
urge the donor community to meet these shortfalls and
limit the impact on the most vulnerable segments of the
population.

By hosting more than 3 million Afghan refugees,
Pakistan is easing the humanitarian burden on
Afghanistan at considerable economic and social cost
to itself. After 10 years of internationally assisted
State-building efforts in Afghanistan, more refugees
should be repatriated to the country. Creating pull
factors in Afghanistan is part of the solution strategy
for Afghan refugees agreed to in Geneva this year. We
look forward to its smooth implementation.

I take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Peter Witting of Germany and his delegation for
their guidance of the Council's work on Afghanistan
in the past two years. Since this our last scheduled
public meeting for the year, I also express our sincere
appreciation and thanks to the delegations of Colombia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa for their
valuable contributions as non-permanent members. It
has been a privilege to share the Security Council table
with those delegations in 2012.

