Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, I would like to begin by thanking you for
organizing today's open debate and for your valuable
remarks. I would also like to extend my gratitude to
the Secretary-General and to the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for their meaningful input.

Furthermore, I associate myself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The most effective contribution that States can make
to the prevention and resolution of conflicts is to adhere
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations in
their relations with other States in word and deed and in
good faith. This, first and foremost, requires respecting
the political independence and territorial integrity of
other States, refraining from the threat or use of force,
settling international disputes by peaceful means, and
avoiding intervening in the internal matters of States.
The emergence of conflicts in certain cases is due to
lack of compliance with these important principles on
the part of one party or all parties concerned.

Our region has paid and continues to pay a heavy
price as certain countries have chosen to resort to
force to secure their national interests. If they remain
unchecked, such policies will cause new conflicts
to emerge or lead to the extension or deterioration of
ongoing ones. Moreover, we should stress the important
roles that States can play using their good offices to
de-escalate tensions, restore confidence, encourage
consultations and facilitate negotiations aimed at
preventing and resolving conflicts.

With respect to regional arrangements and agencies,
Chapter VIII of the Charter has clearly identified
the role that can be played by such arrangements or
agencies in conflict prevention and resolution. With the
consent ofconcerned parties, Chapter VIII can be borne
in mind when dealing with the peaceful settlement of
local disputes. It is clear that the effectiveness of the
efforts of such agencies and arrangements is dependent
to a large extent on their impartiality. Therefore, such
arrangements cannot and should not be abused by
some that seek to impose their will on the countries
of a region. This would be counterproductive, and, of
course, it violates the Charter of the United Nations.

In our view, neither can the United Nations disregard
the potentials of regional arrangements in conflict
prevention and resolution, nor can such arrangements
substitute for the United Nations in the discharge of
the duties entrusted to it by the Charter. The respective
roles of the United Nations and regional arrangements
should be considered to be complementary. Similarly,
all such activities must be carried out in full conformity
with the Charter, either by the United Nations or by the
regional arrangements.

In our view, the effectiveness of the role of the
United Nations in conflict prevention and resolution
hinges on its fully conforming with the Charter, on
consistency in the application of provisions thereof and
by avoiding politicization, selective approaches and so
on. Ultimately, nothing can better contribute to helping
the United Nations effectively fulfil its role in conflict
prevention and resolution than the trust and confidence
of the concerned parties to the Charter.

Last but not least, there is no alternative for the
principles of national ownership and the explicit consent
of parties concerned in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts.

