Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Huang Xia, for his comprehensive briefing and for
his presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/783) for the first time.

It is our view that the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region continues to serve as
a cornerstone of regional stability. We support the
unconditional implementation by all signatories of
their commitments, including respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, non-interference in internal
affairs, the strengthening of confidence-building
measures and the development of regional cooperation
and economic integration. We are confident that the
full implementation of the Framework's provisions will
have a positive impact on the overall security situation
in the Great Lakes region.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains a crucial factor in ensuring security
in the region. We are currently witnessing important
changes in the life of this major Central African State
that have already had an impact on the region as a
whole. We welcome President Felix Tshisekedi's efforts
to achieve political stability, including by establishing
constructive relations with his neighbours. We were
pleased to note the summits held in May and August
in Kinshasa and Luanda with leaders of States in
the region, as well as the decisions taken there on
strengthening security in the Great Lakes region. We
noted the important memorandum of understanding
between the Presidents of Rwanda and Uganda
signed in Luanda in August, and the first meeting of
representatives of the security services of States in the
region, held in Kinshasa in June with the participation
of the Office of the Special Envoy.

We remain seriously concerned about the situation
in the eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where a difficult political and military
situation persists and attacks by illegal armed groups,
intercommunal clashes and the Ebola epidemic
continue. Against that backdrop, we welcome the results
achieved by the Congolese armed forces, together with
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in the fight
against several groups. We call for taking advantage
of the positive changes in the region to further expand
the efforts to eliminate militants and encourage the
processes for their disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration into peaceful life. It will be particularly
important to resolve the problem of the Allied
Democratic Forces.

We share the Secretary-General's concern about
the difficult humanitarian situation in the Great
Lakes region. At the same time, we note some positive
developments in resolving the refugee problem. We
particularly want to highlight the ongoing repatriation
of Burundian refugees from neighbouring countries
in connection with the stabilization of the situation
in their homeland. We welcome the measures taken
in the framework of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to harmonize
national strategies for repatriating and integrating
refugees and address the root causes of the issue. Such
efforts show that the regional players are part of the
collective quest for responses to the challenges facing
the Great Lakes region. We hope that the remaining
disagreements between the leaders of individual
countries in the region will not affect their commitment
to the principles enshrined in the Framework. We call
on the relevant States to resolve their differences and
continue to cooperate on key issues that affect the
stability and security of the entire region. We believe
that lasting solutions to these problems can only be
found independently, with the support of the ICGLR
and other regional mechanisms, in accordance with the
maxim "African solutions to African problems".

