Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tanin, for his very comprehensive briefing on the
situation, and assure him yet again of our full support
in the exercise of his mandate. I also thank the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and the Ambassador of Kosovo for
their statements.

France actively supports the pursuit of political
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo under European
Union auspices. The recent convening of a meeting
between the Serb and Kosovo Prime Ministers, with
the participation of the High-Representative of the
European Union, was a further demonstration of the
commitment of Belgrade and Pristina to the process of
bilateral rapprochement. Fresh headway has been seen
this area in recent months, in particular the integration
of former officials of the Serb Interior Ministry into
Kosovar institutions, as well as the entry into force in
March of the agreement on the mutual recognition of
diplomas. We welcome those steps.

We are eager to see all commitments signed within
the framework of the agreements concluded under the
auspices of the European Union implemented as soon
as possible, including the creation of the association/
community of Serb majority municipalities, which is
a cornerstone of the dialogue. The normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina remains in
general terms a sine qua non for their respective progress
along the path of European integration. We therefore
urge the Kosovo and Serb authorities to intensify their
efforts to pursue dialogue in order to produce further
concrete results in the coming months.

France remains concerned by the behaviour of a
minority of the Kosovo opposition. Further disruptions
of the work of the Assembly and violence and other
acts of intimidation of elected officials are completely
unacceptable. France calls on those responsible for
such unacceptable actions to adhere to the standards
of democracy and to express their concerns in the
framework of existing institutions and with respect
for the provisions of the Constitution. Violence and
hate speech have no place in a society to which the
overwhelming majority of Kosovo citizens aspire.
Such actions imperil the progress patiently achieved by
Kosovo for more than 10 years in the process of forging
an independent, modern and democratic State. Despite
these tensions, the Kosovo authorities must seek to
keep the channels of dialogue open and continue to pay
heed to the population. Domestic reforms are crucial to
giving citizens new hope. The implementation of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement must work
to that end by fostering conditions conducive to the
required change. The Kosovo authorities can count on
our full support in that area.

Pursuing the efforts undertaken to entrench the rule
of law in Kosovo must remain a greater priority than ever.
That will entail first and foremost addressing impunity.
The speedy ratification by the Kosovo President of
the host agreement signed with the Government of
the Netherlands as a precursor to the establishment of
specialist chambers in The Hague is a decisive step
forward, which we welcome. It is a clear demonstration
of Kosovo's willingness to honour its commitments in
the area of the rule of law. It is important going forward
that all components of the specialist court take up their
work according to the established timeline and that
the Kosovo authorities cooperate fully to ensure that
the prosecutions of those responsible for the crimes
contained in the Marty report can commence.

The ongoing work on the issue of disappeared
persons is also essential. In that regard, we welcome the
recent appointment by Pristina of a Chair of delegation
to the Joint Working Group on Missing Persons. We
hope that it will provide an opportunity to give fresh
impetus to the work of that body.

The consolidation of the rule of law will involve
the fight against radicalization in all its forms. France
welcomes the unconditional engagement of Kosovo

in that area, both at the local level as well as through
the membership of the Global Coalition to Counter
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. I take this
opportunity to reiterate our support for the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, which works
daily to uphold the rule of law and security in Kosovo.

France will continue to support the efforts of
the Kosovo authorities to achieve international
recognition for their State. We welcome the recent
admission of Kosovo as the fifty-fifth member of the
Union of European Football Associations, coming as
its does just days before the kickoff of 2016 European
Championships in France. We also actively support
Kosovo's candidacy to INTERPOL and the Council
of Europe, and the strengthening of Kosovo's status
within the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe.

I conclude by again recalling our hope for
the continuation of the progressive transfer of
the competencies of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo to the Kosovo
authorities, and for a review of the reporting cycle
in the Council of the situation in Kosovo, given the
ongoing progress seen on the ground, particularly as
concerns the consolidation of Kosovo institutions and
the bilateral dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia.

