Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General and the Special Envoy
for their briefings. The United States welcomes
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga to his role and very much looks
forward to working with him.

The United States is pleased to see that the
Secretary-General's recent report on the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) noted that
the security situation in Abyei is generally calm. We
welcome the expanding economic activity, including
cooperation on the development of oil resources in the
border region, and appreciate the commitment between
local populations to preserve peace.

The United States would like to extend particular
thanks to Ethiopia for its contributions to UNISFA.
Without Ethiopia's efforts, the generally positive trend
of developments in Abyei would not have been possible.

While the political situations in Khartoum and Juba
remain fluid, the warming relations between the Sudan
and South Sudan and a stabilized security environment
indicate that there is great potential for those two
countries to capitalize on shared interests along their
border and work together to resolve border disputes.
While we commend the African Union (AU) for its
engagement in and support for addressing outstanding
border issues, we note that the Council has not received
a status update on the African Union's efforts despite
repeated requests to the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. Sustained political engagement
by the AU on the Sudan and South Sudan's border
issues is essential to ensuring that the two countries
remain committed and engaged on resolving these
issues. Taking advantage of recent trends to resolve
border issues at this time would promote stability in
the region and could be an easy win for the AU and the
nascent governments in Juba and Khartoum.

InNovember2018 , the SecurityCouncilunanimously
agreed in the UNISFA mandate that the improved
security situation in Abyei necessitated adjustments
to the peacekeeping mission (see S/PV.8400). The
United States notes with disappointment that the
troop reduction and increase in police that was agreed
upon by the Council and the parties have not yet been
implemented. We call on the Sudan to provide visas to
the incoming United Nations police without delay and
on Ethiopia to withdraw peacekeepers, in line with the
current mandate.

In continuation of the initiative of the Secretary-
General to recommend the reconfiguration of UNISFA
for the upcoming mandate renewal, the United States
supports further advancing the efforts that this organ
made in the fall of 2018.

First, the United States calls for a reasonable
reduction of uniformed personnel in UNISFA. The
improved security environment and positive bilateral
developments between the Sudan and South Sudan must
be reflected in UNISFA force levels and composition.

Secondly, the United States calls for increasing
the number of police relative to troops in UNISFA. As
the Secretary-General has observed, a reorientation
towards a police-style mission is needed to ensure that
UNISFA continues to fulfil its primary role in protecting
civilians and reducing predominantly criminal threats.

Thirdly, the United States calls for a civilian
leadership component within UNISFA. That civilian
leadership component could further facilitate
engagement among the parties to create space for a
political resolution. Those recommended changes will
appropriately reconfigure UNISFA to better suit the
security and political environment on the ground.

Finally, regarding the Secretariat's reporting
on UNISFA's performance, the United States calls
for improvements in the quality and quantity of
information provided to the Council, in line with
resolution 2436 (2018), which mandates clear detailed
and standardized reporting across all United Nations
peacekeeping mission.
In conclusion, the United States remains committed
to peace and security for Abyei and the region, and
looks forward to working with the Council and the
parties to ensure that UNISFA is adapted to the current
political and security environment.

