Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson and
Mr. Keating for their briefings. We listened with great
emotion and attention to the statement made by the
representative of Rwanda.

Today we remember the tragic events of 1994 in
Rwanda, which for the past 20 years have evoked in the
international community not only a feeling of horror,
but also a deep sense of guilt for the slaughter that took
place at end of the twentieth century - events that
could and should have been prevented. The history of
the last century, and especially the terrible lessons of
the Second World War, should have taught us that signs
of genocide must be fought with resolve and without
pandering to those who espouse a xenophobic ideology
for short-term political goals. The Russian people, some
of whom were sentenced by the Nazis, like many other
peoples were, to physical annihilation, paid a ghastly
price - the lives of tens of millions of fallen soldiers
and civilians, women, the elderly and children.

It seems that humankind has not learned the bloody
lessons of history. Nazi criminals were tried and, as
a result of the Victory over fascism, we established a
new international system. The 1948 Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
and the 1968 Convention on the Non-Applicability
of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes
against Humanity were adopted. They have allowed
certain actions to be qualified as genocide and ensured
that there is legal accountability for them.

Nevertheless, in the late twentieth century, the
international community was able neither to recognize
in time the signs of distress coming from a small
African country, nor to rescue its people. One of the
most horrifying instances of genocide occurred before
our eyes with almost complete inaction on the part of
the United Nations. How was that possible? In 1994,
there was already a United Nations peacekeeping
Mission in Rwanda. Why was it powerless in the face
of the horrific bloodshed that led to the genocide?

We believe that the answer to those questions lies
in the conclusions of the report of the commission to
carry out an independent inquiry into the actions of the
United Nations during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda
(see S/l999/l257, annex), which was created in the wake
of the Rwandan tragedy. The commission came to the
conclusion that the main reason for the United Nations
total failure to prevent the genocide was that States,
and even the itself Organization itself, lacked sufficient
political will for decisive action, even though all the
necessary instruments and the legal basis required for
making decisions already existed.

However, somebody raised the issue of protecting
staff in the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda or helping to save their compatriots who were
in the country. Someone thought first and foremost
about their internal political needs and someone
thought about maintaining their political influence in
the country. And someone simply did not pay sufficient
attention to the horrifying news coming from Kigali,
attributing it instead to the particularities of the
African continent. Indeed, the United Nations betrayed
Rwanda and the cost of that betrayal was approximately
1 million human lives.

What conclusion can we draw today as we
commemorate such a tragic anniversary? We must
continue the work being carried out by the United
Nations to correct our mistakes. Yet such mistakes
continue to be made, as evidenced by what is being
proposed by several Security Council members with
regard to the establishment of a United Nations mission
in Syria, which would somehow supposedly to stop the
violence and give the Security Council more objective
information on what is going on there.

It is important to stop using political forces that
preach nationalistic and sometimes extremist ideas for
short-term goals. It is important to understand once and
for all that a policy of accommodating such forces can
lead to the most tragic and destructive results. It was
no surprise that the need to protect and promote the
fundamental rights of minorities, regardless of their
nationality, ethnicity, race or religion, was raised yet
again at the recent International Conference on Genocide
Prevention in Brussels. Similarly, the importance of
measures to prevent incitement to violence based on
ethnic or religious hatred was also underscored.
We call on all countries to effectively strengthen
international and regional cooperation to achieve those
goals in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. That should be the focus of the Secretariat,
particularly of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide. In that context,
determining genuine priorities and appropriate goals
is highly important. Theoretical research, when truly
necessary, should be fully integrated into the framework
of existing international legal foundations.

Today as we mourn with the people of Rwanda, we
should remember that our fragile world requires our
joint efforts in order to meet its current challenges.

