Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):

Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your

assumption of the presidency of the Council for this

month. I am convinced that your abilities and

experience will ensure your successful leadership of
our work.

I thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for his introduction of his report
to the Council today.

We often feel that the international community is
not yet fully aware of the true significance of the
creation and consolidation of the ICC. The Court
undoubtedly represents a transcendent step in the
process of strengthening international law. We have
clearly stated on other occasions that, as a member of
the Council, Costa Rica intends to the best of its
abilities to represent the interests of the small States
that make up more than half the membership of the
Organization and whose independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity depend on awareness and the strict
observance of international law.

It is precisely for that reason that my country
welcomed the creation of the Court and works
assiduously to consolidate it. An international order
that is unable to deliver punishment for the most
serious crimes against humanity is one that cannot
offer guarantees or protection to the millions of human
beings who are subject to barbarity. We must raise our
voices on behalf of those innocent victims and work to
strengthen international law.

Fortunately, acting under Chapter VII of the
Charter, in 2005 the Council adopted resolution 1593
(2005), putting the capacities of the young ICC to the
test. I am that sure that, in adopting that resolution, the
Council was aware that it was not only testing the
Court's capacities, but, more important, expressing its
commitment to implementing the Court's decisions. In
referring the case to the Court, we were not merely
lending it our support, but also committing ourselves to
implementing and cooperating in the implementation
of its decisions.

If the judges of the Court accede to the new
requests of the Prosecutor by issuing new arrest
warrants, all of those responsible will have the
opportunity to exercise their full legal rights under the
Rome Statute. My delegation is concerned that such
warrants will simply be added to the list of those that
have yet to be implemented. In April 2007, the judges

of the Court issued two arrest warrants against Ahmed
Haroun and Ali Kushayb, but unfortunately those
individuals remain free and continue to occupy
important posts in the Government of the Sudan.

My Government regrets the pressure that has
been applied on this Council to work for the
suspension of the Court's decisions. We believe that
the pressure should be applied on the Government of
the Sudan so that they comply with the requirements of
the Court, and not on this Council for it to suspend the
Court's decisions.

Costa Rica agrees with and endorses the
recommendations of Prosecutor Ocampo. This Council
should begin to consider what should be our next steps
to enforce the arrest warrants, to ensure that the
Council's decisions in resolution 1593 (2005) are
implemented.

We cannot today change the facilities provided by
the Government of the Sudan for the deployment of
UNAMID. They cannot be exchanged for more new
crimes, for more impunity and for the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Sudan. Nor can we
content ourselves with new calls for cooperation with
the Court. We did that in presidential statement number
21 earlier this year, and cooperation with the Court
continues to be zero. This afternoon the Council will
hear Mr. Holmes, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, speak of the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Darfur. We cannot be
satisfied with the adjustments made for the deployment
of UNAMID and say nothing about the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Sudan.

Costa Rica recalls once again that because of its
very nature the Court is not equipped to arrest those
persons. No court of justice in the world has that role.
Costa Rica understands that execution of the arrest
warrants is up to States and, ultimately, to the
international community.

This is not the time to be content with meeting on
a six-month schedule. To the contrary, this is the
moment to increase the pressure to finally bring about
the needed cooperation with the Court. This Council
should not give in to the voices that insist that we are
endangering the peace process in the Sudan. We
already know, and we have been warned, that there
may be reprisals. The situation could get even worse,
but true peace will be closer to hand. We should
know - as the poets of old have so often said - that
night is darkest just before dawn. The Council cannot
hesitate to enforce the decisions of the Court and to
hold perpetrators responsible for the consequences of
their actions.

It is urgent that we begin a process that takes a
serious look into the issue of complying with the
mandates of the Court. We need to revise the broad
range of instruments available to the international
community to meet its objectives and to place some of
them at the service of the Court's effectiveness,
because the Court's future depends on that
effectiveness.

We are in the presence of a State that does not
want to - or is not able to - protect its population,
who are the target of war crimes, crimes against
humanity, genocide and ethnic cleansing. How much
longer will the Council delay in examining whether we
are seeing the first case of the responsibility to protect,
as stipulated in the 2005 World Summit Outcome?

We are, of course, concerned about the statements
of the Sudanese authorities with regard to the security
of internationally protected staff and the humanitarian
workers. We are concerned about the acts committed
against them every day. We recall that international
humanitarian law proscribes any attacks on
internationally protected staff, particularly on those
who are attempting to assist populations at risk, as in
the case we are looking at. We absolutely reject, and
would condemn, any reprisals against international
civil servants and humanitarian staff, and we will work
within this Council to determine who is responsible if
that turns out to be necessary.

