Mrs. Itoua Apoyolo (Congo) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation, I would first like to thank
the delegation of Denmark for its initiative to organize
this meeting during its presidency, which has provided
an opportunity for the Security Council to express its
views on a subject of great interest. I would also like to
thank Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for the briefing on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict he has just given us.

The issue of the protection of civilians has been
on the agenda of the Security Council since 1999. We
have come a long way in that time, with three
resolutions having been adopted on the matter. Those
resolutions have been referred to frequently by
speakers who have taken the floor before me. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes the Council's ongoing
commitment to this issue. We also reiterate our support
for all the measures envisaged in the resolutions that
have been adopted.

Unfortunately, despite the efforts of the
international community, including by the United
Nations, the protection of civilians in armed conflict
continues to be of major concern. Each year millions of
people, particularly women and children, are the
victims of deliberate attacks, forced displacement,
sexual violence, forced recruitment, senseless killing,
maiming, hunger, disease and the loss of the means of
subsistence. Taken as a whole, this has taken a heavy
toll on the victims of armed conflict.

In his last report, contained in document
S/2005/740 and dated 28 November 2005, the
Secretary-General deplored the absence of a
multisectoral monitoring and reporting mechanism that
would make it possible for the Council to identify
priority areas and evaluate the results of its decisions.
In that connection, the adoption of resolution 1674
(2006), on 28 April 2006, marked an important step, in
that it provided for the establishment of a framework

for the protection of civilians in armed conflict. My
delegation recognizes the urgent need for the Council
to move on to the implementation of its decisions by
considering specific steps aimed at ensuring the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Among the efforts aimed at addressing the needs
of civilians, we should urge all States that have not yet
done so to ratify without delay the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War and to implement all the relevant international
legal instruments. To date, only half of the countries
involved in armed conflict are parties to Optional
Protocol II to the Geneva Conventions, which is the
most relevant instrument relating to non-international
conflicts.

We should also call for the ratification by all
Member States of the Optional Protocol to the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel.

We must guarantee the security and freedom of
movement of United Nations personnel and of the staff
of humanitarian organizations by creating the
necessary security conditions for humanitarian
protection activities.

We need to consider stronger measures in the area
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

We need greater support for peacekeeping
activities.

We must strengthen cooperation between
international, regional and national organizations in
order to protect displaced persons.

We must also put in place a multisectoral
monitoring and follow-up mechanism to make it
possible to collect all the information necessary as
regards the protection of civilians in countries on the
Council's agenda.

I cannot conclude without recalling the idea of
the responsibility to protect, which was set out at the
September 2005 World Summit. We strongly support
that idea, for it is up to the parties to a conflict to
guarantee access for humanitarian personnel to
populations in need. My delegation also believes that
the creation of a safe environment for people and
groups at risk must continue to be a fundamental
objective of peacekeeping operations. We also remain
convinced that the best protection is to be found in
strict respect for international humanitarian law,
including the Geneva Conventions and international
human rights and criminal law.

