Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome Mr. Sergey Vasilyevich
Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation, to New York and wish him a
pleasant stay with us.

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting and Ms. Ursula Mueller for her
insightful briefing.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea remains
extremely concerned about the escalation of tensions
in north-western Syria, in particular in the provinces
of Idlib and Hama. Although it is true that there has
been some reduction in the level of violence, aerial
bombardments and attacks on the ground continue in
various parts of those two governorates. Despite the
announcement on 18 May of another unilateral 72-
hour ceasefire by the Government of Damascus in the
demilitarized zone, various reports echo the imminent
start of an operation by Government forces and their
allies against Al-Nusra Front jihadists entrenched in
Idlib and surrounding areas, who, since last week,
have been attacking positions occupied by the Syrian
forces and the civilian population with artillery fire
and rockets. In addition, the situation remains volatile
and the possibility of new hostilities is strong, which
complicates the future for some 3 million civilians
caught in the crossfire.

As Mr. Mark Lowcock said at the most recent
briefing (see S/PV.8527) to illustrate the gravity of
the humanitarian situation, since the recent military
escalation began in late April at least 160 civilians
have been killed and nearly 200,000 people have fled
the country's hostilities in southern Idlib and northern
Hama. In addition, attacks on camps for internally
displaced persons have resulted in a number of civilian
deaths and injuries, while health centres and schools
have been damaged or destroyed, leaving 400,000
students out of school. In that regard, we express our
concern about the fate of people who remain in Al-Hol
camp, in the north-east of the country, which hosts
more than 70,000 people living in extreme conditions.

Against that backdrop, we cannot completely rule
out the possibility that the parties or at least one of them
is using chemical substances as a weapon of war, as is
being reported, or that an attack with chemical weapons
may be staged to justify further offensives.

In such a context, Equatorial Guinea can only call
for restraint and for the parties to ensure full respect
for international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We reiterate the need for Russian-
Turkish cooperation to make it possible for ways to
be found to reduce tensions in the de-escalation zone
within the framework of the Sochi agreement.

I do not know if some members of the Council saw
the well-known series Game of Thrones, produced by
the Home Box Office television network. That medieval
drama and fantasy series describes some aristocratic
families who are fighting for power to conquer the
Iron Throne and rule over the seven kingdoms that
make up a vast territory called Westeros. In the last
episode of the television drama, we saw how the
mother of dragons uses the burning fire of her dragon
to conquer the capital of the seven kingdoms - the
King's Landing - by burning to ashes with horrifying
violence thousands of innocent people and all the
existing social and economic structures. In Syria, there
is no need for dragons to destroy a city.

In Game of Thrones, death and destruction are only
fiction but in many Syrian cities, air and ground strikes
have caused very real damage, wiping out thousands
of innocent families, their cultural identities and the
social and economic structures. That metaphor should
give food for thought to the parties and countries that
can exert influence in order to prevent more victims
being added to the nearly 400,000 people who have lost
their lives since the beginning of the conflict.

I conclude my statement by reiterating the call on
the parties to renounce violence and armed provocation
and to decisively commit to the peaceful resolution of
the crisis in the context of resolution 2254 (2015).

