Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands):

"I was eight months pregnant. They stomped me
and kicked my stomach with their boots, and then
they stripped me naked. I was blindfolded and hung
by my wrists from a tree. I was raped nine times,
and they left me tied to the tree.

That is but one of the many horrendous accounts of
Rohingya survivors, as reported by the independent
international fact-finding mission on Myanmar. Those
stories shock our collective conscience and implore us
to act.

Let me take this opportunity to thank Mr. Darusman
for his impressing and sobering briefing to us today,
as well as for his efforts in delivering a substantive
report. It is important that the Council hear directly
from relevant human rights bodies, as the Security
Council has the authority to refer situations to the
International Criminal Court. Many issues deserve our
urgent attention, such as the lack of access to Rakhine
state, the need to create an environment conducive
to repatriation through the implementation of the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, formerly led by Kofi Annan, and the
fate of the detained Reuters journalists.

Today, however, I will focus on accountability
and make three points: first, on the findings of the
independent international fact-finding mission on
Myanmar established by the Human Rights Council;
secondly, on the road to accountability; and, thirdly,
onthe urgent need to respond.

The report of the fact-finding mission
(A/HRC/39/64) is deeply worrying. It has based its
findings on 875 in-depth interviews with victims
and eyewitnesses that show the same clear pattern
of conduct by the military, border guard police and
vigilantes. Its analysis shows convincingly that the
gravest crimes under international law have been
committed in Rakhine state. The mission furthermore
concludes that, on reasonable grounds, the factors
allowing the inference of genocidal intent are present
and that the crimes committed against the Rohingya
may even amount to genocide. The report stresses the
need for a competent court of law to determine whether
specific individuals are guilty of those crimes. Those
findings cannot simply be taken note of and then set
aside. They implore the international community to act.

That brings me to my second point - the need
to ensure accountability for those crimes. The fact-
finding mission's report highlights the urgent need for
prosecutions for the gravest crimes under international
law and to hold those responsible to account. Justice
for the victims is an end in and of itself, but it is also
an essential prerequisite to prevent it from happening
again. Decades of discrimination against the Rohingya,
followed by complete inaction, have brought us to
this point. We cannot afford to respond with inaction
once again and allow the repetition of those gruesome
acts, either in Rakhine state or across other parts of
Myanmar where the same perpetrators are targeting
other minorities. We can see that happening now in
Kachin and Shan states.

A meaningful effort towards ensuring accountability
can also be a means to ensure that the Rohingya feel safe
enough to voluntarily return to their places of origin in
Myanmar. We would like to be hopeful about the national
commission of inquiry. The Myanmar Government,
however, in the past has repeatedly failed to genuinely
prosecute the perpetrators of human right violations.
We recall the fact-finding mission's conclusion that
it is unlikely that Myanmar's judiciary can deliver
on a fair and independent trial. In order to make that
happen, we need to step up international involvement.
The creation of the independent mechanism by the
Human Rights Council is a crucial first step to enable
future prosecutions. Preserving evidence is key, and
we strongly urge the Myanmar authorities to cooperate
with the independent mechanism and all other human
rights mechanisms. Still, holding the perpetrators
accountable for the most serious crimes is beyond their
mandate. The International Criminal Court was created
exactly for that purpose.

That brings me to my final point - the urgent
need to respond. Coordinated action by the Security
Council, including through presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/22 of November 2017 and our visit to
Myanmar and Bangladesh in April, have resulted in
incremental change for the better. However, the pace
has been slow. The Council has engaged constructively
with the Myanmar Government but needs to conclude
that this approach has yielded minimal results. We
cannot allow Myanmar to play for time while the fate
of the Rohingya remains unchanged. The international
community cannot rely on the generous hospitality of
Bangladesh forever.

The findings of the fact-finding mission demand
action not only from the Human Rights Council, the
General Assembly or the Special Envoy. It is time that
the Council shoulder its responsibility. We need to refer
the situation in Myanmar to the International Criminal
Court and use all tools available to us to create
meaningful change on the ground, including targeted
sanctions and an arms embargo. Much remains to be
done to ensure that the Rohingya can safely return to
their country and continue to live their lives in safety
and freedom in Myanmar, as they deserve. Myanmar
needs to show progress. The time to act is now.

