The President: Following consultations among
the members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the statements
of its President (S/PRST/2010/2, S/PRST/2009/23, S/PRST/2008/l6) and
emphasizes the critical importance of post-
conflict peacebuilding as the foundation for
building sustainable peace and development in
the aftermath of conflict. The Council highlights
the need for effective peacebuilding strategies to
ensure durable peace and development.

"The Security Council recognizes that
sustainable peacebuilding requires an integrated
approach, which strengthens coherence between
political, security, development, human rights and
rule of law activities. The Council recognizes the
important role that the United Nations can play in
supporting national authorities to develop
peacebuilding strategies that incrementally and
comprehensively address priority needs. The
Council encourages international partners to align
their support behind these strategies at the
international, regional, national and local levels.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of national ownership and the
development of national capacity, and
underscores that peacebuilding strategies should
be considered in a country-specific context. In
this regard, the Council recognizes the need for
national authorities to take responsibility as soon
as possible for reconstituting the institutions and
functions of Government, with a view to
addressing all key peacebuilding needs. The
Council emphasizes that support for democratic,
transparent and accountable governance is
essential in order to achieve durable peace.

"The Security Council highlights the
importance of the peaceful settlement of political
disputes in a post-conflict State and addressing
the sources of violent conflict as essential
elements for achieving sustainable peace. The
Council recognizes the importance of advancing
the peace process and peaceful coexistence
through inclusive dialogue, reconciliation and
reintegration. The Council reaffirms that ending
impunity is essential if a society recovering from
conflict is to come to terms with past abuses
committed against civilians affected by armed
conflict and to prevent such future abuses. The
Council underlines the importance of holding
free, fair and transparent elections for sustainable
peace.

"The Security Council recognizes security
sector reform as essential to the peacebuilding
process and affirms that security sector reform
should be nationally owned. Effective security
sector reform requires developing a professional,
effective and accountable security sector, in
particular national police and military capacities
under the civilian oversight of a democratic
Government. The Council highlights the
importance of a sector-wide approach for security
sector reform, which enhances the rule of law,
including through the establishment of an
independent justice and correction systems. The
Council requests the Secretary-General to
include, where appropriate and mandated, in his
reports on specific missions an indication of their
progress in supporting national authorities
towards achieving coordinated and
comprehensive international support to nationally
owned security sector reform programmes.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of pursuing political stability and
security, alongside socio-economic development,
for the consolidation of peace. The Council
stresses the importance of delivering early peace
dividends, including the provision of basic
services, in order to help instil confidence and
commitment to the peace process. The Council
recognizes that the reintegration of refugees,
internally displaced persons and former
combatants, in coordination with security sector
reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, should not be seen in isolation, but
should be carried out in the context of a broader
search for peace, stability and development, with
special emphasis on the revival of economic
activities. The Council notes, in this regard, that
high levels of youth unemployment can be a
major challenge to sustainable peacebuilding.

"While recognizing the importance of
developing State capacity, the Security Council
also emphasizes the importance of increased
attention and coherent policies to the
reconstruction of conflict-affected communities
and empowerment of affected people, in
particular vulnerable civilians, such as children,
the elderly, refugees and internally displaced
persons. The Council takes note of the need for
assistance for victims. The Council, in
accordance with its resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008), underlines the key role women and
young persons can play in re-establishing the
fabric of society, and stresses the need for their
involvement in the development and
implementation of post-conflict strategies in
order to take account of their perspectives and
needs.

"The Security Council notes that drug-
trafficking, organized crime, terrorism, illegal
trafficking in arms and trafficking in people could
constitute transnational threats with an impact on
the consolidation of peace in countries emerging
from conflict, and underlines the importance of
increasing international and regional cooperation
on the basis of common and shared responsibility
to address them effectively.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of launching peacebuilding assistance
at the earliest possible stage. The Security
Council recognizes the critical role of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in addressing
peacebuilding priorities, particularly through
marshalling support and resources and improving
planning and coordination for peacebuilding
efforts. The Council further recognizes the need
for greater coordination with the Commission and
looks forward to the 2010 review of the PBC and
the recommendations on how its role can be
enhanced.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of enhancing coordination among
relevant bilateral and multilateral donors to
ensure predictable, coherent and timely financial
support for post-conflict peacebuilding. The
Council underscores that funding mechanisms for
addressing immediate post-conflict needs, in
particular the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), should
play a catalytic role, which should be followed by
more substantial, longer-term finance as soon as
possible for the recovery and reconstruction
efforts. The Council encourages greater synergy
between the PBF and the PBC.
38

"The Security Council recognizes the need
to broaden and deepen the pool of civilian
experts, in particular from developing countries
and women, to help develop national capacity,
and encourages Member States, the United
Nations and other relevant partners to strengthen
cooperation and coordination in building such
capacities. The Council looks forward to the
recommendations of the United Nations civilian
capacity review in the Secretary-General's
follow-up report of his report (S/2009/304).

"The Security Council emphasizes the need
for the United Nations system to strengthen
strategic partnerships with other international,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
financial institutions, in particular by promoting
coherence and coordination among their plans
and programmes. In this connection, the Council
looks forward to further strengthening of the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
World Bank at both the Headquarters and field
levels, and for the Secretary-General to include in
the same follow-up report details of what steps
have been made in generating more timely,
predictable and accountable responses for the key
peacebuilding sectors as requested."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/7.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.30 pm.
