Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would like

to thank the presidency of the Security Council, held by
the Republic of Cote d'lvoire, for having convened this
important open debate on the role of States, regional
arrangements and the United Nations in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts.

Azerbaijan aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.

The prevention of conflict is critical to ensuring
a peaceful international environment. In a number of
situations, efforts to that end have successfully reduced
tensions and helped prevent bloodshed. Furthermore,
important progress has been achieved in enhancing
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
arrangements across a full range of areas - from
the maintenance of international peace and security
and humanitarian assistance to development and the
protection of human rights.

However, serious challenges remain, and my
country's practical experience of facing armed
aggression, foreign military occupation and ethnic
cleansing is illustrative in that regard. Despite Security
Council resolutions, demands and condemnation by
the international community and ongoing conflict-
settlement efforts within the framework of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the
Nagorno Karabakh region and seven other surrounding
districts of Azerbaijan remain under unlawful military
occupation, even as deliberate actions are being carried
out in the occupied territories with a view to securing
their colonization and annexation, in clear violation of
international law.

As the concept note (S/2018/1064, annex) rightly
emphasizes, many contemporary conflicts are internal
crises, which in a growing number of cases are taking
place in environments where the situation is severely
exacerbated by new threats and challenges. At the same
time, the nature of conflict has changed significantly
over the years. It is abundantly clear that the boundary
between intra-State and inter-State conflicts has
become increasingly blurred in recent decades.

The most frequent and complicated instances
include attempts by States to camouflage aggression and
disguise their role in fuelling conflicts on the territories
of other States. This obviously imposes an additional
burden on the international system and mechanisms and
on the various regional and subregional organizations
dealing with conflict prevention and resolution.
Against this background, in some instances regional
arrangements are clearly misused by those who violate
international law as a shield for consolidating military
gains and undermining efforts to achieve solutions to
regional conflicts and other security problems.

The concept note raises a fundamental question
as to how cooperation between the United Nations,
States and regional and subregional organizations in
the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts
can be strengthened in practice. Most importantly,
consistency should be maintained in identifying ways
and means for the international community to respond
to crises and conflicts, as well as to any apparent
distortion of international legal norms and principles.
Needless to say, the implementation of the resolutions
adopted by the principal organs of the United Nations
as well as accountability must be part and parcel of the
collective efforts towards that end.

The purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations constitute a foundational normative
framework in international relations. There is no
alternative to commonly agreed rules and their universal
application, including in particular with regard to the
resolution of conflicts, whatever their distinct root
causes and characteristics.

The fulfilment in good faith of the obligations
assumed by States based on full respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
the inviolability of their international borders are
prerequisites for the maintenance of international
and regional peace and security and are at the core of
economic cooperation and sustainable development.

It is our common duty to promote and support a
reinvigorated and strengthened multilateral system.
The involvement of States and regional, subregional and
other intergovernmental organizations and their close
cooperation with the United Nations must be reinforced
and integrated into a reformed peace architecture.
My country, Azerbaijan, will continue to be an active
partner in that process.

