Mr. Sahovie (Serbia and Montenegro): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting and express our appreciation for the
manner in which you are conducting the Council's
deliberations at this critical juncture. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report, and the Assistant Secretary-
General, Mr. Annabi, for his briefing today.

I should like to express my country's gratitude to
the President of the Council for the previous month,
Mr. Mamady Traore, as well as to all members of the
Council for the expressions of condolence and support
to my country in the wake of the assassination of Mr.
Zoran Djindjic, Prime Minister of Serbia, on 12 March.
Indeed, we are grateful for the understanding and
assistance offered by the international community as a
whole in the aftermath of that tragic event.

Since then, we have lived through a difficult
period, including a state of emergency, which, I am
glad to be able to inform the Council, was lifted
yesterday. In the circumstances generated by that tragic
event, we have also faced serious new challenges in
Kosovo and Metohija. Mr. Nebojsa Covic, Deputy
Prime Minister of Serbia and head of the Coordination
Centre for Kosovo and Metohija, has addressed those
challenges in detail in a letter to Security Council
members, which they will be receiving shortly.

Several grave incidents in recent weeks have
illustrated the real lack of security in Kosovo and
Metohija and, consequently, the fragility of the overall
situation. Two people were killed and three people -
two of them children - were wounded on 14 April in
an assault near Pec. A few days earlier, in the fifth
attack to take place during a single month, the last
Serbian school in Kosovo Polje was demolished.
Finally, on 12 April, in an act of violence that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
himself defined as terrorism, a railway bridge was
blown up in Zvecan municipality. The illegal Albanian
National Army (ANA) claimed responsibility for that
attack, stating its decision to sever all connections
between Belgrade and "Albanian territories". That
organization has in previous years claimed
responsibility for several terrorist attacks in southern
Serbia and the Republic of Macedonia. We appreciate
the fact that, after some initial confusion, Special
Representative Steiner proclaimed ANA a terrorist
organization and declared that United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) police
and KFOR would increase their presence in this area.
My Government appreciates Mr. Steiner's
decision to declare null and void the illegal enactment
by the Kosovo Assembly of the law on higher
education. It appreciates also the Security Council's
support for the Special Representative's decision. We
have no doubt that the members of the Council share
the concern of Serbia and Montenegro with regard to
the increasing violations of minority rights and the
existing legal framework in Kosovo and Metohija by
the Provisional Institutions.

The Security Council, the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative have repeatedly noted that
the Provisional Institutions are not sufficiently devoted
to solving the bread-and-butter issues of all the citizens
in the province. The Institutions' persistent demands
for increased responsibilities, while they infringe on
the competencies reserved for UNMIK, have also been
pointed out as a cause for concern. This kind of regular
departure from the foundations of resolution 1244
(1999) has given rise to a careful analysis of the
accelerated process of transferring further
responsibilities to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government.

We note the Secretary-General's explanation that
the responsibilities being transferred are those outlined
in chapter 5 of the Constitutional Framework, while the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General will
retain responsibilities reserved for him under chapter 8,
and that the process will be conducted in a phased
manner, taking into account the capacity of those
Institutions to assume additional responsibilities.
According to the principles of resolution 1244 (1999),
conferring elements of statehood on the Provisional
Institutions is wholly unacceptable. It is therefore
highly regrettable that several influential Kosovo
Albanian leaders have, in the face of the clear position
of the Council and the Secretary-General, recently
demanded publicly the transfer of authorities reserved
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General.

My Government also considers that the
willingness and capacity of the Provisional Institutions
to implement the Special Representative's benchmarks
must constitute an important criterion for the further
transfer of responsibilities. Disregarding this necessary
condition in the name of a speedy handover of
authority will only further endanger stability and
security in the region.

In this context, it is also necessary to note the
continuing problems presented by the functioning of
the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC). The report we
have before us concludes that the task of transforming
the KPC into a multi-ethnic body focused solely on its
mandate has lagged and that the Corps' aspiration to
serve as an army clearly contravenes the principles of
resolution 1244 (1999). Monthly KFOR reports
routinely list cases of non-compliance by the KPC,
including criminal activity. The February report cites a
case involving the Commander of Protection Zone 1.

The serious problems accompanying the
establishment of substantial autonomy in Kosovo and
Metohija, in line with resolution 1244 (1999), will be
best resolved by cooperation among all interested
parties. To that end, the Government of Serbia on 17
April supported calls by the Coordinating Centre for
Kosovo and Metohija for dialogue with representatives
of the international administration and the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government on all issues related to
the development of a democratic, multi-ethnic, multi-
confessional and multicultural society in the province.

The Government of Serbia also supported the
decision of Return Coalition deputies to continue their
participation in the work of the Provisional Institutions
and thus represent the interests of the Serbian
community in Kosovo and Metohija.

In line with my country's commitment to resolve,
in the spirit of cooperation, the issues of importance to
the stability of the region and to the everyday life of its
citizens, Foreign Minister Svilanovic recently
addressed a letter to Special Representative Steiner
expressing a readiness to establish, as soon as possible,
in cooperation with the Republic of Macedonia and
UNMIK, the modalities for opening border crossings
between Serbia and Montenegro and Macedonia, in the
area of Kosovo and Metohija. The purpose of opening
the border crossings in the vicinity of Rastelica-
Strezimir and Debelde-Tanusgevci is to facilitate
communication among the population in the border
zone, particularly their access to property they own in
the territories of neighbouring countries.

There is no doubt that discussions on practical
issues related to the daily concerns of all citizens are of
vital importance to the stabilization of Kosovo and
Metohija. In that context, it should be noted, however,
that the return of displaced persons, freedom of
movement and decentralization are critical problems
for the minority communities. So far, there has been no
real progress on these issues, but unless they are
resolved, the establishment of the democratic order
envisaged under Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) will not be possible.
Although the process of cooperation envisaged
under the Common Document on cooperation between
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK has
been stalled - not for any lack of readiness on the part
of Serbia and Montenegro - we continue to believe
that the mechanism of consultations within the High-
Ranking Working Group is the best way to move
forward. We therefore call on UNMIK once again to
revive this mechanism and make it operational and thus
relevant, as it was meant to be.

In conclusion, bearing all the aforementioned in
mind, we would welcome Mr. Annabi's responses to
the following three questions.

First, how does UNMIK intend to implement the
process of transferring further responsibilities to the
Provisional Institutions, in the light of the Secretary-
General's statistics showing that, of 36 policy decisions
taken by the Kosovo Provisional Government during
the first three months of this year, only 10 were
prepared according to the rules of procedure in force?

Secondly, what concrete steps is UNMIK
planning to take in the light of the Secretary-General's
assessment that ethnic violence and crime seem to be
on the increase and that the persistence of ethnically
motivated security incidents remains a barrier to the
free movement of minority community members?

Finally, since the Special Representative is
responsible for exercising control and authority over
the Kosovo Protection Corps, what measures are
envisaged to bring this organization in line with its
mandate?

