Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):

We would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-

General for his introduction and the Under-Secretary-

General, Mr. Pascoe, for his presentation on the
situation in the Middle East.

In a few days, in Damascus, a summit of Heads
of State and Government of the Arab League will be
convened. We hope that the summit will be a decisive
stage in the search for peace and will help to ease the
suffering endured by the Palestinian people.

As we are now well aware of the situation in the
region, which is a direct consequence of the
confrontation between Israel and its neighbours, we are
especially concerned by the humanitarian tragedy still
experienced by the population of the occupied
Palestinian territories, in particular Gaza. We therefore
reiterate our call to Israel to take a humanitarian
approach and put an end to the siege of Gaza.

We must also, however, underscore the collective
fear under which the Israeli population lives, with
rockets being launched from Palestinian territories. The
Palestine Authority, in our View, should exercise all its
rights over its territories.

We have always stated that it is, first and
foremost, the two parties, Israel and Palestine, that
must create suitable conditions for dialogue and
negotiations. In that respect, we feel encouraged by the
recent meeting in Sana'a, held under the aegis of the
Government of Yemen, of the two main Palestinian
factions, which have promised to engage in dialogue.

We also welcome the resumption of the
Palestinian/Israeli negotiations. However, we fear that
the continued construction by Israel of the wall of
separation and the expansion of its policy of settlement
in the Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem
and the occupied Syrian Golan, could affect these
negotiations.

In Lebanon, another theatre of conflict, the
Secretary-General's last report (S/2008/135) notes the
repeated Israeli Violations of that country's air space,
and thus of the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006).
Such a situation is most disturbing, and of course of
concern to the Security Council.

Moreover, and on the basis of resolutions 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006), we wish to see a resumption
of the work of the Commission charged with
delineating the Syrian-Lebanese border in order to
resolve the thorny issue of the borders, including that
of the Shebaa farms.

We are forced to note, however, that
unfortunately all these solutions seem far off as long as
the political and institutional impasse affecting
Lebanon has not been resolved, in particular by the
election of a president of the Republic.

The overall situation in the region, the
complexity and seriousness of which are keenly felt by
all of us, calls for speedy and concrete actions by the
international community, and especially by the
Security Council.

The inability of the Council to enforce its
resolutions is obvious and could, in the long run,
undermine its credibility. That is why, as we have
already stressed, the Security Council should consider
innovative, bold and pragmatic solutions that can assist
in the achievement of progress by ending the deadlock.

One thing is clear - only a comprehensive
approach, with the participation of the main
stakeholders, both from within the region and beyond,
can establish the basis for lasting peace in the Middle
East. That is the reason why my country believes that
the consideration of the Arab Peace Initiative, which
calls for the immediate implementation of the
provisions of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
could also serve as a significant step in a fair resolution
of the Middle East situation.

