Mr. Selim (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
presence here today of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
to participate at this meeting at the invitation of the
Russian Federation to discuss the issue of the settlement
of conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa and
countering the terrorist threat in the region shows
that the region requires unity from the international
community in order to confront that threat. It also
requires broader implementation and involvement by
the Security Council in the crisis in the region.

I should like to express my gratitude to His
Excellency Mr. Sergy Lavrov, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation, for the invitation to
be here.

We hope to be a member of the Security Council
in the period 2016-2017, and therefore to be involved
in confronting the threat of terrorism, which we have
known well and which we have confronted for decades.

We are also interested in the settlement of
regional conflicts before bloody conflicts affect State
sovereignty, which can ultimately have an impact
on the interests of all peoples. I believe the Russian
spokesperson was right when she stated on 27 August
that there was a need to comprehensively assess the
nature of conflicts and to determine the necessary steps
to restore national stability based on the principles of
the United Nations.

We in Egypt share that vision. When Moscow
affirms that regional crises can be effectively and truly
resolved - and this meeting represents an important
effort by the Security Council - we must act on a
consensus basis in order to put an end to conflicts in the
region. Such conflicts prevent the people of the region
from moving towards modernity, with all that entails
for international peace and security.

In making such laudalbe efforts, I believe that we
should look again at the regional picture beginning
in 2011. At that time some believed that the current
politicizing of the region would have the support of
the peoples. Some also thought that those trends were
moderate and capable of containing and marginalizing
the forces of extremism and terror that kill and destroy.

There is no doubt that those so-called Islamic
trends ran counter to the ability to govern and they have
shown that they have not understood the dynamics or
the history of our peoples. They take over power and
in an absolutist manner work against their own idea of
patriotism. They act against the people and associate
themselves with the most extreme forces.

The people then turned against them. Some thought
that those currents would come to power in the region,
and that did not take into account the diversity of
circumstances in Arab countries. Egyptian society for
its part, for example, refused to politicize religion and
refused to hand over the country to a clique that tried to
subject Egyptians. What can we say about the mosaic
society in Syria that buttressed the crisis? To be frank,

other factors were at play. We must understand that as
well.

Therefore we must accept diversity in the Arab
world. Our country has never wanted to politicize
the region, as I was saying, especially when that is
intended to subjugate the population. Syrian society is
very diversified, and that has reinforced the crisis. To
be frank, as we have tried to be, this conflict involved
other factors, some of which were internal in nature,
because some regimes in the region have lasted for
decades without reviewing their policies or the nature
of their relationship with their peoples and the regional
scope. There has also been an expansion of corruption,
opportunism and the marginalization of important
sectors of society. At the same time, the people have
become aware of their rights. This came together with
revolution and with knowledge of social media, and it is
only natural for those groups to express their ambitions
and to decide to restore their rights. Given that regional
situation, we can only call it a catastrophe. All factors
need to be addressed together.

Occupation, calls for independence, decades-long
repression and disregard of the necessary factors have
given rise to an explosive crisis. To live in peace and
stability in the Middle East is possible, but it requires
that the Palestinian people regain their rights, their
independent State and all the other rights enjoyed by
citizens of other countries. That would do away with
the polarization of extremist forces.

Whereas in Syria several wars - against terrorism,
the fight against the regime and the fight against the
moderate opposition - have merged into one, the latter
is in conflict with the regime and is waging a reciprocal
war. The multiplicity of wars is an element that further
attracts terrorists and extremists to Syrian soil and
further complicates efforts at a settlement.

What makes it possible to fight terrorism effectively
is to simplify those conflicts so that there is only one
war between two fronts, one under the flag of the State
and the other one which unites the forces of extremism
and terror. Then one can give full support to the first
front made up of the international community and the
people and then we can create a front together with the
Syrian State through the transition committee embodied
in the Geneva decision. That will allow everyone to join
that effort.

The same situation applies to Iraq. Prime Minister
Al-Abadi tries to build a united front vis-a-vis
terrorism; but things are not easy in any of the conflicts
of the region because of the confessional polarization
that has existed since the war in Iraq in 2003 and the
assassination of the LebanesePrime Minister, Rafik
Hariri in 2005. In Beirut in 2008 all ofthis was followed
by four years of conflict, and even the imposition of a
process in Yemen.

All this makes it necessary to return to the rule of
law and a situation that guarantees rights to all citizens
without exception. That is the only way out to ensure a
certain modicum of stability in the region.

We must not allow conflicts to become broader
between the Shiite and the Sunni communities, which
are both noble. We cannot politicize religion and use it as
a weapon. The situation in Libya, despite the differences
in nature and the absence of the religious factor in the
conflict, requires creating the same broader front to
face terrorism. That is what the United Nations Mission
attempts, but that requires international resolve.

The invitation by Russia to this meeting is a
foundation on the basis of which we can build in order
to involve the Council in all the factors in the region
to ensure a good outcome. I hope that we all take the
opportunity of this window in order to become partners
to fight Daesh and to establish stability in the Middle
East and safeguard the State.

