Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me thank you, Sir, for giving me the
opportunity to speak before the Security Council on the
subject of the increase in acts of piracy and armed
robbery against ships off the Somali coast. I also wish
to thank the Secretary-General for his thorough
briefing on the subject, as well as the recommendations
contained within his report (S/2008/709), with regard
to measures to be taken by the international community
to resolve the issue.

According to the information contained in the
report of the Secretary-General, the humanitarian and
security situation in Somalia is deteriorating rapidly
day by day. In spite of improvements and the
negotiations between the Transitional Federal
Government and the Alliance for the Re-Liberation of
Somalia, the violence and warring continue to worsen.
Because of our geographic proximity, we in Yemen
suffer the consequences of that deterioration in the
Horn of Africa, and especially in Somalia.

With Somalis fleeing the war and the dismal
economic situation there has been a proliferation in
piracy and the trafficking of human beings. Yemen has
spared no effort, within its means, to resolve the
Somali crisis through a series of initiatives to bring
together Somali tribes, political parties and factions
and leaders.

With regard to the issue of piracy in the territorial
waters off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of
Aden, which continue to increase, we believe those
acts pose a serious threat to the safety and security of
international maritime navigation in some of the
world's most important international seaways.
Therefore, my country condemns and denounces all
acts of piracy and armed robbery against ships in the
territorial waters off the coast of Somalia, in the high
seas and in the Gulf of Aden.

In that context, the Republic of Yemen is working
with the coastal States of the Red Sea and the
international community with regard to the
proliferation of acts of armed robbery and piracy and
the best ways to put an end to that scourge. My country
welcomes the consultative meeting of the coastal Arab
States held in Cairo on 29 November under the joint
presidency of Yemen and Egypt to discuss the
phenomenon of piracy off the Somali coast and ways to
combat it. We welcome the communique adopted at the
end of the meeting, which stated that the protection of
international marine transport and the security of the
Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden are the responsibility of
the coastal States and therefore, before any
arrangements or operations are established, there must
be prior consultation with those States in the context of
the territorial waters and international waters adjacent
to those States.

My delegation reiterates our ability to protect our
territorial waters and we are prepared to cooperate with
concerned States in order to consolidate stability and
security in the Gulf of Aden and the Arabian Sea, and
we call for concerted efforts to combat all acts of
piracy and to provide assistance to the countries
affected by that phenomenon by strengthening the
capacity of their coast guards and providing technical
and material support. My country supports
international and regional efforts in the fight against
the phenomenon.

The Republic of Yemen reaffirms that those
efforts must be in line with the relevant provisions of
international law and respect for the sovereignty of
countries over their territories and territorial waters.

Acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia and in the
Gulf of Aden have increased the social, economic and
health-care burdens of Yemen because of the
uninterrupted flow of refugees towards our country.
There have been concurrent increased costs as well as
increased need for the services of the coast guard in
order to provide humanitarian aid and help rescue
those who have been shipwrecked and who risk
drowning because of the sea itself or because of the
brutality of the shipowners. There have also been
increased costs in insurance for ships navigating the
seas in that area. Increased assistance to those coastal
States can help eliminate piracy in the territorial waters
off Somalia and the Gulf of Aden. In that context, the
Republic of Yemen welcomes the final communique
adopted by the United Nations conference held in
Nairobi on 10 and 11 December 2008, as well as the
recommendations contained therein.

My country believes that establishing a regional
centre in Yemen for the exchange of information on
piracy and for providing the necessary technical and
material support could contribute to coordinating
regional and international efforts to combat piracy and
armed robbery at sea.

In this context, my country looks to Asian
countries party to the Regional Cooperation Agreement
on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against
Ships in Asia, as explained by the representative of
Japan in his statement this afternoon. That Agreement
is in perfect harmony with the proposal put forward by
the Republic of Yemen with regard to regional
cooperation and combating piracy in our region. The
Agreement will serve as useful guidance in drafting
our own regional agreement.

My country also believes that the issue of piracy
is an inevitable result of the deterioration of the
political situation and instability in Somalia. It is also
the result of the absence of a functioning State for
17 years. It will be possible to overcome this problem
only once a comprehensive political solution that takes
all aspects of the issue into account has been reached.
In this context, the Republic of Yemen reiterates the
need for national reconciliation in Somalia.

In conclusion, we also need to state that the
piracy crisis cannot be completely eradicated,
regardless of the efforts made, because its root cause is
the international community's wilful disregard of the
situation in Somalia. The population there is at war,
and the territory of Somalia provides the context for
the settling of regional issues.

The international community thus needs to give
the attention and support needed to strengthen
Somalia's central State institutions. It also needs to call
upon the parties to form a Government of national
unity and put an end to the conflict in Somalia so that
the country can consolidate peace and security in its
own territory - land, sea and air.

