Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to express my sincere thanks and
congratulations on the adoption of the significant
resolution 2341 (2017), on the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks. I would also like
to thank the Ukrainian presidency of the Security
Council for convening this important debate. And I also
thank the briefers for their valuable presentations.

The terrorist incidents witnessed by the world
today attest to the importance of protecting critical
infrastructure, which ought to be a priority as part of
our efforts to counter terrorism, especially with the
increasing numbers of victims of terrorist incidents
that target infrastructure. Such attacks also have a
negative impact on large segments of the peoples
subjected to such attacks - one that goes beyond
national boundaries.

Today's resolution is the first of its kind to address
the protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks. It covers a number of important points that
must be taken into consideration, including the fact
that every State must determine what constitutes its
critical infrastructure, especially given the absence of
an international definition in this area, as well as how
to effectively provide protection from terrorist attacks.
The resolution also reiterates the need for inter-State
cooperation, promoting international cooperation and
information exchange and increasing awareness so as
to improve preparedness to counter attacks against
critical infrastructure.

The resolution also underscores the importance of
every country identifying and developing strategies to
eliminate terrorist risks to critical infrastructure. The
resolution urges States with capacity to provide relevant
assistance to build the capacity of other States and
empower them to protect their critical infrastructure
against terrorist attacks, including through training and
providing the necessary resources, as well as technical
assistance and the transfer of technology.

The adoption of this resolution on protecting
critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks is of vital
importance. However, more crucial is implementing
this and other Security Council resolutions on counter-
terrorism. That requires thorough follow-up by the
Council and the holding to account of countries and
regimes in the event of non-compliance when it comes
to implementing such resolutions, or in the case of
those who finance or sponsor terrorism or who harbour
or supply them with weapons. Such countries and
regimes are sapping our efforts and riding roughshod
over the resolutions adopted by the Council to defeat
terrorism. It is high time to hold them accountable for
sponsoring terrorism.

In conclusion, allow me once again to thank the
Ukrainian presidency and to assure the Council that
Egypt will remain committed to its obligations and will
be at the forefront of the efforts of the international
community to defeat terrorism, while respecting
international law, the rule of law and human rights.

