Ms. Brandt (UNICEF): UNICEF welcomes the
Secretary-General's report (S/2013/245) and this
opportunity to brief the Council. Allow me, first, to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Leila Zerrougui for her tireless efforts and those of
her Office to protect children in armed conflict. I also
thank the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
for our fruitful collaboration on child protection. Our
thanks also go to Luxembourg for chairing the Working
Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflict since January. We welcome the presence of the
representative of Save the Children, one of our main
partners in child protection.

Sadly, in 2012, armed conflicts intensified in both
reach and brutality. Civilians, especially children, were
targeted, traumatized, maimed and killed. Childhoods
were lost, families shattered and lives changed
irreparably. Some conflicts experienced a lull, and we
dared to hope for peace, only to watch them reignite.
Other conflicts, such as in Syria, had an impact across
borders and regions. With each outbreak of war,
children suffer grave violations of their rights. Allow
me to highlight two alarming trends.

The first trend relates to the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. Armed conflicts frequently
occur in urban settings. When explosive weapons such
as artillery, mortars, rockets, improvised explosive
devices and aircraft bombs are used in those areas, they
kill or injure large numbers of children. Those attacks
not only have a long-term emotional and psychological
impact on children, but also destroy vital social
infrastructure such as roads and power supplies. They
deprive children of access to essential basic services,
such as schools and hospitals, and, in the absence of
immediate medical care, injuries can turn into life-long
disabilities. We therefore urge all parties to conflict
to adopt different tactics and rules of engagement.
We urge that they neither position their troops among
civilians nor target each other in the middle of villages,
towns and cities. We urge that they adopt rules to guide
how and where explosive weapons can be used.

The second trend has to do with the use of schools in

military operations. UNICEF is deeply concerned about
that. It poses grave risks to children and educators. It
robs children of the opportunity to learn and it violates
their right to education. We are encouraged by the
leadership of countries such as the Philippines, which
have restricted the use of schools by their armed forces
and continue to strengthen their laws and guidelines.
We hope that others will follow those examples. We
must preserve schools as places of learning and safe
havens for children.

Those two trends highlight the critical role of the
children-and-armed conflict agenda. Encouraging
parties to conflict to comply with international
child-rights norms and standards is crucial if we are
to safeguard the lives and futures of children. That
must also remain our focus as we address the issue of
persistent perpetrators on the list. We do that through
action plans and country task forces. Action plans are
critical to commit parties to conflict to halting the
violation of children's rights. My call today is that those
plans be fully implemented, as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zerrougui just pointed out,
because commitments do not save children's lives,
concrete actions do. Such actions include releasing
children from armed groups, raising awareness in
communities to report violations and tracing children
and reuniting them with their families.

This year, country task forces developed ways to
accelerate the implementation of action plans by setting
benchmarks, holding regular dialogues between the
United Nations and parties and addressing bottlenecks
to progress. But there is still much work to be done. As
we monitor grave violations against children in armed
conflict, we must especially focus on prevention. That
means making sure that children are, first and foremost,
safe in their families and secure in their communities.

We have failed many children, but the story of one
15-year-old boy, a former child soldier in the Central
African Republic, should inspire us. Upon learning
that his family had held a funeral for him after he was
abducted, he was determined to tell his parents he was
alive. He joined a centre for child soldiers and prepared
to return to his village and reclaim his life. "Better
late than never," he said. It would be better still if he
had not been robbed of his childhood in the first place.
Let his courage and example inspire us to reach more
children like him. With the Council's help, we can all
work towards that noble goal.

