Mr. Arrocha Ruiz (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presence of Prime Minister Stefan
Lofven this morning and we applaud the initiative
of the Swedish presidency for convening this timely
debate to put in perspective the vulnerability of a high
number of children affected by the scourge of armed
conflicts and violence.

Panama aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Argentina on behalf of
the group of countries that have endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration.

The briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Gamba, as well as the contents of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/465), confirm that the
outlook is truly alarming. The marked increase in
serious violations, confirmed by the United Nations,
that have been perpetrated against children - not only
last year - is unacceptable and reprehensible by any
account. That is why we applaud the joint efforts of
UNICEF and the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, as they are crucial given the
current situation.

The magnitude of the impact on children deprived
of their freedom and recruited into armed groups and
forces in order to actively participate in conflicts is
substantial, as we heard at first-hand this morning from
Ms. Yenny Londofio, and we thank her for her courage
in speaking to the Council.

Even worse are the appalling cases of killings,
sexual exploitation and violence, collective violations,
forced marriages with combatants, kidnappings,
and sexual slavery and trafficking, which cannot be
tolerated by any State, and the adoption and ratification
of international instruments on the rights of children is
therefore a key element in this respect.

Accountability for crimes and serious violations
of human rights and humanitarian law in a rigorous
judicial framework must be ensured. To this distressing
panorama, in which the clear participation of certain
Government forces and non-State armed groups has
been made clear, we would add displaced children who
are seeking safe haven from the increasing number of
attacks against schools and hospitals, as well as those
who are victims of abduction, including in particular
girls being held in conflict zones, where they are more
vulnerable to physical Violations and the flouting of
their most basic human rights.

Mr. President, we wish to emphasize the value of
your concept note (S/2018/625, annex) in outlining key
areas for the debate, in particular the urgent need to
protect children and safeguard their rights. Although
the report focuses on specific regions, my country
believes that a coordinated response, in a spirit of
solidarity, is a global obligation. Threats to peace and
security increase the natural vulnerability of children,
and collective endeavours to overcome this tragedy are
of the greatest urgency. Human lives are at stake here.
We do not have the right to deprive children of a safe
present and future. States have an obligation to prevent
violations that undermine respect for international law
and for the human rights of children.

Aware of the global responsibility that has brought
us here today and with firm political resolve, my
country has deployed efforts beyond our region to
contribute to the humanitarian assistance needed by
the more than 30,000 Syrian children who are refugees
in the Za'atari camp, in Jordan. With the assistance of
UNICEF, we have dispatched Panamanian teachers who
today are cooperating on an educational programme
for these children, because we firmly believe that
access to education and to a dignified life that offers
opportunities is an inalienable right of all children.

Aware of the significant value of empowering
young people so that they can become actors for peace,
Panama will, in January 2019, host World Youth Day,
to be led by Pope Francis. The event will be aimed at
overcoming cultural and religious barriers and bring
together young people from all corners of the world,
with the common aim of achieving a culture of peace in
order to build a better world.

In recent years, Governments have made forceful
statements, signed conventions and promulgated
legal texts guaranteeing the rights of children under
the worst circumstances. However, implementation
thereof is required in order to urgently translate the
commitments made into realities on the ground. We
therefore welcome the unanimous approval of resolution
2427 (2018), proposed by Sweden, as it contains
elements of great value in this process. The link that
it establishes between the protection, rights, welfare
and empowerment of children is, in my country's view,
vital in the framework of the preventive approach that
should without a doubt be our objective.

I wish to conclude by reiterating Panama's firm
commitment to contributing to the global effort to
ensure the full protection of the rights of children in
all areas, in particular when they are faced with the
scourge of armed conflict.

