Mr. Vrailas (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.

The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and
Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2016/532). I would also like to
thank Special Representative Haysom for his briefing.

(spoke in English)

Let me start by reiterating our full support for the
important continuing role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
all of the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people and in coordinating the international
community's assistance.

The progress achieved in Afghanistan is encouraging
in many areas, but much remains to be done as progress
has been uneven and remains reversible. The ongoing
fragility warrants a realistic approach for the longer
term and calls for the sustained and predictable support
of the international community, based on the principles
of mutual accountability.

As the Secretary-General highlights in his report,
we have to meet important challenges, in particular in
terms of the economic slowdown, with persistent high
poverty rates; the struggle for political reforms, notably
as regards the electoral system and a credible electoral
calendar; and a security situation that remains a source
of real concern.

Success will require concerted efforts, which
depend on tangible progress in Afghan State-building
through the continued implementation of the reform
agenda of the National Unity Government; international
support and sustained funding at or near current levels
until 2020; increasing aid effectiveness in response
to the new Afghan national peace and development
framework and our lasting security partnership;
and regional support for a political process towards
stabilization, peace and reinforced cross-border
economic cooperation.

A wait-and-see attitude is hardly an option and
risks costing much more tomorrow than it might save
today. The signal of our lasting, mutual engagement
has real impact not only on Afghanistan but also on the
wider region: on stability, on possible peace talks, on
economic development and on migration.

Let me underline the need for the Afghan people,
especially the youth, to be able to see a viable future in
Afghanistan. In this regard, the capacity ofAfghanistan's
institutions to address the population's basic needs and
to reduce poverty will be a determining factor. This will
require the Afghan Government to promote sustainable
economic, social and environmental development,
including sustained job creation for women and men
alike, while further improving governance, tackling
drug production and trafficking, as well as further
strengthening fiscal sustainability.

The first draft ofthe new Afghan national peace and
development framework is encouraging. It is important
that the framework focus also on the important issues
of good governance, the rule of law, anti-corruption
and human rights. Progress must be made with the
new national priority programmes and the update
of the Self-reliance through Mutual Accountability
framework. All three are linked and will be important
deliverables in the run-up to the Brussels conference,
to be co-hosted by the Government of Afghanistan and
the European Union in October this year.

However, even more important is to cross
the threshold from policy concepts to actual
implementation, despite the difficult legacy that the
National Unity Government is facing. Corruption in
particular is a critical challenge in this regard, and the
implementation of effective anti-corruption measures
is of paramount importance.

Only a stable political and economic environment
will help consolidate Afghanistan's nascent democratic
institutions and promote the establishment of a reliable
rule-of-law framework with safeguards to respect,
protect and promote human rights, in particular women's
and children's rights. Significant progress in this
respect has been made in recent years in Afghanistan,
but much remains to be done, in particular to ensure
the full enjoyment of women's and girls' rights and
women's empowerment at all levels of society, which
is a priority.

In this context, I would like to highlight that
substantial cooperative efforts will be necessary to
address large population movements and the issue of
irregular migration. They represent a severe constraint
for the development of Afghanistan's society and
economy, as well as a pressing challenge to the region,
transit States and the EU, where Afghans remain the
second-largest group of arrivals in 2015.
Irregular migration is a real political challenge,
and that is why the EU has made the offer of a new
political framework to address this pressing problem:
the Joint Way Forward. Effective cooperation on the
return and readmission by the Afghan Government of
its nationals, in full respect of their fundamental rights
and in accordance with international commitments and
obligations, is its central element. We hope to agree
on and effectively implement the Joint Way Forward
as soon as possible. The EU stands ready to support
its implementation through substantial reintegration
assistance so as to help create a conducive environment
that can offer Afghan citizens opportunities within
the country.

I would also like to briefly highlight the formidable
challenge that minefields still pose for security and the
socioeconomic development of the population. We call
for a sustained demining rhythm and commend the work
of mine-action partners and the Afghan authorities.

In this crucial phase, when we are heading towards
the upcoming NATO summit in Warsaw and the
Brussels conference on Afghanistan in October, let
me stress that we have a collective responsibility for
stability and State-building in Afghanistan and the
wider region. Security and sustainable development
represent interconnected challenges in such a
State-building process, which needs to be underpinned
by genuine political support within the region. A secure,
stable, and prosperous Afghanistan is vital to the peace
and stability of the region as a whole. It is probably
the best reason to join forces in the region, to set aside
differences and to use one's respective influence with
the parties to the conflict.

We need to promote a genuine and results-
oriented negotiation process aimed at creating a lasting
settlement that will provide the foundation for peace,
security and prosperity both in Afghanistan and the
wider region, and we know how important UNAMA's
work is in this context. At the same time, it is imperative
that any agreement not set back the rights of Afghan
women and girls.

The EU encourages the multilateral efforts under
way to support the Afghan Government in promoting
a meaningful, Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process as the only viable path towards the sustainable
resolution of the conflict. It welcomes and supports the
efforts undertaken by the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group to create a conducive environment for such a
process. Ending the armed conflict in Afghanistan is
urgent and in the interest of all who seek development
and stability, prosperity and peace.

Let me conclude byjoining others in paying tribute
to Special Representative Nicholas Haysom for his
outstanding work, his personal commitment and his
integrity, as well as his untiring energy in contributing
to a better future for all Afghans, the sort of future that
they both want and deserve. We wish him all the best
for his new challenging assignment in Africa.

