Mr. Vermeulen (South Africa): First of all, I would
like to thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. My
delegation thinks it is timely. We would also like to thank
the Council for giving us the opportunity to address it on
this matter.

The South African Government is extremely
concerned at developments, not only in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but also in the region. Should the
conflict not end soon it might expand further to include
larger sections of our continent. Although the present
conflict started on 2 August 1998, it has its roots in many
years of mismanagement and corruption in the former
Zaire. The South African Government believes that the
ousting of the former President, Mobutu Sese Seko, in
May 1997, created an ideal opportunity to empower the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
discussions held on the South African naval vessel, SAS
Outeniqua, which preceded President Mobutu's departure
and also involved the current President of the Republic of
the Congo, Mr. Kabila, had as its purpose the
establishment of a broad-based political order within a
proper legal framework.

Unfortunately, this is history, and the region, as well
as the continent, is faced with an extremely complicated
conflict in an inhospitable environment. Since the
outbreak of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the South African Government has taken a
consistent and clear position, based on its belief that
lasting peace can be ensured only through all-inclusive
negotiations involving all parties to the conflict.

Our Government remains convinced that the
outcome of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) summit, held in Pretoria on 23
August 1998, provides the framework for a negotiated
solution to the conflict. The summit called for a ceasefire,
a cessation of hostilities, the withdrawal of all foreign
forces involved in the conflict, and negotiations among all
inhabitants of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
aimed at re-establishing a democratic government in the
country.

Within this context, our Government has been fully
supportive of the efforts of President Chiluba of Zambia,
in accordance with the mandate given to him by the
SADC summit held in Mauritius in September 1998, to
bring about a ceasefire in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The South African Government has in fact been
actively involved in the regional talks held in Lusaka,
Gaborone and other cities, talks aimed at getting
agreement among all parties to the conflict - including
the rebel forces - on the terms of a ceasefire and the
modalities of its implementation.

Our Government maintains the view that there is
clearly both an internal and an external dimension to the

 

conflict. In our opinion, all belligerents in the conflict
should participate in the search for a ceasefire if a
permanent end to the hostilities and lasting stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region are to be
achieved.

Of immediate concern to our Government is the
cessation of all hostilities and that a ceasefire document
should be signed by all belligerents. The signing of a
ceasefire should be followed by the establishment of an
appropriate international monitoring mechanism under the
auspices of the Organization of African Unity and of the
United Nations.

This ceasefire agreement should be followed by the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in a predetermined procedure which
should take into consideration the removal of military
threats to the present Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as guaranteeing the security
of neighbouring countries.

A further aspect which is of critical importance is that
all belligerents should commit themselves to peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well
as in the Central African region. With regard to stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the South African
Government is of the opinion that all political groupings in
that country should be able to participate in negotiations
aimed at establishing a representative national government.

On the issue of regional security, we have taken note
of calls by some countries for the convening of an
international conference encompassing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and affected neighbours. Gaining
international support for the reconstruction and development
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo should be an
important aspect of such a conference.

Our Government is also extremely concerned at the
general deterioration in the respect for human rights in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since the start of the
conflict. This has revealed ethnic divisions which continue
to prevent movement towards lasting national reconciliation.
The lack of respect for human rights seems to be prevalent
in most of the regions of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo where conflict is taking place.

The South African Government condemns all human
rights violations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and we request all belligerents to adhere to international
agreements and conventions with regard to a situation of
conflict and to ensure general respect for human rights,
especially those of the civilian population.

The South African Government looks forward to a
speedy resolution of the problems in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This is the only way in which the
situation will stabilize and allow the citizens of that
troubled land to enjoy the peace and stability they are all
entitled to.

