Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Ambassador of Belgium for his briefing and reiterate
France's full support for the realization of his mission.

I will focus on three points.

The first concerns the arms embargo, which, as our
United Kingdom colleague mentioned earlier, is vital.
It directly impairs the ability of terrorist groups, in
particular Al-Shabaab, to acquire weapons and therefore
cannot be considered an impediment to combating
terrorism. It also plays a useful role in preventing
trafficking in arms and ammunition, especially from
Yemen. Finally, above all, it provides support for the
Somali authorities in reforming the security sector
and improving their capacities to manage weapons
and ammunition. We have noted progress, but we also
see that difficulties persist with regard to documented
cases of weapons diverted from the Somali armed
forces to be found in the black market or in the hands of
members of Al-Shabaab.
My second point is that we must step up the fight
against the financing of Al-Shabaab. In that context,
we note that no illegal Somali charcoal exports have
been reported since the summer of 2018, which is good
news and demonstrates that the work done by the Panel
of Experts, together with certain Gulf countries, has
been successful. We must, however, remain vigilant to
ensure that such traffic does not resume.

We know that Somali charcoal is not Al-Shabaab's
only source of funding. The terrorist group also
generates very significant amounts of revenue from
trafficking in arms, sugar and tobacco and new forms
oftaxation, including on imports arriving at the port of
Mogadishu. It is therefore absolutely necessary that the
Somali authorities, with the support of the international
community and the Security Council, intensify their
vigilance and actions to combat the financing of
Al-Shabaab. We also hope that the Panel of Experts,
which enjoys particular expertise in this area, will be
able to support the efforts of the Somali authorities in
combating the financing of Al-Shabaab.

My last point concerns the cooperation of the
Somali federal authorities with the Panel of Experts. 1
will be very clear on this point. For almost 10 months
the Security Council has been calling on the Somali
authorities to cooperate fully with the Panel, which
is mandated by the Council. The chairmanship of the
751 Committee has spared no effort to find a solution.
Nevertheless, the Somali authorities have continued to
refuse to cooperate with the Panel of Experts, which
constitutes a direct challenge to the authority of
the Council.

In that regard, we find it unacceptable that
the Security Council should receive by letter new
injunctions from the Somali Federal authorities, setting
new conditions for cooperation with the current and
future Panels of Experts. Without a change in attitude
on the part of the Somali authorities, we might have to
reconsider our position with regard to the considerable
support that the international community has been
providing for the security of Somalia for years. France
therefore unequivocally calls on the Somali authorities
to cooperate with the new Panel of Experts as soon as
its members are appointed, including by allowing it to
visit the country.
Lastly, I recall that we continue to believe that
Eritrea must commit to working in good faith with
Djibouti to resolve the border dispute between the two
countries and the issue oijibouti prisoners ofwar. The
Council must continue to follow those two unresolved
issues, for which concrete and rapid progress would
make it possible to strengthen the peace process in
the region.

