Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and
Mr. Alexander Hug, Deputy Chief Monitor of the
Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for their
briefings.

The latest developments on the ground are
worrying. I refer of course to the resumption of fighting
on Wednesday in Marinka, west of Donetsk, and of
the increase in incidents at numerous points on the
front line. According to the information we have, the
attack was launched by separatist troops in violation
of the commitments made in Minsk on 12 February.
We firmly condemn all violations of the ceasefire
declared in February and urge the parties to respect
their commitments under the Minsk agreement's
implementation package.

It is clear, however, that the fighting, which is at a
level ofintensity not seen since February and the attack
on Debaltseve, comes primarily from limited forces
in a sector that has already been the scene of several
violations of the ceasefire, to our regret. As far as we
know, the separatist forces amount to a half-battalion
supported by armoured elements and they have been
halted. The situation, however, presents a number of
features that call for extreme vigilance, particularly
the concentration of heavy weapons that violate the
Minsk agreement, which must be stopped immediately.
Similarly, the presence among the separatists of many
foreign fighters who are radicalized, bellicose and
undisciplined shows that Moscow must do more, and
do better, to control the actions of the separatists and
mercenaries.

The deterioration of the situation on the ground
should not detract from the overall situation in Ukraine.
Despite the attack, the Minsk process is ongoing
and there are true signs of hope. From the security
perspective, the Minsk process has launched a positive
momentum, even if it has been only unevenly applied
to date. The average number of victims per day has
dropped significantly since the adoption of the Minsk
package on 12 February. More than 2,500 Ukrainian
soldiers have been released.

Furthermore, at the second level of the process,
there have recently been tenuous but encouraging
developments in the political process. In particular,
the working groups proposed by Ms. Tagliavini in her
statement before the Council three months ago (see S/PV.7400) have been established and have already
met. Discussions are still getting off the ground. They
have been delayed by numerous signs of distrust and
sensitivity on both sides. We note that in the groups,
substantial and productive debates have achieved
tangible progress on organizing elections in the
separatist zone. In particular, a voting method for the
separatist zone has been accepted by all, and that is a
positive sign that touches on one of the key aspects of
the crisis.

Similarly, the Trilateral Contact Group, the
cornerstone of the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, within which the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and plays
a crucial role pursuant to resolution 2202 (2015), has
met on several occasions. In that regard, we regret the
change of heart of the Russian party which, in leaving
the discussion table with great fanfare on Tuesday,
is attempting to impose the separatists as the sole
Ukrainian interlocutors in that forum. We remind
Russia, a member of the Trilateral Contact Group and,
more than any other party, subject to the provisions
of resolution 2202 (2015), that it cannot shirk its
obligations. The conflict in Ukraine is not a domestic
crisis in which Russia can simply play the role of
well-meaning mediator between two camps. Everyone
knows the role that it has played in the crisis from the
start, and Russia has been paying the consequences
since then.

We are at a moment of truth in the Ukrainian crisis.
The future of the Trilateral Contact Group is at stake
and we cannot allow that crucial part of the diplomatic
framework, which was put together so painstakingly, to
be simply withdrawn and disqualified, particularly as it
was endorsed by the Council in resolution 2202 (2015).
More broadly, we must do all we can to maintain the
momentum and methodology that we have used up til
now. Our priority must be the full implementation of
both the security and political aspects of the Minsk
package, which must enter into force simultaneously
before the end of the year. Respect for the timeframe
established in Minsk is crucial and in our opinion it is
unacceptable that it be allowed to slide. The timeframe
is ambitious, but the Minsk process is the only possible
means to avoid a resumption of violence from which no
one would benefit.

A Normandy format follow-up meeting of political
experts will take place in Paris on 10 June. We call
on Russia to stop trying to extricate itself from the
negotiating process and to exercise its responsibility
over the separatists. It is, moreover, important to stress
to the Kyiv authorities that they must begin a real
dialogue with the separatists in order to organize local
elections in full respect for the Minsk timeframe, and
to implement the decentralization of Ukraine. When
proposals made by the separatists are unacceptable
to Ukraine, it must respond with its own so that the
negotiations can move forward.

At this crucial moment in the implementation of the
Minsk process, our commitment is more important than
ever. The commitment of France is unwavering. In the
context of the Normandy format, France and Germany
will continue to bring pressure to bear on the parties to
ensure that the OSCE enjoys the freedom of movement
it requires to perform the tasks entrusted to it under the
Minsk agreements, particularly in terms of monitoring
the ceasefire and the withdrawal of weapons.

Finally, we recall our commitment to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial independence of Ukraine
within its international recognized borders.

