Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French): I, too,
wish to begin by extending a warm welcome to
Mr. Didace Kiganahe, Minister of Justice of Burundi,
and by thanking him for his very enlightening
statement. His participation in today's meeting gives us
an opportunity to convey to him personally and to the
authorities and the people of Burundi a message of
encouragement and support for the continuation of
their efforts towards national reconciliation and the
establishment of a climate of justice, with a View to the
development of Burundi as a stable State. I wish also to
thank Mr. Ralph Zacklin for his presentation, which
was extremely clear and interesting.

Romania has regularly emphasized the need for
the United Nations, the Burundian authorities and the
countries of the region to make a concerted effort to
put an end to the climate of impunity in Burundi and to
ensure that those who have violated human rights may
be brought to justice without delay. In that context,
priority must be attached to strengthening the country's
judicial system in order to provide conditions more
conducive to bringing the perpetrators of such acts to
justice.

In that same vein, we endorse the approach
recommended in the Kalomoh report (S/2005/158)
towards establishing the truth and creating a climate of
justice in Burundi through the creation of a
commission of inquiry of mixed composition and a
special chamber. We believe that the principles of
justice and the rule of law must apply at the local level;
to a great extent, progress towards genuine and
effective justice depends on local ownership of the
process. At the same time we are of the View that
measures in the sphere of criminal justice must be
accompanied by a non-judicial mechanism to ensure a
substantial contribution to the promotion of national
reconciliation.

Here, we are highly encouraged by the
Transitional Government's reaffirmation of its political
will to eliminate impunity and to lend all necessary
support and cooperation to the establishment of the
judicial mechanisms that have been proposed.

I take this opportunity to reaffirm once again our
opinion that any resolution of the situation in Burundi
must be based on a coordinated regional approach. In
that regard, I would ask the Minister of Justice whether
he could shed further light on what possibilities he sees
for strengthening practical regional arrangements in
support of the activities of the mechanisms to be
established with a view to combating impunity in
Burundi.

Finally, we believe that the United Nations
Operation in Burundi could play an even more
important role by becoming involved, within the terms
of its mandate, in the process of capacity-building for
the Burundian judicial system.

