Mr. Spinellis (Greece): I, too, would like to thank
the Lithuanian presidency for organizing this timely
and important debate.

More often than not, civilians constitute the bulk
of the victims of armed conflicts around the world.
Although, at the normative level, significant progress
has been made over the past decade to enhance the
protection of civilians, the same progress has not been
reflected on the ground. Security Council resolutions
and the Secretary-General's reports, although
unanimously adopted and endorsed by Member States,
lack the required implementation in the field. A more
efficient and better coordinated protection effort is
needed in order for the necessary level of protection to
be reached.

Enhancing the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is one of the core responsibilities of the
Security Council,. Although the main responsibility
lies in the hands of the parties involved in a conflict,
the protection of human dignity, along with the
consolidation of human rights, is the responsibility of
all Member States.

The use of new weapon technologies is a new threat
to civilians and, at the same time, raises questions
about the compliance of those weapons with the rules
of distinction, proportionality and precaution set out
in international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. However, that same technology is
capable of facilitating the tracking and recording of
civilian casualties, while contributing to easing civilian
suffering and pain and to bringing perpetrators to
justice. Humanitarian access and the relevant corridors,
whenever feasible, should remain unimpeded.

On another note, attacks against journalists and
media personnel covering armed conflicts continue to
increase. Local journalists account for the majority of
victims, and female journalists are routinely targeted.
Combating impunity will undoubtedly decrease the
deaths, including among journalists working under
dangerous conditions.

Moreover, the role of journalists in conflicts is
further expanding, as they remain in the field from
the very beginning until the end of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. Besides, journalists' role in
reporting on conflict is dependent upon their ability
to provide independent and fair coverage of all sides.
However, with a changing media landscape that relies
increasingly on freelancers, Internet journalists and
social media, conflict journalists and their work are
becoming progressively more vulnerable.

My delegation shares the View that the protection
of civilians should include, in all its aspects, the
component of the protection of journalists in an effort
to introduce this dimension into the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding stages through a comprehensive
approach in which training plays a crucial role. Training
is a fundamental pillar, and Greece is contributing to
that effort by supporting training initiatives to develop
safety and security for civilians, peacekeepers and
United Nations staff in the field.

In that vein, we also welcome the presentation
provided on the protection of civilians in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, and we note
the attention given by the Special Committee and its
sensitivity to the issue of the protection of civilians.

The protection of civilians remains a serious
challenge for the international community, but we
cannot allow ourselves to fail.

