Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Israeli and Palestinian relations continue to
deteriorate. The suicide attacks against Israeli civilians
and the Israeli reprisals against Palestinians, which
have led to the death of people, are only strengthening
the logic of confrontation. This does not help ensure
security for both sides or their legitimate interests.
Furthermore, all this seriously complicates efforts to
achieve a political settlement ofthe crisis.

The most serious concern has been raised by the
humanitarian disaster in the Palestinian territory. As a
sponsor of the peace process and an active participant
of the "quartet" of international mediators, Russia is
undertaking energetic steps to remove Israeli and
Palestinian relations from the vicious circle of
confrontation. To that end, the Russian Government is
in constant contact with the Israeli and Palestinian
representatives and the leaders of the Middle Eastern
States. The special representative of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation is in the
region almost constantly. The situation was discussed
comprehensively within the framework of the meeting
of the G-8 Foreign Ministers meeting of 12 June, held
in Canada.

During the past month the Security Council has
adopted several decisions that have set out the road
map for overcoming the crisis and for stabilizing the
situation, as well as for moving towards a political
settlement, including the establishment of a Palestinian
State to exist peacefully alongside Israel with
internationally recognized borders. We believe that the
priority task at this stage is the development of
machinery for the parties' compliance with existing
Security Council resolutions. That guides the efforts of
the "quartet".

The coming meeting of the "quartet" on 14 June
in Washington should be an important step in efforts
designed to dissolve the tensions in Palestinian-Israeli
relations and to establish the conditions for moving to a
political settlement, including through holding an
international conference on the Middle East. The
Security Council's task is to help in these efforts in
every way possible and to ensure it the support of the
international community. Attempts to use the Council
Chamber for mutual recrimination and all types of
argumentation is counterproductive. It only makes the
work of the "quartet" and many Arab countries to
achieve compliance with United Nations resolutions
more difficult.

