Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Embassy of the People's Republic of China in
Belgrade has been destroyed by North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) missiles, causing deaths,
disappearances and serious injuries.

The United States and NATO, which refer to civilian
dead and wounded as "collateral damage", now cynically
declare that the Embassy was not a deliberate target, that it
may have been an accident, that they are investigating, that
they do not attack civilians and that we must see the "big
picture". It is not an accident, but an act of aggression.
After one has seen the terrible images traversing the world,
there is not much to investigate. Furthermore, there is
information that today other civilian targets were bombed.

The Government of the Republic of Cuba forcefully
condemns this new act of genocide, which constitutes a
flagrant violation of the sovereignty of the People's
Republic of China, of the Charter of the United Nations, of
international law and of the Geneva Convention.

As Jose Marti said, the truth must be spoken. The
Security Council cannot remain impassive and silent, as
though it were unaware that the yesterday's bombings and
those of the past 45 days have brought death, injury,
hunger, desolation and terror to millions of people.

The hundreds of civilians killed, many of them
children, the thousands of civilians injured, the passengers
burnt to death in the Grdelica gorge train, the dozens of
journalists killed in the bombing of the Serbian television
station, the children trapped in the mangled iron remains of
the refugee convoy on the Djakovica-Pec road and the
people who were travelling in the bus on the Luzane
bridge may not for now be present in the records and
resolutions, but they are present in the consciences of all
of those seated around this table and, more importantly,
in the consciences of those peoples that feel - rightly, in
almost every case - that this place has little to do with
their lives and aspirations.

The United States and NATO are deliberately using
technologically advanced weapons in order to interrupt
the supply of energy for health services, water supply and
food production, as though they were unaware that they
would cause humanitarian consequences by cutting off
electricity, heating, communications, energy and transport,
by destroying civilian facilities that provide essential
services to the population, information sources and the
livelihoods of the population and by engaging in
psychological warfare.

Residential buildings, hospitals and health centres,
schools, old-age homes, historical monuments, churches,
places of worship and works of art have been destroyed.
Civilian targets have been intentionally attacked, with
prior knowledge that they were occupied by civilians and
that those attacks would result in their deaths. This is a
gross violation of the Geneva Protocols and international
humanitarian law.

How is it possible that the Security Council does not
at least call for a cessation of the brutal bombing against
the peoples of Yugoslavia when considering this subject?
Can anyone believe the refrain that the war is not against
the Serbian people? NATO, headed by the United States,
is committing acts of genocide. The genocide must stop.

The attacks in recent hours on the Chinese Embassy
and on civilian targets show that there has been no
progress at all towards a political solution, despite what
is being said. Actions speak louder than speeches and
papers. How can the Group of 8 agreement be considered
acceptable if that agreement begins by ignoring the main
cause of the tragedy, which is the NATO bombing? There
can be no just or worthwhile agreement unless the
aggression, acts of genocide, bombing of civilian targets
and the systematic attempt to deprive a nation of its
means of subsistence are first brought to an end.

As President Fidel Castro has said in recent days,
"Our opinion is that only a political solution is

possible in that situation, not a military one,
and that it must be based on respect for the rights of

 

all the countries of the region, their religions, and their
ethnic groups and cultures - a solution for both Serbs
and Kosovars. I have the complete conviction that this
problem will not be resolved through the use of force.
I have the complete conviction that all military
technologies are dashed to pieces against the will of
any people that is resolved to fight. It is my
conviction that there is no alternative but to seek a
political solution and that such a solution is possible
using a little common sense and reason."

I can assure the Council that the Cuban diplomats who
remain in and move around everyday in Belgrade are
qualified as witnesses to what is now occurring.

Cuba hopes that the Security Council will act
immediately in accordance with its responsibilities and that
it will resume its role under these exceptional and
emergency circumstances. If it does not do so, the damage
to international order, to the collective security of States
and to the United Nations will be irreparable. The historical
responsibility will be enormous if the Security Council
continues to allow itself to be subordinated, sullied and
scorned.

It is the task and unique duty of the Security Council
to regain the powers and mandates assigned to it by the
Charter. Its most urgent and important task is to halt the
genocide and stop the NATO bombings. Having
accomplished that, its task will then be to find the path
towards a just and dignified political solution that respects
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and all the States of the region.

Cuba hopes that the Security Council will neither
accept nor endorse any project that is based on force,
inequality or pillage; that it will neither accept or endorse
a discussion of the elements of a peace process under
NATO bombardment; and that it will neither accept nor
endorse any agreement before halting the genocide. Failing
this, the Security Council will have to be counted not only
among the victims, but also among the accomplices.
Let us hope that it will not be necessary to wait 20
years for someone to bitterly recognize, in the year 2019,
that this war was a lamentable error. This has happened
before, but not before 4 million Vietnamese and 50
thousand Americans had to die. We sincerely hope that a
just, dignified and lasting peace will be re-established for
all the peoples that built a fraternal federation on the ruins
of the Second World War and that lived in prosperous
harmony for more than 40 years.

