Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I wish to greet the
Permanent Representative of Colombia in this Chamber
and also to join others in expressing our heartfelt
condolences to the people of Colombia on the tragic
landslide in Mocoa.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his briefing and for the
effective contribution made by the United Nations
Mission in Colombia to the peace process in the
country. We welcome the many positive developments
that have been witnessed. My delegation wishes to
make the following observations and recommendations
with a view to furthering the peace process.
The Colombian Constitutional Court will need
to improve the revised peace agreement adopted by
the Congress for it to take effect as soon as possible.
We commend the formation of the transitional justice
tribunal, the truth commission and the missing persons
search unit to redress the grievances of the 8 million
victims. The amnesty law ratified by President Santos
should result in further bills and pardons, with measures
for the demobilization and disarmament of some 7,000
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-People's
Army (FARC-EP) rebels.

The process of the laying down of weapons must
be rigorously carried out in the 26 demobilization
camps. Thus the active coordination of the tripartite
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism, consisting of
the United Nations, the Government and FARC, will
accelerate the process offull and effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. Equally important
is the peaceful reintegration of former FARC rebels
into society. At the same time, we must ensure that all
parties to the peace process strictly comply not only
with the provisions of the peace agreement but also
with international humanitarian law.

We encourage the Government to continue
negotiations with the largest left-wing rebel group,
the National Liberation Army, with a view to ending
the confrontation. We are concerned that the National
Liberation Army is continuing to commit acts of
violence that destabilize the country, hence we urge
that a bilateral ceasefire agreement be concluded at the
very earliest.

We need a vision of peace that is truly bottom-
up, one that endeavours to break the vicious circle of
violence and leads to a true institutional strengthening
and the protection of peoples' rights. The country has
lost years of potential progress, and it is thus critical to
create an adequate socioeconomic structure that is able
to support this young democracy. The private sector has
inputs to make and must unite with the public sector to
move Colombia forward.

It is clear that a post-conflict Colombia will pose
challenges and offer opportunities. Job creation and the
establishment of infrastructure and State services such
as schools and hospitals in former guerrilla strongholds
will narrow the wide gap between rural and urban areas.
In addition, dismantling organized-crime networks will
have to remain a priority.

Achieving peace in Colombia is critical to achieving
a more stable world. Such a commitment is necessary,
together with that of the United Nations system and
regional organizations, especially the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, in assisting
Colombia with the reform process.

Finally, the ceasefire is still fragile, but the future
of Colombia holds the promise of progress. Kazakhstan
will work with the United Nations and other Member
States to overcome challenges and to build a peace that
lives up to the aspirations of the Colombian nation and
the world. We look forward to Visiting Columbia in May
to attest to our strong support for the peace process in
the country.

