Mr. Ivanov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): First,
allow me to associate myself with the gratitude
expressed by previous speakers for the opportunity
offered by this meeting of the Security Council in the
present format.

The dynamic of the development of events
concerning Iraq and the consideration of this question
within the Security Council are the focus of the close
attention of the President and the Government of the
Republic of Belarus. Belarus is convinced that the
international community has available to it specific and
practical possibilities for maintaining the process of
Iraq's disarmament on a political and diplomatic plane.
Shifting the problem of Iraq to a military plane without
making use of those possibilities would run counter to
the interests of international peace and security and the
imperatives of international law.

The Republic of Belarus favours the continuation
and stepping up of the activities of inspectors in Iraq
and calls on the Government of Iraq to follow
unswervingly the policy of constructive cooperation
with the United Nations and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). We find counterproductive
any kind of ultimatum limiting the time frame for the
activities of the inspectors or for the process of Iraq's
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

Belarus is deeply concerned by the rhetoric in
favour of the use of force as a means of resolving the
problem and by the continuing escalation of tension
around Iraq. We firmly oppose the unilateral use of
force against Iraq in Violation of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity and the bypassing of the Security
Council.

A solution acceptable to the international
community on the question of Iraq can be found only
within the framework of the competence of the
Security Council and must be strictly complied with by
all members of the international community.

The President and the Government of the
Republic of Belarus are convinced that comprehensive
Iraqi cooperation with the United Nations and the
continuing normalization of relations between Iraq and
Kuwait will guarantee a definitive solution to the
problem of Iraq. We also believe that an integral
element of this process is the gradual lifting of the
sanctions on Iraq.

The Republic of Belarus calls upon the Security
Council to be guided by the need to maintain peace in
the Middle East and to prevent the unleashing of a
major international conflict with unforeseeable
consequences.

