Ms. Loj: I thank the Security Council for inviting
me to participate in this important debate about United
Nations peacekeeping. The debate on this issue over
the past 12 months in the Security Council and in the
General Assembly, as well as internally in the
Secretariat, has been not only timely but also necessary
to ensure common understanding on how to tackle
future peacekeeping challenges. Let me add that, in
thinking about these issues, it is not always necessary
to develop fresh ideas. Sometimes, it is also useful to
revisit long-standing proposals and evaluate them
against today's and tomorrow's challenges.

Today's debate has a special focus on how to end
peacekeeping operations and how to transition into
longer-term conflict-prevention activities. Based on my
experience from two years as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Liberia, I would like to focus
my remarks on three issues: mandates, implementation
and tools.

At the outset, however, let me underline that for
all three of those elements, there is no one-size-fits-all
solution. Each and every conflict and peacekeeping
challenge has to be reviewed and the solutions adjusted
to the specific challenges characterizing the country or
the conflict. There is no recipe that can be applied
across the board. Country-specific challenges and

capacities have to be taken into account from the
outset, and measures need to be decided and applied
accordingly.

First, a few words about mandates. In his report
in April 2001 (S/2001/394, para. 6), the then-Secretary-
General states "A good exit or transition strategy
depends on a good entrance strategy" - with the
entrance strategy, of course being embodied in the
mandate of the mission. It is therefore paramount that a
mission's initial mandate be clear in its priorities, be
realistic and leave no room for ambiguity.

In Liberia, some of the day-to-day challenges we
face are related to the interpretation of our mandate -
with regard to the protection of civilians, for instance.
How should "imminent threat of physical danger" and
"within its capabilities" be interpreted? These are weak
phrases that can be taken as all-encompassing or as
nothing at all. Furthermore, in Liberia incidents of mob
violence are common and often involve attacks not
only on the Liberian National Police but also on
civilians. How are such incidents meant to be treated in
a peacekeeping mission? How is a mission to deal with
an imminent threat when the threat comes from
civilians? Such questions need to be well thought
through when mandates are formulated.

We need implementable mandates rather than
politically correct ones, which I have often more
informally called "Christmas trees". Each mandate
should be adjusted to the specific context on the
ground. What works in one place may be impossible to
implement in another. Furthermore, it is important that
the Council exercise great care when changing a
mission's mandate. If new tasks are being continuously
added, the context surrounding the original ones,
including the provision of a security umbrella, and the
conditions for its transition and exit will become
increasingly difficult. If the goal post keeps changing,
so to speak, there will be consequences as to when the
desired end state can be reached.

Secondly, I would like to make a few comments
on the challenges and constraints we face when
implementing mandates, especially in integrated
missions. Integrated missions are generally tasked not
only with keeping the peace but also with assisting to
build national capacities to sustain the peace - in
other words, peacebuilding. For those missions,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not two separate
sequential processes; they are two sides of the same
coin, are closely interlinked and must be pursued
simultaneously.

There appears to be conceptual agreement across
the United Nations system and among Member States
concerning the integrated approach to keep, to build
and to sustain the peace, for instance in a country like
Liberia. The challenges we face, however, concern how
to implement that approach in practice. That is further
accentuated by the institutional framework we have
established, both in terms of governing bodies and the
generation of resources, especially assessed versus
voluntary contributions. Let me provide a few concrete
examples of these implementation challenges.

While Liberia is not yet a self-starter, delivering
as one country - although I expect it to become one
soon - the level of integration between the country
team and the Mission is very good. It includes
innovated approaches such as joint programmes, joint
offices and joint use of United Nations assets - but
also a general willingness to find pragmatic solutions
to common challenges. We are, as we say, working
together and trying hard to deliver as one.

Keeping in mind that an exit strategy should form
part of every entrance strategy, that integration should
be institutionalized early on in the life of a mission.
However, due to different governing bodies, budget
cycles and even procurement rules and regulations,
achieving true integration and delivering as one can be
extremely challenging. My plea would be that the
various governing bodies and the Member States
consider that issue.

Another point has to do with assessed versus
voluntary contributions. In my mind, there is no doubt
that for peacebuilding activities to succeed, funds other

than, and in addition to, assessed funds - whether
through the agencies and programmes working with a
mission or through bilateral partners - must be

available. Security sector reform is more than plans
and policies. It is also implementation. If voluntary
funds to sustain implementation do not materialize,
that creates significant gaps on the ground.

Let me illustrate with the case of the Liberian
National Police. The Mission's mandate is primarily
focused on training and mentoring. But even the best
trained police officer needs the means to function -
equipment, transport, etc. Unless the voluntary funds
are forthcoming, the police force will not have the
desired impact.

A third set of challenges relates to ensuring
national ownership - the overarching prerequisite for
any transition or exit. Transforming a mission from
doers to mentors is the key to sustainability and is
probably the hardest task for any mission. Yet without
national ownership, no peace can be sustained. The
United Nations in Liberia was able to plan its
intervention based on clear national leadership and in
alignment with national planning frameworks fairly
early on.

I wish to conclude with a few words on the tools
available to facilitate transitions and exits. First of all,
as I have said, exit strategies should be incorporated
from the early days of the mission, even if they are not
fully formulated. Otherwise, the mission will act like a
ship without a clear destination. The development of
benchmarks to monitor the consolidation, draw-down
and withdrawal of a mission is important and is a vital
tool to guide transition.

In Liberia - thanks to my colleague on my left -
we have been working with benchmarks since 2006
and have learned how important it is to define clearly
what we are measuring. Are we assessing the
achievements of the Mission against its mandate, or
against overall progress in the country? I strongly
believe it should be the latter. If it is, we need to
measure not only the impact of the Mission's activities,
but also the impact of those being conducted by the
entire United Nations family, the Government and
other partners.

Finally, Member States and the Council have
much focused on reporting from missions. While that is
understandable, let me reiterate that nothing beats
experiencing the challenges at first hand, in the field.
We always welcome visits to Liberia from the Security
Council and other Member States at different levels,
especially since so many Members are not represented
in Monrovia.

Mr. President, thank you once again for inviting
me to participate in this debate. Merci beaucoup.

