Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom warmly welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2377 (2017). In finalizing the mandate of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, we
have taken an important step in supporting the parties
to consolidate the gains achieved over the past year as
they implement the next phase of the peace process.

It seems that each time that we meet in the Chamber
on Colombia, there is another historical milestone
to welcome. In July (see S/PV.7997), we welcomed
the laying down of arms by the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), and earlier this
month (see S/PV.8041), we saw the FARC transform
into a political party - the new Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Comun - at its inaugural Congress
in Bogota. As President Santos Calderon told us when
we visited in May, the implementation of the Final
Peace Agreement is irreversible.

But irreversible and sustainable are not exactly
the same. We have officially reached the hard bit now.
While a laydown of arms more than half a century in
the making is without question history, it happens in a
moment. The reincorporation of the FARC into society
will not happen instantly. It will be a process. It will
require commitment. It will require sacrifice. It will
mean putting aside differences that were born long
before most Colombians.

Sustainable peace will depend on the FARC's
successful reincorporation into civilian life, so I am
pleased that the United Nations will continue to be able
to play a supportive role in accompanying the parties
in the next crucial phase of implementation. I want
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Jean Arnault, and his team for their dedication
and hard work over the past few weeks to put in place
in all necessary preparations to enable the Verification
Mission to start work on 26 September - the day
after the first Mission finishes its mandate. I want to
reiterate our thanks to Jean Arnault and the first United
Nations Mission for a truly excellent job in supporting
the FARC's laydown of arms.

The Pope's visit to Colombia last week further
reinforced Colombia's remarkable achievements over
the past 18 months, and we welcome the most recent
positive development, on 4 September, when the
Government and the National Liberation Army signed
a bilateral ceasefire. It is also very encouraging that the
parties have indicated that they would like the United
Nations to play a role in verifying that ceasefire. It is
a resounding endorsement of the United Nations work
with the FARC peace process over the past year. We
stand ready to support it in whatever way we can and
look forward to further advice from the Secretary-
General in due course.

With our action today, we have shown that the
Council remains fully committed to assisting Colombia
on its journey towards peace. We have put a verification
team in place, based on the Secretary-General's
recommendations following close consultations
with the parties. It is now up to Colombia - both its
Government and its people - to show that all of the
history that has been made up to this point will mean a
lasting peace for generations to come.

