Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like very much to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. Annadif, and the Chair ofthe Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali,
His Excellency Ambassador Skoog. We appreciate their
valuable briefings on the most recent developments in
the Republic of Mali. We also commend the Special
Representative on his efforts to ease political tensions
among all the parties concerned and to implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We
also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, Mr. Coulibaly, who
is participating in today's meeting. In my statement
today I will address three key issues, namely, the
security, political and humanitarian situations.

First, with regard to the security situation, we are
concerned about, and have paid close attention to, the
increasing use of improvised explosive devices by
terrorist groups over the past two years. The number
of incidents in which such devices were used has
exceeded 269 since the beginning of 2016. They have
killed nearly 230 people and injured 480. We commend
MINUSMA and other international partners, as well
as the security forces in Mali, on their efforts to train
and build the capacity of security personnel, provide
the necessary military resources to the security sector
and support Operational Coordination Mechanism. We
must speed up the operationalization of the Mechanism
to ensure that all combatants are integrated into the
security sector, according to the number agreed upon,

in order to address security threats and ensure control
over the northern areas.

The State of Kuwait extends its deep condolences
to the families of the victims of the two terrorist
attacks that took place in Aguelhok and Gao, as well
as to the Governments of the Niger and Chad and to
MINUSMA. We are deeply saddened about the ongoing
deterioration of the security situation in Mali. We are
concerned about the increasing number of civilian
victims during the most recent reporting period and
about continued attacks on security personnel, in
particular the Blue Helmets, who risk their lives daily
to ensure stability and security in Mali. We reiterate our
support and gratitude to them and to all peacekeepers.
Our gratitude will always fall short, regardless of how
much we thank them.

With regard to the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel, the State of Kuwait welcomes the pledges
made during the donors conference held in Brussels on
23 February, which will enable the Force to carry out its
tasks to the fullest. In that regard, we look forward to
the report of the Secretary-General in May.

Secondly, concerning the political situation,
we welcome the road map that was signed by all the
relevant parties on 22 March. We urge them to commit
themselves to the timeline agreed upon. We reiterate
our position that the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is the main solution
to the ongoing crisis in Mali. We commend the group
of mediators, led by Algeria, the United Nations and
participating regional and international organizations
on their efforts to reduce security and political tensions
in Mali. We also call upon the Government of Mali to
play its role and create an environment conducive to
implementing the Agreement by taking key political
steps, such as cooperating with all parties to ensure
the completion of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, security sector reform and
the decentralization process. We underscore that the
absence of State authority in northern Mali will thwart
comprehensive progress.

We welcome the visit by the Prime Minister
Maiga to the city of Kidal, in northern Mali, to
bridge the political gap and rebuild trust between
the residents of that area and the central Government
and to resume social services in the region. We also
welcome the cooperation among all signatory parties
to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in preparation for the upcoming presidential and local
elections. We also commend MINUSMA on its efforts
to prepare for those elections. We urge the Government
to ensure smooth and transparent elections in which
all segments of the population can participate. We also
encourage the Government to implement the remaining
provisions of the Agreement in line with the agreed
road map.

Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
we urge all parties to honour their commitments in line
with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, and to take the necessary steps to
prevent collateral damage in military operations. We
welcome the steps taken by the Malian Government
to investigate such incidents. We reiterate our support
to the International Commission of Inquiry on Mali,
which will investigate gross violations and abuses of
international law, including sexual violence in time
of conflict. We also welcome the Secretary-General's
efforts to combat human rights abuses.

We welcome the decision of the Government of
Mali to adopt the Safe Schools Declaration. We fully
believe that educating youth will promote security and
stability in any country. We call upon the Government
to redouble its efforts to reopen all of the schools that
were closed throughout the country. We also commend
the efforts of humanitarian organizations that are
cooperating with the central Government to meet the
humanitarian needs of the residents of the northern
regions. We urge all parties to ensure the safety of
humanitarian workers.

In conclusion, Kuwait underscores that the role of
the United Nations in Mali and the Sahel is indispensable
at this stage. We look forward to the outcome of the
MINUSMA strategic review in preparation for the
renewal of its mandate next June so as to make its work
more efficient in the current difficult environment. I
would like to emphasize that we are ready to work with
all members of the Security Council during the coming
period to ensure the necessary mandate for the Mission
and facilitate the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

