Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): First of all,
I would like to thank the Republic of Korea and you
personally, Mr. Minister, for convening this important
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and for submitting a concept note on the topic
(S/20l3/ 75, annex). We are also grateful to the Secretary-
General, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their statements.

A response to the large-scale atrocities perpetrated
during the Second World War served as the basis for
the founding of the United Nations, the proclaiming
of fundamental values, such as peace and respect for
human rights, and the establishment of multinational
judicial institutions. The significant development of
international norms and standards for the protection
of civilians and the engagement of the Security
Council, including the adoption of a number of
important documents and practical steps towards their
implementation, have given rise to increased attention
to the issue.

However, efforts to ensure a peaceful, just and
prosperous world have not always been consistent and
successful. As a consequence, civilians continue to
suffer from inadequate protection and discriminatory
treatment in situations of armed conflict. As the
latest report of the Secretary-General on the topic
acknowledges:

"Despite some progress, the reality on the ground
continues to be characterized by the frequent
failure of parties to conflict to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law to
respect and protect civilians as well as with relevant
human rights obligations." (S/2012/3 76, para. 4)

Azerbaijan's consistent position with regard
to the issue under consideration is well known and
stems from its keen interest in contributing to the
achievement of sustainable peace and development and
from our practical experience in addressing the impact
of armed conflict on civilians. The war unleashed
by neigbouring Armenia against my country and
the military occupation of our territories have had a
considerable impact on civilians. As a result of that
aggression, Azerbaijan continues to suffer from having
one of the highest numbers of refugees and displaced
persons in the world. At present, approximately one
of every nine persons in the country belongs to that
category. Twenty-one years ago, an unprecedented
massacre was committed against the Azerbaijani
population in the town of Khojaly. In one night, more
than 600 civilians were killed in that town only because
they were Azerbaijanis. Not even women, children and
elderly were spared by the invading Armenian troops
and irregular local armed groups.

In all its four resolutions adopted in 1993 in response
to the occupation of the territories of Azerbaijan
(resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884
(1993)), the Security Council referred specifically to
violations of international humanitarian law, including
the displacement of a large number of civilians in
Azerbaijan, attacks on civilians and the bombardment
of inhabited areas. We are confident that the consistent
measures being taken at the national level, as well as
the existing international legal framework, will serve to
bring to justice those responsible for the grave offences
committed against the civilian population ofAzerbaijan
during the conflict. It is incontrovertible today that no
official or political status cloaks the person concerned
with immunity for the most serious international
crimes, such as war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and ethnic cleansing.

In recent years, important steps have been taken
for the protection and Vindication of rights and the
prevention and punishment of crimes that have an
international dimension and scope. Indeed, ending
impunity is essential not only for the purposes of
identifying responsibility for both parties to the conflict
and individual perpetrators but also for ensuring
sustainable peace, truth, reconciliation, the rights and
interests of Victims and the well-being of society at
large.

Unfortunately, not all grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law
have received due attention and a response at the
international and regional levels. As a result, past
wrongs left unpunished and unrecognized continue to
impede progress in achieving the long-awaited peace
and reconciliation and could even play a key role in the
eruption of new conflicts and the commission of new
crimes.

More resolute and targeted measures are required
to end impunity in such situations. We concur with the
Secretary-General that where national authorities fail
to take the steps necessary to ensure accountability,
the international community and the Council should
play a more proactive role in ensuring an appropriate
response, including through the establishment of
international commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions and in supporting the implementation of their
recommendations. It is also essential to emphasize the
role of the relevant humanitarian mandates in ensuring
that all situations of armed conflict, including those
of a protracted nature, receive due attention by the
international community.

It is important to repeatedly recall that the
establishment of truth in respect to gross violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law,
the provision of adequate and effective reparations to
victims and the need for institutional actions to prevent
the repetition of such violations are all necessary
adjuncts to true conflict resolution and imperative with
regard to the effective and politically uncompromising
system of international criminal justice. In any event,
the conflict resolution initiatives considered by the
Security Council and regional arrangements must
ensure that peace and justice work together effectively.
Such an approach provides that no peace settlement
can be reached if it is inconsistent with international
law, particularly where peremptory norms and the rules
and standards of international humanitarian and human
rights law are concerned.

It is essential that peace efforts and peace agreements
never encourage the acceptance of situations achieved by
the unlawful use of force and other egregious violations
of international law, such as war crimes, crimes against
humanity, genocide and ethnic cleansing. On the other
hand, in situations of protracted armed conflict, the
lack of agreement on political issues cannot be used
as a pretext for not addressing problems caused by
continued and deliberate disrespect for international
humanitarian human rights law.

Particular consideration must be given to
implications for the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts aggravated by population displacements and
foreign military occupation. The impact of conflict on
housing, land and property, as well as discrimination
on ethnic grounds and forced demographic changes
in such situations, require a more consistent approach
in order to put an end to illegal practices and policies
and to ensure the safe and dignified return of displaced
populations to their homes.

It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles that prevent return, be applied
by the international community with more systematic
regularity. As the Secretary-General made clear in an
earlier report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict,

"[e]nsuring the right to return constitutes a
categorical rejection of the gains of ethnic
cleansing and offers some measure ofjustice to
those displaced from their homes and land, thereby
removing a source of possible future tension and
conflict" (S/2007/643, para. 55).

Among the pressing issues requiring urgent action
and attention is that of civilians, including women
and children, taken hostage and reported missing in
connection with armed conflict. Azerbaijan continues

its efforts to address that disturbing phenomenon,
including through the relevant biannual resolution of the
General Assembly and the Commission on the Status of
Women, of which my country is a main sponsor.

It is important that the Security Council
consistently maintain its focus on the protection of
civilians. Azerbaijan would support more systematic
and frequent discussions on the topic during briefings
and consultations, as well as at informal meetings, such
as Arria Formula meetings.

In conclusion, I would like once again to commend
the initiative of the Republic of Korea to convene
this open debate on the protection of civilians and
to advance that significant theme in the work of the
Security Council. We welcome the draft presidential
statement to be adopted later as the outcome of today's
meeting. It contains a number of the aforementioned
key components of our position and approach on the
topic.

