First of all, let me start by thanking Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for her briefing. I can only echo that 2020 showed a profound shift in developments in Afghanistan. In the past few weeks, we again saw a year of hope, but also of despair. We see the peace process gaining traction in Doha, but also witness violence reaching its highest levels. According to the Global Peace Index, Afghanistan is the least peaceful country in the world. It is very worrisome that attacks are targeting infrastructure, particularly schools. It is a nightmare that human rights defenders and journalists are killed. A couple of days ago, the Deputy Governor of Kabul was killed. This is just too much. The violence has to stop. We should be united in the Security Council and call for an end to the violence. On the peace process, I can only echo what Ms. Lyons said. Doha really is a wonderful achievement. I would like to congratulate our Afghan, American and Qatari friends and the many partners who made this possible. The agreement reached on the rules of procedure is important. These are early positive signs, but they give us hope for future talks. We are not there yet. Both sides should now use the next 20 days wisely and consult with their leadership and constituencies on the proposals on the table and the way forward. The negotiation team of the Afghan Government decided that it would talk to the youth. To hear that young people have thus far been excluded from the peace process is very worrisome. We have always said that, from our perspective, it is absolutely necessary that women be represented on both sides. We hope for renewed commitment to the path towards a political settlement and a peaceful future for Afghanistan. We need a full and lasting ceasefire. The strategy of the Taliban to negotiate, on the one hand, and to continue violence, on the other, is extremely cynical. If the Taliban really want peace for the country, why do they continue to destroy infrastructure and schools? Why do they destroy their motherland if they want to be part of the Government? This has to stop. Germany will continue to support the peace process in close cooperation with our partners, including our co-penholder, Indonesia, as well as Norway, Uzbekistan, Qatar and the United States. On the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), I welcome that Ms. Lyons has chosen to play an active role by maintaining a small team in Doha to support the negotiations. It is very important that the negotiating parties hear from her what the international community expects and what the Afghan people expect. I hope we can launch a forum of key regional and international partners to further strengthen efforts to support the negotiations. The United Nations and UNAMA need to continue to play an important role in Afghanistan in protecting human rights, safeguarding women and children, promoting sustainable development and protecting the rights of minority groups using a victim-centred approach. What is really concerning is drug trafficking, which we need to continue to combat. These continue to be important tasks for the United Nations and for the international community at large. On international assistance, Geneva was a success. It sent a strong signal of continued international support. In total, countries pledged more than $3.3 billion. I am very happy to confirm that Germany alone pledged more than $500 million in international assistance and stabilization funds. Germany continues to be the second-largest donor to Afghanistan. Assistance is attached to conditions that the Afghan Government itself greatly values. The current and future Afghan Governments must apply the same standards with regard to ensuring human rights, protecting women and minority groups, maintaining the constitutional achievements of the past 19 years and fighting against corruption. The coronavirus disease pandemic has been a huge challenge, and we know that we also need to support Afghanistan in that respect. Afghanistan needs more continued reliable international assistance to address all its humanitarian needs. Only 50 per cent of the pledges towards the humanitarian response plan have been fulfilled. I know that there are competing needs, but we can do better than that. On the sanctions regime, we do not yet see sufficient reasons for lifting sanctions on the Taliban or downplaying their direct link to terrorism. I thank the Afghan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the non-governmental organization Afghans for Progressive Thinking and my colleagues in the Kabul Embassy for identifying Ms. Shkula Zadran as our youth representative. Her wonderful briefing made the deficiencies very clear. We, the Security Council, have listened to her, but everybody should listen to her, including the Afghan Government and the Afghan public. If peace is to be achieved, the Taliban have to understand the issues that she raised - the need to protect the youth and to preserve what has been achieved over the past few years in Afghanistan with regard to the role of women's participation in economic and political life that for peace in the country. Those gains must be not only preserved but enhanced. We need firm commitment to the human rights constitutionally guaranteed to all in Afghanistan. We will continue to support civil society organizations and non- governmental organizations. They are the backbone of a democratic Afghanistan. Accountability is also key. Whoever commits a war crime must be prosecuted. There can be no reconciliation or peaceful future for the country if impunity prevails. I would like to thank Indonesia for its efforts over the past two years in its capacity as co-penholder. It was very hard work, but it was wonderful to work with Indonesia. I wish our successors good luck. I am sure Estonia and Norway will do an excellent job. Germany will continue to support the Afghanistan dossier at the United Nations. We are very proud to be the facilitator of the General Assembly resolution 75/90, adopted last week, which expressed the solidarity of the wider United Nations membership with Afghanistan. The United Nations stands behind the peace process. We are very happy that we received 130 votes in favour of the resolution - many from the countries of the region, such as Iran. We even garnered the support of some co-sponsors from the region, like Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Mongolia. Despite the 130 votes in favour, we regret that four countries did not vote in line with us. We would have loved to have them on board. It is unfortunate that two of those countries are actually permanent members of the Council.
