Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like, on behalf of Qatar, Chairman of
the ninth summit of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April. We are convinced that your
wisdom and experience promise success in the
Council's deliberations. Your prompt response to our
request for an emergency meeting to consider the
dangerous situation in occupied Palestine, including
Jerusalem, is a sign that augurs well for us. My
delegation would also like to thank Ambassador Ole
Peter Kolby of Norway for the able and wise manner in
which he conducted the Council's deliberations last
month.

I shall not refer to the tragic situation of the
Palestinian people and its President, Chairman Arafat,
who are under Israeli attack and occupation, because I
am convinced that the Council knows all there is to
know about Israel's organized killings and massive
violations of international law and its contempt for the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 1949. However, I
will reiterate that the Council is responsible for what is
happening in the occupied Palestinian territories. Ever
since it declined to send international observers to that
region, things have gone from bad to worse. That is
because the Council hesitated to adopt the robust
initiative that would have been in the interests of both
parties, on the excuse that Israel had rejected it.
Obviously, Israel has no wish for observers, who would
reveal the abuses it is committing against defenceless
Palestinians. It continues to flout resolutions, including
resolution 1402 (2002), which calls upon it to withdraw
from the occupied Palestinian territories, declaring
quite unambiguously that it refuses to comply with the
provisions of that Council resolution, although the
Council is the supreme organ charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Some are trying naively to explain the Israeli
onslaught by categorizing it as self-defence, but how
can one think that destroying and setting fire to a
neighbour's land will bring peace? It is only through
dialogue and negotiations that the Palestinian people
can regain their occupied land and gain their
independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Israel must understand that it will never enjoy peace
while it insists on keeping that land. During their
Summit in Beirut, the leaders of Arab States, in good
faith, spoke of their desire to have a good-neighbourly
relationship with Israel.

The Middle East region is experiencing
unprecedented tension. I hope I do not seem to
exaggerate when I say that it is about to explode. We
must make every possible effort to save what can still
be saved. We must take practical and concrete
measures that will cause Israel to fully implement
resolution 1402 (2002). We must send international
peacekeeping forces to the region and pressure Israel to
return to the negotiating table to do what is necessary
to restore peace between Palestine and Israel to bring
the peace process back to the point where it left off.

