Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zerrougui for both her briefing and the
excellent assistance and advice she gave the Security
Council during our visit last week. I would also like
to thank Special Envoy Djinnit for his briefing and for
the work he has been doing in the region to support the
implementation of the 31 December agreement.

There are only 73 days left before the elections in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, elections that
will be crucial for both the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the prospects for peace and
stability in the Great Lakes region. If successful, as the
Ambassador from France has said, it will prove to be
a historic turning point: the first peaceful democratic
transfer of power in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's history. It will serve as a foundation on which
to build peace, stability and prosperity.

I believe it is important that we, as the Council,
recognize the progress that has been made in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular the
publication of the list of candidates for presidential,
provincial and parliamentary elections and the fact that
all parties so far have stuck to the electoral timetable
that has been set out. But if I personally took one
thing away from the Council's visit to the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, it is that there is still much work
to be done. For elections to be credible, there needs to
be an environment conducive to holding free and fair
elections. But there remains distrust among opposition
figures, civil society and the Government, and many
Congolese clearly feel that the conditions for credible
elections do not currently exist. There remain a number
of unresolved issues.

First, with regard to the electronic voting machines,
Special Representative Zerrougui mentioned the
Westminster Foundation for Democracy study into
the machines and the recommendations it put forward.
We would urge the Independent National Electoral
Commission to implement those recommendations
on how to improve the machines and encourage it to
undertake outreach with the opposition and civil society
on how the machines work and how the Commission
is going about implementing the recommendations.
We would also encourage the opposition to engage
constructively with the Electoral Commission
when it comes to making the best of the electronic
voting machines.

Secondly, there are questions around voter
registration. We urge the Independent National Electoral
Commission to implement the recommendations of the
International Organization of la Francophonie.

Thirdly, as the Ambassador of Kuwait highlighted,
the 31 December agreement contained a number of
confidence-building measures, especially with regard to
the freedom of assembly and expression. We very much
welcome President Kabila Kabange's commitment to
the Council that his Government would allow peaceful
rallies to take place in the run-up to the election.

Fourthly, we believe that independent election
observation would help build trust and confidence
within the Democratic Republic fo the Congo. We
welcome President Kabila Kabange's commitment to
facilitate observers from the region.

Fifthly, and finally, I do not think that anyone
underestimates the logistical challenges of organizing
three sets of elections on the same day. The United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) has
offered its support to the Government, and we very
much hope that the Government will take MONUSCO
up on that offer.

MONUSCO continues to play a vital role in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, both in supporting
elections and in protecting civilians. The United
Kingdom is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in North Kivu, South Kivu, Kasai
and Tanganyika and the impact that that has on the
civilian population. That is a very worrying trend, and
we support Secretary-General's call for the authorities,
with the support of MONUSCO, to take the necessary
steps to protect civilians. We are also concerned about
the increase in reported human rights abuses and
violations from July to August, as compared to the
same period last year. As the Ambassador of Sweden
said, it is particularly concerning that 59 per cent of the
violations across the country were perpetrated by State
agents. We call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to spare no effort in bringing
those responsible for such abuses and violations
to account.

We remain very concerned about the Ebola outbreak
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We welcome the leadership of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in cooperation
with the World Health Organization and MONUSCO,
in responding swiftly to the Ebola outbreak. We remain
ready to provide further support.

In conclusion. I would like to reiterate the
importance of the next 73 days. We have come a
long way, but much remains to be done. The Council,
together with the region, must remain engaged and
supportive to ensure that credible, transparent elections
lead to a peaceful transfer of power.

