Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
will try to be brief, since my positions coincide with
a number of the suggestions made by my colleagues. I
would like to thank Rwanda for having organized this
meeting on the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), and the Chair of the PBC and Mr. Abulkalam
Abdul Momen of Bangladesh for their statements.
As noted in the 2010 review of the peacebuilding
architecture (S/2010/393, annex), an effective response
on the part of the Organization is required to produce
a broad and coordinated strategy based on local
authorities' identification of priorities so as to establish
goals and specific deadlines. The review also stated
that this task requires countries to undertake activities
promoting humanitarian assistance and the restoration
of the rule of law, develop plans for security and justice
policies, and promote sustainable development and a
vigorous and democratic policy aimed at protecting and
promoting human rights. Those challenges are still very
much with us, and we feel it is important to support
a peacebuilding strategy in post-conflict situations
based on three elements that various speakers have
highlighted. The first of these is the issue of national
responsibility, the second is coordination with the
United Nations, and the third is the complementarity of
regional organizations.

The first of these areas, the principle of national
responsibility in peacebuilding activities, is a priority.
At the same time, it must be founded on the protection and
promotion of human rights, ensuring the involvement
of society as a whole, without any discrimination,
and encouraging the conditions and opportunities
that allow all to participate on an equal footing. Such
involvement and broad-based participation, without
discrimination or exclusion, should be reflected
throughout the entire reconstruction process and based
on the priorities established by the local authorities
and demanded by society as a whole. We realize that
this is complex and difficult, but what is important is
consensus and agreement; that is the best way to deal
with such situations effectively and legitimately and to
address the challenges of the realities that emerge after
a conflict.

We are pleased to see that in its 2012 programme
the PBC reaffirmed the centrality of a strong national
role in peacebuilding, as exemplified by the its support
during the transition of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, and for the holding of free, fair and peaceful
elections in Sierra Leone - long sought by the
international community - as well as the mobilization
of resources in support of a new poverty-reduction
strategy in Burundi. All of these unquestionably
demonstrate the real and potential importance of the
work of the PBC, shown on the practical level in its
ability to mobilize, promote and launch constructive
dialogue with the relevant national actors.

Regrettably, the collapse of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau interrupted the electoral process there
during the period covered by the report (S/2013/63).
And, most recently, the failure of constitutional order
in the Central African Republic was preceded and
followed by renewed hostile activities, revealing the
limits of the PBC's ability to help countries if the
countries themselves do not possess a credible, firm and
stable national commitment, and if they cannot take the
necessary steps themselves to address the fundamental
causes that can lead to instability or situations where
conflict will overwhelm peace. It is clear that the
degree of legitimacy that the PBC's political support
can bestow on countries on its agenda must be sustained
and combined, as has been said, with the effective, clear
commitment of the countries themselves.

For the second aspect, the coordination of the
peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations, the
Commission is in a privileged position when it comes
to mobilizing and making assistance with resources
for peacebuilding activities - financial, technical
and political - more effective, as well as in its ability
to establish agreements and provide strategic links
with regional and international actors in order to help
ensure that every effort contributes to strengthening
institutions and is in line with the country's priorities.

On that point and because I promised to be concise,
the representatives of China and other countries
underscored an intangible but decisive factor that arises
when financial, economic or technical cooperation is
being established with countries that request and need
it. If we consider the lessons learned in the cases of our
countries in Latin America, there is a very high social,
economic, cultural and institutional cost involved.
Based on lessons learned, we support the idea that
such cooperation cannot be used as the sole model or
as an imposed solution, particularly when attempts are
made to continue imposing such models or solutions
even after economic growth and social inclusion have
clearly failed. That is not only the case in countries
in my region; it is also clear that such one-size-fits-
all solutions being imposed on countries are today
actually impeding and undermining the possibilities
for well-being, social cohesion and the rule of law in
the countries concerned.

Therefore, we should not impose solutions, but
rather should favour them; we should not preach, but
rather discuss and respect the will and the priorities of
the countries concerned. The bottom line should be full
respect for the rule of law and human rights. At the
same time, as noted by the Ambassador of Guatemala,
it is not enough to have a more fluid, ongoing, frank
and strategic relationship between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council. We must also
look at the capacity and functions of all of the parts of
the Organization and ensure that there is an efficient,
comprehensive and clear link among them.

When we talk about cooperation with post-conflict
countries and societies, I think it would also be very
interesting to consider what is happening with regard to
financial cooperation. What is the situation with regard
to the conditions for access to credit, for example,
that are imposed on post-conflict countries? What is
happening with economic and financial cooperation and
the need to guarantee gradual, progressive, continuous
and effective access for post-conflict societies to
universal economic, social and cultural rights, not to
mention political and civilian rights, particularly with
regard to women's equality, education, culture, jobs for
young people and the human rights of children. I think
that all of those aspects must be considered as well
because we are discussing the conditionalities tied to
financing and cooperation mechanisms in other forums
and bodies outside of the Organization.

The practice of inviting the Chairs of the country
configurations for Liberia and Sierra Leone to inform
the Council before renewing the mandates of the
peacekeeping missions undoubtedly ensures that the
Commission can fully carry out the advisory role
assigned to it by the United Nations and enables the
Security Council to draw further on the experience of
the Peacebuilding Commission. We believe that this
practice should be applied to the other countries on the
Commission's agenda where there is a United Nations
presence on the ground, as we saw recently with the
Central African Republic, and where developments
are incompatible with the peacebuilding agenda in
the country. The interactive dialogue scheduled for
tomorrow with the Chairs of the country configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which recently has
followed Security Council meetings on the subject,
certainly affords us a great opportunity to think across
the board about the core problems and challenges, not
only for the Peacebuilding Commission, but also for the
Council.

The issue of the associations and the promotion
of cohesion leads me to affirm, as my last point, that
the role of regional organizations and subregional
organizations, as established under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, entails the need
to strengthen the capacities of the regional systems
to support countries recovering and rebuilding
after a conflict. In that regard, I think it would also
be interesting to include the model of South-South
cooperation, which is governed by the principles of
complementarity and solidarity. The progress that we
have made in focusing on South-South cooperation could
also help us to understand and guide us in how we think
about the role of regional and subregional cooperation
with the understanding that it is only the principles
of complementarity and solidarity that should really
guide us. That is because once again we are seeing that
the lack of security in and destablization of a country
affect security and stability in neighbouring countries.
If a region is unstable, we cannot expect every country
there to develop and prosper.

Therefore, that relationship and link between post-
conflict countries with regional organizations has key
strategic power. It does not exclude the mission and
functions of the United Nations as an international
system, but gives it predictability that further strengths
the complex and challenging stage of ensuring lasting
peace, which, as we know, goes hand in hand with
political stability and social justice.

