Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Mark Lowcock, as well as
Ms. Bandu Bahati and Abbe' Nshole, for their briefings,
which were as poignant as they were enlightening.

I would like to begin by commending the action of
the countries of the region, which have demonstrated
solidarity commensurate to the challenge posed and
bear the primary burden of welcoming Congolese
refugees. I also wish to pay tribute to the role of the
Congolese themselves, who provide relief and support
on a daily basis to the internally displaced persons and
refugees arriving in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. More than 11 million people, mostly women
and children, are now in forced displacement in the
Great Lakes region .

I will not cover the terrible and detailed findings
presented by the briefers, which represent a call to
action. The question we must answer is: How can we
respond and contribute to resolving that crisis?

First, we need to provide immediate financial
support. The humanitarian crisis facing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo calls for renewed commitment
on the part of the partners in order to address it. The
donor conference to be held in April in Geneva will, I
hope, be an opportunity to provide a resolute response
commensurate with the needs of those affected by
the crisis.

Secondly, we must also tackle the root causes of
the current crisis. In the Kasais, a conflict between a
traditional chief and the authorities, which was at first
limited, has degenerated and triggered a wide-ranging
crisis. In other parts of the country - in Tanganyika,
Ituri and the Kivus - local conflicts aggravate
or relaunch tragic humanitarian crises. In all such
situations of intercommunal conflicts and activities
of armed groups, the political factor plays a crucial
role and contributes to fuelling tensions that are often
linked to the availability of resources. The prospect
of presidential, as well as legislative and provincial,
elections will make local competition stronger and
cause new tensions.

The Congolese Government, which has the primary

responsibility for organizing elections, must take the

necessary measures to ensure that the conditions for

free, open and peaceful elections are in place, starting

with the full implementation of the de-escalation

measures provided for by the New Year's agreement.

It will also be the responsibility of each candidate to

ensure that their supporters behave respectfully in the

political debate and exercise restraint. These measures

are essential to preventing new clashes and population
displacements. They are in line with the objectives of
national reconciliation, tolerance and democratization,
which are part of the commitments undertaken by the
Congolese authorities under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.

More generally, it is early action through dialogue
and mediation missions that will prevent the spiral
that has led to the current humanitarian crisis. The
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
has an essential role to play here. The Mission's
integrated approach to protecting civilians is designed
to address that issue. If properly implemented, the
approach can even become a peacekeeping model.
A whole-of-mission effort is necessary to prevent
conflicts and to be proactive so as to prevent tensions
from escalating. The Mission's good offices, supported
by a tight community-alert network that enables early
identification ofpotential conflicts, will be particularly
crucial this year. France hopes that that aspect of
MONUSCO's mandate will be strengthened in the
mandate that we adopt by the end of the month.

The two priority missions of MONUSCO - the
protection of civilians and election preparation - are
inextricably linked and mutually reinforcing. That is why
MONUSCO must have access to all necessary means
to accomplish its mission. But we must be realistic.
MONUSCO cannot do everything alone. Much will
depend on how the elections are organized. A peaceful
electoral climate, where everyone has confidence in
the process and each candidate enjoys free expression,
will contribute even more to pacification than anything
MONUSCO could do.

I also call on the countries of the region to
implement, without delay, the commitments made under
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Results must quickly demonstrate those commitments,
which were renewed collectively last October.

