Mr. Sana (Rwanda): At the outset, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, and your delegation for convening
this important meeting.

A discussion of this nature provides an opportunity
to reflect on ways of reinforcing cooperation and
partnership in areas of common interests. In the
context of the African Union (AU) and the continent's
regional economic communities, such partnership
has been leading to positive outcomes, owing mostly
to the advantages of local knowledge, proximity and
the ability to mobilize and respond quickly. African
issues constitute more than two thirds of the Security
Council's agenda, and that has been the case for many
years. That percentage clearly shows that the African
Union needs a stronger United Nations and that the
United Nations needs a stronger African Union. We
commend the many instances where both organizations
have cooperated on initiatives to bring peace to conflict
areas, such as in the Sudan and Darfur, Somalia and
Mali.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, United
Nations and AU envoys, together with those of the
European Union and the United States, worked
very closely to bring together regional countries in
implementing the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of Congo
and the Region. In the Central African Republic, the
cooperation demonstrated in searching for a solution
to the sectarian conflict showed the importance of
planning together and sharing situational analyses.
We believe that continued productive burden-sharing
between the two bodies could be the key in addressing
many of the problems facing our continent.

Frank and open communication is the foundation
for any successful, productive partnership, especially
in cases of complex joint endeavours, such as
United Nations-authorized military interventions,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction activities. We believe that efforts to
improve strategic cooperation should emphasize ways
by which both bodies could have more regular and
substantive interactions with executive representatives
of their respective organizations on matters directly
linked to peace and security in Africa. One joint
annual consultative meeting is simply not enough.
More to the point, are the format and decisions of such
consultations sufficient? How substantive are they?
What kind of follow-up mechanism exists to ensure their
implementation? Such a practice would be an important
step forward and might produce other innovative styles
of interventions, including in dealing with complex
cases while taking into account the genesis of the issue
within a regional perspective.

Joint communique's have been issued, and the
Security Council has adopted relevant resolutions and
presidential statements that underscore the importance
of developing effective partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union. I would like to recall that,
during Rwanda's presidency in July 2014, the Council
adopted resolution 2167 (2014), which calls for the
strengthening ofregional partnerships in peacekeeping.
At the same time, at the initiative of Chad, the Security
Council adopted a presidential statement in December
2014 (S/PRST/2014/27) that expresses its resolve
to strengthen coordination and capitalize on the
comparative advantages of two organizations.

The challenge we have today is to instil positive
evolution towards that kind of partnership - to move
from an ad hoc partnership to a more structured and
strategic framework of partnership. As partners,
the AU Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council must work towards the same purpose
in complementarity, based on their comparative
advantages, including knowing when it is critical to
prevent a conflict, or to rapidly deploy troops to avert
the igniting of a large-scale conflict and save lives.
There is a need to enhance our coordination, develop
more efficient communications in matters of peace and
security in Africa and hold timely consultations on
matters. Where appropriate, the two Councils should
undertake joint field missions.

In addition, we need to further address the challenges
related to financial resources and technical capacity,
which often compromise the goals and ambitions
of many regional and subregional organizations,
particularly the African Union. My delegation reiterates
its call for enhancing the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility in the financing ofregional organizations
in peace and security related efforts. In that regard,
we call for sustained support to the newly established
African Union Peace Fund, led by Mr. Kaberuka, which
was put in place to provide the necessary resources for
peace support missions and other operational activities
related to peace and security. It is also our view that
regional organizations should be encouraged to assume
ownership of their initiatives as much as possible and
strive towards self-reliance. As a partner, the United
Nations should seek to actively assist the capacity-
building of such organizations.

