Mr. Balei (Mozambique): Mr. President, the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
is honoured to participate in this ministerial debate
on the situation in the Great Lakes region under your
presidency. We commend the Secretary-General for his
informative report (S/20l3/387) on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region. SADC also commends Ms. Mary Robinson,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, and the President of the World Bank,
Mr. Jim Yong Kim, for their valuable support to the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework.

As one of the guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, SADC is encouraged by the
steady progress in its implementation. We commend
the Secretary-General for his continued engagement
in that process. His visit to the Great Lakes region
with the President of the World Bank last May attests
to his commitment. We welcome the commitment
of the World Bank to pledge an additional $1 billion
for development endeavours in the region, which are
critical for rebuilding communities impoverished by
the protracted insecurity and instability.

Similarly, we commend Ms. Robinson for her lively
engagement with the Government, civil society and
other stakeholders whose involvement in efforts to find
lasting peace, security and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region is pivotal. For the
Framework to succeed, we must embrace a holistic, all-
inclusive approach.

Parallel to those efforts, SADC is pleased with
progress in the deployment of the Force Intervention
Brigade, which should be completed soon. Once
it becomes fully operational, it will contribute to
reducing the threats posed by armed groups on the
State authority of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, ensure the security of civilians and make space
for stabilization activities. We believe that this Charter
organ will continue to provide the necessary support
for the Intervention Brigade to fulfil its mandate,
particularly by ensuring that it has the capacity to carry
out targeted offensive operations in a robust, highly
mobile and versatile manner.

We note with concern the resurgence of violence
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Threats posed by rebels of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) are real and must be countered as
prescribed in resolution 2098 (2013), which the Council
adopted on 28 March. Recent clashes in Goma between
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo (FARDC) and the M-23, instigated by the latter,
demonstrate the utter contempt of that rebel group.
We all know what the Force Intervention Brigade is
required to do in that regard, either unilaterally or
jointly, with the FARDC.

SADC is aware that the Intervention Brigade alone
cannot bring about lasting peace, security, stability and
prosperity to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region. In that regard, we encourage the use
of all the relevant regional and subregional dialogue
mechanisms so as to build the much-needed confidence
among national stakeholders, as well as between
neighbouring countries.

We anticipate the conclusion of the political process
being facilitated by President Yoweri Museveni of the
Republic of Uganda. We believe that those political
talks, involving all stakeholders, will go a long way in
attaining the goals of sustainable and durable peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.

It was in the same spirit that the SADC extraordinary
summit held in Maputo in June underscored the need to
consider engaging all opposing forces in an effort to
find a lasting political solution within the Great Lakes
region under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. We are reiterating that call today.

We have been given a unique opportunity to change
the way we do business, by implementing to the letter
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework in
good faith. The people of eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo have suffered for too long. We commend
the fact that the Security Council should remain seized
of the matter.

Let me conclude by reaffirming that the member
countries of SADC associate themselves with the
efforts of the United Nations and the wider international
community aimed at the restoration of peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region.
