We would like to thank the briefers for the information provided today and for their efforts in the maintenance of peace and security in the Central African Republic. The fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is a global endeavour. Its impact is overarching in the Central African Republic owing to the multiple challenges that the country faces. We express our solidarity with the people of the Central African Republic and welcome the measures adopted by President Touadera to mitigate the spread of the pandemic. We acknowledge the Government's efforts to continue maintaining, with the support of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the Economic Community of the Central African States, high-level contact with the leaders of armed groups. With regard to accountability, we welcome the approval of the various laws required by the provisions of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and the creation of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation. We commend the progress made by the strategic committee on elections, and we are pleased with the presentation of a revised electoral calendar that complies with the constitutional deadlines set by the National Electoral Authority. Nevertheless, preparations for the next elections constitute a real challenge for the Central African Republic as a result of the increased political tensions and, certainly, the impact of COVID-19. To create the right environment, one that is conducive to free, transparent, fair and inclusive elections, the security situation in the Central African Republic, where armed groups signatories to the agreement continue to perpetrate violent acts against civilians, humanitarian workers and peacekeepers, needs to be addressed. Before concluding, we would like to draw attention to the humanitarian situation. It is necessary to redouble our efforts to support the country in these very difficult times and to contribute to the humanitarian response plan to assist the most vulnerable. To conclude, we would like to acknowledge the role of MINUSCA and the guarantors of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic for the efforts made in the quest for a lasting and sustainable peace in the Central African Republic.
