Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic): I
am pleased at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I should also like to congratulate you on the
utmost efficiency with which you have conducted the work
of the Council.

We welcome the convening of this meeting to discuss
a situation that seriously threatens international peace and
security: the question of Jerusalem and Palestine. Israel's
measures to Judaize Jerusalem and to efface its Arab
identity fall within its expansionist plan aimed at acquiring
Arab territories by force. Jerusalem, in particular, has a
special religious and historical significance, not only for
Arabs and Palestinians, but for the Islamic and Christian
worlds as a whole.

It is where the prophet Moharnmed ascended to
heaven, and it is the cradle of Christianity. Therefore, trying
in any way to alter its identity, legal status or demographic
composition represents a clear challenge to the feelings of
those in both the Islamic and Christian worlds, in addition
to being a clear violation of Security Council resolutions.

The international community calls upon the Security
Council, which bears responsibility under the Charter, to
pay sufficient attention to that issue and give it due
importance and to adopt as soon as possible measures to
stop the Judaization of that Holy City.

The Security Council must face a fact that can no
longer be denied or ignored: since 1990 its practices have
been characterized - even pervaded - by selectivity of
criteria, double standards and the use of the machinery of
the Council for narrow self-interest. A clear example is the
way in which the Council deals with the Palestinian
question in general and the issue of Jerusalem in particular.
We have been and are still being told by a permanent
member of the Council that the question of Palestine and

 

the Arab-Israeli conflict have no place on the agenda of
the Council. That country has matched words with deeds,
and during the past few years has prevented the Council
from examining the question of Palestine and Jerusalem.
When the Council has considered that question in the
past, that country has used the veto to abort the adoption
of any serious measure by the Council. Yet we all know
that there is nothing more dangerous to international
peace and security than the expansionist policy of Israel,
coupled with its possession of all weapons of mass
destruction, including more than 200 nuclear warheads.

It is a painful irony that the representative of that
permanent member of the Council has in the past week
insisted on refusing to allow the Council to consider the
question of Jerusalem, while at the same time insisting
that it discuss press allegations that there has been a lack
of compliance by Iraq with Security Council resolution
833 (1993). That representative also insisted that the
Council discuss, and the President of the Council ask the
Ambassador of Iraq to explain, an Iraqi letter responding
to press statements made by the assistant of the Secretary
of State that represented a clear interference in the
internal affairs of Iraq and a provocation and incitement
to overthrow its Government.

The international community expressed anger and
condemnation over the Israeli decision on 21 June 1998
to expand the municipal boundaries of Jerusalem, a
decision that represents a tangible violation of Security
Council resolutions. It also represents a clear
contravention of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
In responding to the wish of the international community,
the Council should therefore adopt a resolution
condemning the Israeli laws and the process of
confiscating occupied Arab territories and should force
the occupying Power to stop all of its programmes and
plans for building settlements and to demolish those
settlements that have already been established.

If the Council prevaricates over adopting a just
resolution to deter the aggressor, it will only lead to a
further weakening of its credibility - and its credibility
is already in a pitiful state right now. It would also lead
to the immeasurable deterioration of the fragile situation
in the area and thereby severely jeopardize international
peace and security.

