Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Mr. President, I would
like to welcome you to the Chair. We feel very
honoured by your presence, which shows your
commitment to this cause. We thank you for giving the
Council the opportunity to return to the very important
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I
also wish to thank Mr. Egeland for his comprehensive
briefing, which provides food for thought and impetus
for further action.

Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
that will be given by the delegation of the Netherlands
on behalf of the European Union later in this debate.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2004/431)
charts the way forward. Germany fully endorses the
report and the recommendations and observations
contained therein.

In the year 2005, we will aim for a major
stocktaking of where we stand in the achievement of
the goals that we agreed upon at the Millennium
Summit in 2000. The protection of civilians in armed
conflict is one of the priorities in the Millennium
Declaration; it cites the need to expand and strengthen
the protection of civilians in complex emergencies and
crises in conformity with international humanitarian
law.

This Council has ample reason to continue and
intensify its consideration of this cross-cutting issue in
the months to come. The success and sustainability of
our efforts hinge on how we handle the matter.
Cross-cutting as it is, protection must go beyond a
short-term humanitarian engagement. Humanitarian
assistance and its tools are vital, but we need more:
cooperation and coordination with all actors
responsible for security, crisis prevention,
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation, law enforcement, capacity-building,
reconstruction and development, and other relevant
components. All partners must act in the spirit of a
humanitarian social contract. The problem of illicit
small arms and light weapons in many conflict regions
needs to be tackled in parallel to the demobilization
and disarmament of ex-combatants.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
highly complex subject - so complex that the Council
saw the need to adopt an aide-memoire that breaks the
topic down into tangible fields, or elements of
protection. We would like to emphasize the usefulness
of the aide-memoire and of the road map on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict as tools to
better facilitate and synchronize discussion and action
to be taken. Germany also endorses the 10-point
platform that was presented by Under-Secretary-
General Jan Egeland to the Security Council at its
meeting last December. My delegation would see great
merit in the adoption of the lO-point platform by the
Council.

On this occasion, Germany would like to propose
three points that we deem to be of crucial importance
concerning areas where the need for progress is urgent.
These points are also reflected in the report of the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change.
We appreciate the fact that the authors of the report
saw a need to touch upon the protection issue, and we
agree with their recommendations in that regard. We
propose the following.

First, let us put an end to impunity. Impunity is
one of the worst root causes of the violation of the
integrity of civilians. Parties to armed conflict need to
comply with international humanitarian law, in
particular the four Geneva Conventions and their two
Additional Protocols. If we do not end impunity for
violations of international humanitarian law, refugee
law and human rights law, there will be no deterrent for
the perpetrators of such acts of violence and
aggression. Combatants who violate the principles of
humanitarian law - be it by committing acts against
civilians or acts against humanitarian personnel -
need to know that they are acting against fundamental
principles of humanity and that their acts will
eventually come under the close scrutiny of the
International Criminal Court or of a regional tribunal.

In that regard, we fully concur with the High-
level Panel in its calls on combatants to abide by the
provisions of the Geneva Conventions and on all
Member States to sign, ratify and act upon all treaties
relating to the protection of civilians, including the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, the Geneva Conventions, the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and
all refugee conventions. I would like to emphasize the
role that the International Criminal Court might have in
addressing the issue of impunity. We regret that there is
serious disagreement about the role of the Court. We
believe that we should consider options and
possibilities aimed at bridging those differences,
because we need to advance further towards universal
acceptance of the Court's jurisdiction.

My second point is that we should better address
the issue of humanitarian access, as some previous
speakers have already pointed out. As the Secretary-
General pointed out in his most recent report
(S/2004/431), humanitarian access is either denied or
obstructed for more than 10 million people around the
world. Given such a number, my delegation finds it
difficult to understand why we have to fight so hard in
the General Assembly and in the Economic and Social
Council to include proper language on access in
resolutions concerning humanitarian assistance.

Humanitarian access has a single goal: to help
people who are in critical need. No humanitarian
action, no humanitarian staff member, intends to
violate the sovereignty of States. Sovereignty is not a
predominant issue for the humanitarian community, but
it is a crucial point for those who deny access or link
access to prior approval by the State concerned. That
conflict of perceptions determines our humanitarian
discussions and actions. Our energies are siphoned off
by legalistic skirmishes, when instead we should be
acting in concert to reach a broad-based operational
approach. We believe that the vulnerable and those
who suffer merit a more effective decision-making
process among ourselves.

We appreciate the recommendations contained in
the report of the High-level Panel on viable, practical
measures such as training for political and
peacekeeping representatives to negotiate access and
the use by the Security Council of special field
missions or other diplomatic measures to enhance
access and the protection of civilians.

If we want to improve the quality of protection,
we have to look at the field. There is an evident need
for improved coordination of protection measures at
the field level. To date, no single United Nations
agency has the overall competence to deal with
protection. However, protection can be properly
executed only if it is tackled in a comprehensive way.
A first practical example of such coordination is the
protection working group that was recently established
in Khartoum to deal with protection issues in Darfur.
My delegation is convinced that the Council should
study additional ways in which to reach a more
comprehensive level of protection.

Thirdly, we must stop the recent trend of using
sexual violence as a weapon of conflict. The
importance of reversing the escalating cycle of
violence against women and children during and after
conflict cannot be overstated. Women and children -
be they civilians or female or child soldiers - are
among the most vulnerable groups in times of conflict.
Women are increasingly subject to cruel, degrading and
often lethal treatment in times of conflict. Children
suffer most and have the fewest defences in conflict
situations if they are separated from or deprived of
their parents, and their ability to cope with a quickly
changing environment is very limited.

Many children without protection are being
kidnapped and made child soldiers. Pressing children
into military duty rather than letting them develop
peacefully is one of the most short-sighted and cruel
acts anyone can commit. Even apart from the cruelty
involved, it will have a long-term negative impact. In
that regard, I should like to recall Council resolution
1539 (2004) and the preceding relevant resolutions.

Women and children are also, to an
unprecedented extent, victims of atrocious sexual
violence. Worse still, sexual or gender violence is
intentionally and systematically used as a weapon of
warfare. We must undertake special efforts to study
that phenomenon as diligently as possible to come to a
swift determination on how to stop that practice. In its
report, the High-level Panel proposes giving human
rights components of peacekeeping operations explicit
mandates and sufficient resources for investigating and
reporting human rights violations against women. The
Panel also proposes that the recommendations of
Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security and of the associated Independent Experts'
Assessment for the protection of women be fully
implemented. The German delegation fully concurs
with those proposals.

Let me end my remarks by reiterating our
position: we believe that a new resolution on the
protection of civilians would be a feasible option for
the Council. I say that, bearing in mind that many of
the points raised by the excellent Security Council
resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000) still await
implementation. However, we believe that the
changing character of conflict and the development of
new threats, new institutions and new tools to engage
more effectively in assistance should be reflected in an
operational text adopted by the Council.

