Mr. Hill (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for again
allowing us the opportunity to express our appreciation
of and strong support for the work of the Security
Council's counter-terrorism committees and their
respective expert groups. They work to give practical
effect to the United Nations counter-terrorism
framework and the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. The Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force also has an important role
to play in ensuring system-wide coherence within the
United Nations in tackling terrorism. Australia
encourages the committees and their expert bodies to
continue to explore ways in which to work more
closely together, especially in relation to streamlined
reporting regimes, assessment missions and the
facilitation of technical assistance.

The long-term objective of Australia's
international counter-terrorism engagement is to
develop the ability of partner countries to prevent and
respond to terrorist attacks. As part of that effort,
Australia works collaboratively with countries in the
Asia-Pacific region to implement Security Council
resolutions and international instruments to combat
terrorism.

Australia strongly supports the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in
advancing the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) and its successor resolutions. We welcome
CTED's proactive approach to implementing its
mandate and support the renewed emphasis on the
delivery of technical assistance. We support CTED's
close cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Action
Group of the Group of Eight in helping to deliver more
targeted capacity-building assistance to Member States.
We welcome other innovations, such as the draft
technical guide to the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) that is under development. We also
appreciate the transparent approach being taken by the
Committee and CTED through their programme of
outreach and regular briefings to Member States, the
most recent of which was held last week.

Australia recognizes the vital work of the 1267
Committee in United Nations counter-terrorism efforts
and is committed to ensuring full compliance with
Security Council resolution 1267 (1999) and its
successor resolutions.

We welcome the Committee's efforts to engage
more closely with Member States and regional bodies.
Australia commends the Committee for its efforts to
disseminate information on listed individuals and
entities and to provide updates of existing listings to
Member States in an effective and timely manner.
Australia welcomes the greater transparency that will
be brought to the listing and de-listing processes
through the implementation of resolution 1822 (2008).
We encourage Member States to designate
terrorists domestically and to implement their
obligations to freeze the assets of individuals and
entities that commit and support terrorist acts. The
effectiveness of the 1267 Committee is directly related
to the relevance and currency of the consolidated list
and we encourage further efforts to that end by the
Committee in its outreach to and dialogue with
Member States.

Australia particularly welcomes the 1540
Committee's continued focus on facilitating assistance
to Asia-Pacific countries to fulfil their obligations
under resolution 1540 (2004). We commend the United
Nations Office of Disarmament Affairs for organizing,
in cooperation with the Governments of Thailand,
Norway and the European Union, the Asia-Pacific 1540
regional implementation workshop for border, customs
and regulatory officials, held in Bangkok between
27 and 31 October. Australia was pleased to be able to
participate and address the workshop on practical,
operational measures for border control and support of
export controls.

Such workshops complement Australia's own
outreach on non-proliferation in the Asia-Pacific. In
our bilateral and multilateral engagement with regional
countries, we offer assistance to further improve and
strengthen capacity and expertise where we can, and
we continue to expand and enhance our dialogue on
non-proliferation and counter-proliferation issues with
our regional partners.

At the broader level, as an active member of all
export control regimes, permanent Chair of the
Australia Group, current Chair of the Missile
Technology Control Regime and one of more than 90
participants in the Proliferation Security Initiative,
Australia works actively with other Governments to
strengthen international counter-proliferation
frameworks in support of the goals of resolution 1540
(2004).

