Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's debate on
the situation in Afghanistan. We also appreciate the
insightful and frank briefings by Special Representative
Yamamoto and Ms. Sima Samar, which have added to
our understanding of the current circumstances.

The unimpeded and increasingly brutal terrorist
attacks, the territorial gains by terrorist groups with
support from outside Afghanistan and the emerging
grave humanitarian crises are all portents of dreadful
times. The recent terrorist attack on Afghanistan's
largest hospital in Kabul poignantly depicts the very
complexity of the problems faced by Afghans as a
people, in the most graphic manner. Afghanistan, a
wounded nation reeling with multiple injuries - in
dire need of healing and at its most vulnerable - was
attacked in the most gruesome manner by disguised
attackers who target caregivers.

In the past few months, terrorism in Afghanistan
has grown enormously in intensity, brutality and scope.
Terrorist groups have been successful in their efforts
to capture and hold territory. The Taliban has tried
to expand its influence to territories in the north and
northeast, and to the southwest where it has traditionally
not been so strong. The nexus between terrorist
networks and criminal groups has further strengthened.

We salute the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces, who are countering the forces of
terrorism and extremism with courage and resilience.
India remains committed to standing with Afghanistan
and supporting and strengthening its capabilities to
fight terrorism and violence. Even as the international
community pours in resources and efforts to support
that wounded nation, steadfast efforts to ensure that the
support can be absorbed and utilized by Afghanistan
are crucial. In that regard, it is our first and foremost
duty to ensure that the resurgent forces of terrorism
and extremism do not find sanctuaries or safe havens
of any shape or form. Experience shows that situations
in which foreign assistance is available to insurgents
tend to fester and take a greater toll. We also must not
differentiate between good and bad terrorists or play
one group against the other. The Taliban, the Haqqani
network, Al-Qaida, Da'esh, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba,
Jaish-e-Mohammed and others of their ilk are all
terror organizations 4 many of them proscribed by
the United Nations. They should be treated as such and
their activities must be universally opposed.

It is obvious that the political process that the
United Nations started and the sanctions regimes that
the Council had split have not quite worked. The fact
that the Council has not taken action against the Taliban
leaders, as it had vowed in resolution 1988 (2011), is
now well documented. It took the subsidiary body of
the Council four months to confirm the death of the
Taliban's former leader. Seven months later, we still
await the decision ofthe Council's same subsidiary body
regarding the freezing of that slain terrorist's accounts.

Even as the democratically elected Government of
Afghanistan battles against terror, it is being saddled
with mounting problems that are not of its making.
We are seeing a paradoxical phenomenon of the
return of almost a million Afghans to their homeland,
many involuntarily, in the most difficult security and
economic situation the country has witnessed. As if all
this were not enough, the landlocked country's access
to the high seas is becoming an issue of contention.

The collective humanitarian impact of all this
is staggering, as outlined in the Secretary General's
report (S/2017/189) and by the briefers today. Has the
trend of reversing of the gains of the international
community and Afghan people in the last decades
perhaps now started? Can all of us, who have invested
so much in support of the Afghan people, remain
watching on the sidelines? Can we simply look on as
territories are captured by terrorists, people are killed
or forced, under threat, to go back to a situation that
is the same or worse than the one they fled? Here and
now, it is imperative that we take decisive action. We
must not forget the implications the world faced in 2001
for its lack of action. History never forgives those who
forget it.

