Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): It is
certainly a pleasure to be able to say "Madam
President". I wish there were more madams around the
table. I want to express our great appreciation for your
presence here today. We also want to let you know how
ably you have been represented by Ambassador van
Walsum and his team during a very difficult month in
the Council. We are grateful for you Government's
leadership during this month. I think today's meeting is
a testament to your Government's commitment to
international intervention and the importance of
resolving conflict and restoring order. The commitment
of the Government of the Netherlands to post-conflict
assistance to civil society in Guinea-Bissau is
commendable, as is its support for economic recovery.
I think it sets an example for all of us.

We are also very grateful to have Vice-Prime
Minister Imbali and the delegation from Guinea-Bissau
here. We also welcome the presence of the
representative of the World Bank, Mr. Madavo, as a
welcome testament to the importance of development
in conflict prevention.

The United States commends the people of
Guinea-Bissau for their commitment to peace and for
their sustained efforts to work together to build a
stronger society. We also applaud the work of United
Nations personnel serving with the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau under
the leadership of Secretary-General Annan's
Representative, Mr. Samuel Nana-Sinkam, for their
efforts to strengthen democratic values, promote the
rule of law and encourage the protection of human
rights in Guinea-Bissau. The United Nations Office
represents a good example of the critical role the
Organization can play in conflict resolution and post-
conflict institution-building. A continued United
Nations presence will serve to promote the continued
viability of Guinea-Bissau's democratic institutions
and to turn its attention to reconstruction and economic
development. The United States support for the United
Nations operation remains strong. We are pleased that
the Council has given it a continuing mandate through
March 2001.

While we applaud these signs of progress, recent
disturbing developments in Guinea-Bissau have
sounded some alarms. The fractious and ambiguous
role played by General Mane and his loyalists has
posed a major obstacle to reconstruction efforts since
President Yala's inauguration last February. We call on
General Mane and his entourage to refrain from
interfering with the legitimate, popularly elected
Government of President Yala.

We encourage the Government of Guinea-Bissau
to develop a plan for the integration of former soldiers
into the national economy, within the framework of the
rule of law.

The international community would react
negatively should Guinea-Bissau return to military rule
under any guise. Guinea-Bissau is just beginning to
recover from civil conflict. It needs peace,
reconstruction and development. Nothing could hinder
that more than renewed military intervention in
governance. To that end, the people of Guinea-Bissau
need and deserve the support of the international
community.

We should also take note of the fact that the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are
represented here today as an expression of their
willingness to do their part. Thanks to international
encouragement and intervention, Guinea-Bissau has
taken the first critical steps towards the re-
establishment of a society based on national
reconciliation and democratic values. We must
continue to support those efforts.

The United States remains committed to
supporting Guinea-Bissau's recovery from two years of
upheaval and disruption. We will continue to engage
President Yala's Government to support the ongoing
process of civil and economic reconstruction. As a
member of the Group of Friends for Guinea-Bissau, the
United States stands ready to do what it can to help. In
a subregion fraught with many challenges and
interlocking crises, the United Nations must likewise
continue to do its part in assisting the Government and
the people of Guinea-Bissau to build a strong
foundation for peace.

