Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Let me start by
thanking Nigeria for organizing this debate on a very
important topic. I am extremely pleased to bring
back this topic to the Council, where it is crucial to
have this discussion on security sector reform (SSR).
We join other members of the Council in welcoming
the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and
Security Institutions, Dmitry Tivov. We also welcome
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, Assistant Secretary-General
and Assistant Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme.

Security sector reform is indeed an important
aspect of multidimensional peace operations. Where
peacekeeping operations are required to create an
effective, professional and responsible security sector,
SSR is one of the critical elements of the foundations
of peace and sustainable development. In that regard,
we reiterate the point already referred to by other
speakers, who emphasized that SSR must be based on
national ownership in order to be possible. It is also
recognized that successful, sustainable and nationally
led security sector reforms require focused efforts,
dedicated resources and the concerted political will of
all the parties involved.

In Angola, in order to ensure the success of
SSR, a legal framework for national dialogue on
security sector reform has been created. It involves a
programme for the technical and professional training
of demobilized personnel, and the promotion of and
training in entrepreneurship for former combatants as
a means of promoting the social integration into civil
society of thousands of men and women coming from
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes implemented in the country, in particular
at the end ofa long civil war. In that ongoing process, it
has also been possible, through the recruitment of new
entrants into the army and police, to involve them in an
effective nation-building process as they are trained to
play a role not just in security, but also in the various
forms of nation-building under way in the country.

We stress that security sector reform should be
based on participatory commitments and fully include
the widest range of stakeholders, including civil society.
In that connection, it is important to enhance the host
country's ability to develop, manage and implement
reforms that should be flexible, adaptable and tailored
to the post-conflict country's concerns and needs.

Resolution 2151 (2014) - the first stand-alone
Security Council resolution concerning SSR - is a
milestone decision that has impacted a wide range
of mandates given to United Nations peacekeeping
and special political missions. The main challenge to
security sector reform remains the deficiency of actual
political will to reform, as we have seen in different
countries on the agenda of the Security Council. We
must therefore recognize that reforming a country's
security sector is a political endeavour and must not
be treated as a strictly technical matter. United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions must
ensure therefore that Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General, through their good offices, engage
in intense political dialogue on SSR in the country to
which they are assigned at the earliest stage of their
mission. Security sector reform remains a crucial tool
not only for conflict prevention in post-conflict States,
but also in the prevention of post-electoral Violence like
that which we are now seeing in Burundi.

The partnerships on SSR of the United Nations
with regional organizations, such as the African
Union and European Union, have in the past been a
sound foundation that has enabled the implementation
of a comprehensive SSR process with coordinated
information-sharing developing into an effective
division of labour. When implementing SSR in the
field, those partnerships should form the basis on which
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
ensure that a comprehensive SSR process is thoroughly
coordinated with information-sharing and developed
into an effective division of labour. The technical
guidance and guidelines of the United Nations system
integrated into SSR can be improved through regular
consultations with Member States, in order for the
Secretariat to continue to update and elaborate new
guidelines, including the development of training
modules based on best practices.

In countries with ongoing DDR and SSR
programmes, the United Nations should provide
information to the host countries' security sectors on
implementation and follow-up in order to avoid the
exclusion ofex-combatants and to create the bestpossible
conditions for their integration into civilian life, which
is a crucial element in the peace and consolidation
process. In countries like Liberia, where the Security
Council intends to end its mission, draw down or
reduce the personnel of its peacekeeping mission, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council
in particular should establish mechanisms to prevent
the risk of the resurgence of conflict after the United
Nations mission exits. In that context, we also call on
the Peacebuilding Commission to continue to play its
very key advocacy role through the United Nations and
international and regional financial institutions, as well
as with bilateral and multilateral donors, in order to
continue to mobilize logistical and financial resources
in support of countries engaged in a peacebuilding
process.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that security
sector reform is not the only concern of post-conflict
countries, but must be combined with reforms in other
areas, including administration, justice, the rule of law
and good governance, in order to ensure long-lasting
stability.

