Mr. Khan: It is indeed a singular honour and a
privilege to present the first report of the United Nations
investigative team to promote accountability for crimes

allegedly committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), also known as Da'esh (see S/2018/103l).
We intend to outline today our initial strategic vision,
the progress made to date in its realization and our key
priorities as we now continue our preparatory work in
Iraq ahead of the commencement of more meaningful
and substantive investigative work early next year.

I would like, however, to begin with the obvious,
but something that requires us all, in my respectful
submission, to have pause for thought. It is to applaud
the indefatigable courage and perseverance and
recognize the tremendous suffering of the survivors
of Da'esh crimes. Their fortitude in standing firm and
continuing is an aspect that must be recognized and
be at the forefront of our minds. In that endeavour, of
course, the unity and united perseverance of the people
of Iraq in defeating ISIL territorially are an aspect that
must be mentioned.

As ISIL has been driven from its strongholds, the
scope and magnitude of its heinous acts have become
tragically ever more clear. Witness testimony after
witness testimony has revealed unimaginable abuses
and acts of depravity. Thousands of our fellow human
beings - men and thousands upon thousands of women
and children - have become victims at the hands ofISIL
and witnesses to its deeds. By dint of resolution 2379
(2017), the Security Council responded unanimously
with one clear voice to the call of assistance, which had
been raised by the Government of the Republic of Iraq
in support of its efforts to hold ISIL accountable.

Noting that the terrorist acts of ISIL constituted a
threat to international peace and security, the Council
requested the establishment of the Investigative Team
in order to support domestic efforts to establish
accountability, requiring us to collect, gather, analyse
and store evidence in Iraq of crimes that may constitute
genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes.
In addition, the Council underlined that, as Special
Adviser and Head of the Investigative Team, I would be
required to promote throughout the world accountability
for the crimes of Da'esh and work with survivors in a
manner consistent with now well-established human
rights norms and best United Nations practices. That
was for one imperative and one purpose -to ensure
that those crimes are recognized within the disciplined
environment of the law. That aspect is discussed in
further detail in our report (see S/2018/103l), dated
16 November.
Turning to the next topic of this briefing, I take this
opportunity to express gratitude to the Council and the
Government of Iraq for the significant trust that they
have reposed in the Investigative Team in that important
mandate and to reiterate what should be obvious, which
is our absolute commitment to showing fidelity to the
mandate and resolution 2379 (2017) in a bid to ensure
that those have committed those acts are investigated
and pursued in accordance with best United Nations
practices and international law so that we can deliver
on our mandate.

Since the formal commencement of its activities on
20 August, the Investigative Team has undertaken key
preparatory work, pursuant to the mandate provided
by the Council, in order to provide what we hope will
prove to be a solid platform for the commencement of
investigative activities early next year. As a result of
those efforts and based on the support of key partners
within the United Nations system, including - it must
be recognized - the Executive Office ofthe Secretary-
General, the Department of Political Affairs and the
Department of Field Support, as well as the unstinting
support ofthe Office of Legal Affairs, the Investigative
Team successfully deployed to Iraq on 29 October.

In conducting the preparatory activities outlined in
our first report, we have been guided at all times by
two key imperatives. First, the Team must operate as
an independent, impartial and credible accountability
mechanism capable of conducting all its work to the
highest possible standards. Secondly, there is a need
to ensure that our work is carried out collaboratively
and cooperatively with the Government of Iraq, with
full respect at all times for national sovereignty and
in a manner that effectively harnesses the talents and
engenders the support of all elements of Iraqi society.

As reflected in resolution 2379 (2017) and the
terms of reference for the activities of the Investigative
Team (S/2018/118, annex), approved by the Council in
February, those imperatives are not paradoxical, nor
do they represent opposing weights of a scale to be
delicately balanced. On the contrary, the establishment
of the Team as an independent, impartial entity, and
successful and meaningful engagement with the
Government of Iraq and the broader populace of Iraq
in its work represent, in our view, mutually reinforcing
principles that, if harnessed effectively, will allow the
Team to overcome the many challenges, it will face
and deliver effectively on the mandate set down by the
Council.

With a view to ensuring that the Investigative Team
can conduct its work in an independent and impartial
manner, in line with the international standards to
which I alluded a moment ago, we have sought, during
the first three months of our activities, to prioritize
the development of core logistical, substantive and
administrative frameworks, which have been reflected
in the proposed budget of the Investigative Team
currently under the consideration of the General
Assembly.

With respect to the first aspect - our logistical
arrangements - we have identified former United
Nations facilities for refurbishment that will serve as our
headquarters and permanent premises in Baghdad, and
plans have also been developed regarding the physical
and technological infrastructure that will be needed to
support the material and evidence that we will receive
and gather, as well. That will, we hope, ensure the
effective storage of documentary, forensic and digital
information, which would be the foundation of any
proper investigation in accordance with international
standards.

Secondly, with regard to the substantive framework,
progress has also been made. Work has commenced
on the development of various standing operating
procedures of key activities, including the collection,
preservation and storing of evidence and material, as
well as information management and chains of custody.
Those issues will be critical to witness protection.
Initial mapping activities have already been undertaken,
assisting us in identifying where key sources of existing
evidentiary material may be located.

We have also spent a significant amount of time
in ensuring that the admonition and injunction of the
Council to avoid duplication are fully observed, and
that has taken the form of reaching out to other parts
of the United Nations, whether in the counter-terrorism
sphere or other areas, such as the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide, to ensure that we harness the
capacities, the experience and the centres of excellence
that are already present. All of that is to ensure that the
Team operates as effectively and efficiently as possible
and discharges its mandate.

Thirdly, with regard to the composition of the
Investigative Team, requirements have been identified
with respect to both international staff and national
personnel, and the initial recruitment is progressing. In
that regard, I wish to emphasize to the Council that I
am firmly of the view that the successful integration
of Iraqi national professional personnel into the Team
will be essential. It will enrich our capacities, allow
us to operate more effectively in Iraq and, we hope,
more fully and completely fulfil the responsibilities
entrusted to it by the Council.

At all times, Organizationur objective will be
to foster a mutually supportive relationship between
international and national staff and mould it into one
coherent, cohesive and unified entity, united by a
common principle to investigate, in accordance with
the best United Nations standards and international
practices, acts that may have been committed by
ISIL. In doing so, it is our fervent hope that we will
also strengthen the capacity of the Team, assist in
generating capacities in Iraq and deliver the mandate in
an independent manner, which will, hopefully, support
the long-term, sustainable efforts that Iraq is focusing
on to achieve accountability.

Throughout the formative period of our work over
the past three months, I have consistently underlined the
fundamental imperative and the absolute commitment
of the Investigative Team to ensuring that its actions are
aligned with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations that remain the foundation of this organ, and
also that we abide by United Nations policies and best
practices, including with respect to the transmission of
evidentiary material for use in domestic proceedings.
As I have emphasized, our adherence to those principles
is not only required by dint of the resolution itself, or
indeed by the terms of reference that have been approved
by the Council, but is also essential to ensuring the
continued support of the international community and
the credibility of this work.

It is a remarkable achievement, and both a sign of
the unity of the Council on this issue and revealing of
the criminality of the many acts carried out by Da'esh,
that the Council was unanimous and the international
community is in consensus that the rule of law and
judicial accountability have an important and critical
part to play in properly confronting the phenomena that
we have unfortunately witnessed.

In pursuit of the second imperative of fostering
collective support for our work in Iraq, the Investigative
Team has prioritized the development of cooperative
relationships with the Government of Iraq itself,
as well as with the multitude of religious and ethnic
groups and regional entities in Iraq. We have reached
out to non-governmental bodies and other key national
stakeholders and, as emphasized in our written report,
we consider that that work will be crucial to the
successful fulfilment of our mandate.

Reflecting this during my initial mission to Iraq
in August, I met with senior Government officials,
many survivors, civil society groups and members
of Christian, Shia, Sunni, Turkmen Shia, Kakai and
Yazidi communities. In those discussions, I emphasized
to all, whoever my audience was at any given time,
that there is no hierarchy of victims. The Investigative
Team, in seeking to fulfil the mandate of the Council,
will ensure that we focus on crimes committed against
any human being - irrespective of ethnic group or
religious denomination - who has suffered from those
crimes Within our jurisdiction at the hands of Da'esh.

Since our arrival in Iraq in October, the Investigative
Team has continued to engage with the Government
of Iraq with a view to establishing clear operational
frameworks with our national counterparts. In that
regard, productive discussions have already been held
with the Steering Committee that has been designated
under the terms of reference. We are also working
on and clarifying the procedures that will form the
bedrock of our activities. We have liaised productively
and continuously with the relevant national security
sectors in Iraq to ensure that the Team can undertake
activities in a secure and safe manner.

Last week, I had the singular honour and
opportunity to have a meeting with the Prime Minister
of Iraq, during which I underlined the commitment of
the Investigative Team to working in support of the
domestic authorities of Iraq to ensure that members
of ISIL are held accountable for their crimes. I was
grateful to the Prime Minister that in that meeting, and
afterwards in his public statements, he expressed in
very solid terms, ifI may say so, his continued support
for the resolution, the Investigative Team and our focus
on genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes,
which is to be applauded.

Our presence in Iraq has provided the Investigative
Team with the opportunity to continue to engage
with various survivor groups, tribal leaders and other
non-governmental bodies. In that regard, I recently
held in-depth discussions with tribal leaders from the
Sinjar region and have put in place plans to visit that
region later this month, in addition to other key sites of
ISIL crimes. Since its arrival in Iraq, the Team has also
continued to build relationships with a broad range of
Member States, many of which were initiated here in
New York. We look forward to further strengthening
those ties in support of our mandated activities over the
coming months.

The Investigative Team now looks forward
to continuing preparations in Iraq with a view to
commencing investigative activities in early 2019.
Based on our preparatory activities to date, and
reflecting the consultations held with the Government
of Iraq and other key national stakeholders, I wish to
highlight to the Council the following key priorities for
action, which are outlined, of course, in much greater
detail in the report.

The first priority is the completion of key
infrastructural elements, including the premises of the
Investigative Team and the physical and technological
equipment that I have referred to, which is necessary
for the storage and preservation of evidence.

Secondly, we must finalize the core substantive
work, including our standard operating practices and
the recruitment process, which we hope to be able to
kick off once the budget is approved by the General
Assembly.

Thirdly, we must collect, gather and analyse
the evidence within Iraq, and by that I mean that the
central Government, the regional authorities, third
States, non-governmental organizations, international
actors and neighbouring States must bring all of that
information together so that it can be subjected to
analysis, so that patterns can be discerned and so that
it can lead to the fourth stage, which relates to the
activities of the Investigative Team to fill the gaps that
have been identified. I look forward to presenting my
next report in May 2019, which will provide a fuller
update on those activities.

However, I wish to be candid with the Council in
one additional respect. The delivery of this mandate and
the successful completion of these activities require not
just the historic, united and unanimous support of the
Council, but collegiality and solidarity going forward.
Without the political will and political support of
Member States that have been fortunately evidenced
to date, the significant challenges that are obvious on
the face of the mandate will not be overcome. By the
same token, with that solidarity the challenges and the
scale of the evidence will not be insurmountable by
the application of our collective will and the resources
available in the international community and within the
Team.

On a related topic, I take this opportunity to
mention that the proposed budget of the Investigative
Team has been submitted to the General Assembly
for consideration. It is my sincere belief that we have
presented a very streamlined organizational structure
with a limited objective to meet our mandate. There is
no fat in that budget. We have specifically designed a
substantive capacity that will allow us to conduct our
work in accordance with international standards and
thereby ensure the broadest possible use of evidence
within Iraq and, domestically, within States elsewhere.
That plan, strategy and organizational structure are
complemented by a very lightweight mission support
mechanism that draws on existing United Nations
in-country assets to ensure the maximum focus of
resources where it is needed, which is in the substantive
work of investigating the crimes themselves. It is my
hope that the commitment to efficiency demonstrated
in our proposed budget will be reflected on positively
by Member States in the coming weeks as it is finalized
and approved.

In addition, I would emphasize paragraph 14 of
resolution 2379 (2017), which created a trust fund. I
request that States also consider making supplementary
contributions to the trust fund for key activities. Those
activities are not just for the security and the staff costs
of the team, but include exhumations, DNA analysis
and witness support activities. I take this opportunity
to state and underscore my appreciation for the very
generous and absolutely vital contributions made
thus far by the United Kingdom, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and the Government of Qatar. I also know
that various other States are working towards pledging
further support.

In conclusion, I wish to underline to the
Council that the preparatory work completed by the
Team has reinforced my view that our dual initial

imperatives - ensuring independence and seeking
cooperation, and demonstrating impartiality and
pursuing national engagement - do not present a

dichotomy. There is no contradiction in upholding
independence while supporting national accountability.
Indeed, the opposite is true. It is only by establishing
the Investigative Team as an independent, objective
and trusted source of evidentiary material capable of
conducting its work to the highest possible standards
that we can best support the Government of Iraq and
other Member States in our common and necessary
pursuit of accountability and justice. Simultaneous,
the completion of our investigative activities will be
dependent on securing the cooperation, support and
trust of all elements of Iraqi society.

It is by harnessing those dual elements, both
international and national, that we will be able to
successfully fulfil the mandate the Council has provided
and deliver justice for the victims of ISIL. As we look
forward to the commencement of our investigative
activities in Iraq, it is ultimately them and the cause of
justice that we seek to serve.

