Mr. Sen (India): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.

This discussion is timely, coming as it does in the
midst of heightened international focus on Afghanistan
and the surrounding region. Any discussion on
Afghanistan must begin from the central premise that
the international community has an abiding
responsibility to assist Afghanistan in consolidating
democratic governance, peace, stability and long-term
employment-led development, while delivering
humanitarian assistance in the interim. Our Views are
set forth in that context.

We have carefully read the report of the Security
Council mission and the earlier report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Afghanistan. We share the
mission's positive assessment of the achievements of
the Government of President Karzai and the people of
Afghanistan over the past five years. The establishment
of genuinely democratically elected representative
institutions and sustained economic growth, as well as
growing trade and economic cooperation, investment in
core infrastructure projects and the implementation of
education, health and rural development programmes,
are praiseworthy, particularly as they were achieved in
the face of adversity. At the same time, the support of
the international community has been substantial and
fairly consistent. India is happy to continue playing a
role in the reconstruction of Afghanistan, given our
historic ties with the Afghan people.

There is no doubt that the most pressing task
before us is to overcome the challenge of insecurity.
We have heard several arguments suggesting that the
lack of effective governance in Afghanistan,
widespread corruption, the inefficiency of the police
service, the growing narcotics trade and continued
warlordism in the provinces all contribute to the
security problem. That may well be true, but to focus
on those as the cause of the security problems is, in our
judgement, to miss the point. Those are factors which
thrive on insecurity and serve to exacerbate it. They are
not causes of insecurity. Instead, it is the revival of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups, and the
existence of cross-border safe havens for such groups,
that are the real cause of insecurity. In focusing on
rebuilding and strengthening Afghan State institutions,
the roots of insecurity should not be forgotten.

The report (S/2005/935) refers to Operation
Medusa. As we know, a greater number of people than
the number of those killed in Operation Medusa
became active again. Therefore, Operation Medusa has
not even contained, let alone eliminated, Medusa
herself; the snakes are still swirling because of the
cross-border dimension. That reinforces the importance
of this aspect, and historical experience shows that
unless it is addressed, attempts at stability or security
will be unavailing. It is therefore important to confront,
rather than to strike deals with, the Taliban, which is
really tantamount - if I may continue to use the
metaphor - to looking at the image of Medusa in the
shield without striking at Medusa herself.
While the report of the Council mission suggests
that insurgency is largely confined to one third of
Afghanistan, the situation remains precarious. The
statistics of the International Security Assistance Force
itself show that in recent months security incidents

have escalated by as much as 70 per cent and 50 per
cent in Paktika and Khost provinces. Therefore, it is
not clear that efforts to negotiate peace in the more
troubled Afghan provinces are succeeding; indeed,
terrorist violence spreading elsewhere may suggest the
opposite. Moreover, the growing incidence of suicide
bombings shows the increasing spread of an ideology
and tactics typical of Al-Qaida, which are not part of
the Afghan cultural and religious tradition.

Therefore, we believe that the cost of tolerating
the spiralling Violence is infinitely higher than any
costs we might bear in quelling it through firm law
enforcement action. The consequences of collective
inaction may well be borne by the international
community in general, but will certainly be borne by
the States of the region in particular.

It is in this context that India emphasizes the need
to simultaneously implement firm and effective law
enforcement measures, security sector reform
programmes, capacity-building measures and regional
cooperation in all fields. Similarly, the growth of
representative political parties and the broad-basing of
the culture of democratic political activism, which is
already under way, are developments that should be
fostered, since they also greatly help in checking
terrorism. All of these contribute to the effort to create
credible and sustained opportunities to build upon the
growing constituency for peace in Afghanistan and
across the region. Nevertheless, they must be
accompanied by firm measures to enforce peace.

It was fortuitous that the Security Council
mission Visited our region a few days prior to the
second Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan, which India had the honour to host,
jointly with our Afghan brothers, in New Delhi last
month. The regional dimension is explicitly recognized
in the report of the mission, in context of finding ways
to help Afghanistan overcome the challenges before it.

Indeed, the New Delhi Declaration of the Second
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan notes that a

"strategy for development for Afghanistan which
is based on cooperation with regional countries
creates significant possibilities for reducing
poverty and for achieving the Afghanistan
Compact benchmarks and Millennium
Development Goals in the entire region".
Towards this end, it outlines a number of useful
suggestions for the countries of the region to
coordinate policies for exploiting shared resources like
water, agriculture and energy, to develop capacity-
building programmes, and to expand trade and
transport linkages, in order to design and build
appropriate regional projects.

Similarly, we believe that more work needs to be
done to reverse the expansion of narcotics production.
Not only is it necessary to implement policies to stop
cultivation, but it is also important to focus on
simultaneously implementing crop substitution
programmes and improving border management
mechanisms. It will take a coordinated effort by the
Government and people of Afghanistan, as well as by
regional players, to effectively address this particular
challenge.

India's support for a sovereign, stable, democratic
and prosperous Afghanistan is consistent and well
known. We see a resurgent, stable, sovereign and
peaceful Afghanistan as an essential element in the
emerging mosaic of regional cooperation underpinning
our world. It is also part of a process that reclaims for
the people of Afghanistan their rightful place in our
collective future. Afghanistan's entry into the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, at its last
Summit in Dhaka, was a manifestation of this. We
believe that Afghanistan can and must be provided with
the means to re-establish itself as the crossroads of
Asia, and as one of the future transport hubs and
energy bridges of our region.

In conclusion, let me also reiterate our firm
commitment to our partnership with Afghanistan,
which today covers a multidimensional cooperation
programme that harmonizes with the priorities of the
Afghan Government. Not only have we extended
financial assistance, in excess of $650 million, to fund
infrastructure projects and to assist with the national
budget process, we are also expanding our involvement
in the capacity-building process, both through
traditional training programmes and through innovative
public-private partnerships that involve our apex
Chambers of Commerce and Industry. Thus, our
assistance spans the range of activity, from basic
infrastructure such as roads, power, dams and telecom
to rapidly implemented, community-based, small-scale
projects, and training and capacity-building
programmes. To summarize our approach, we seek to
help Afghanistan create the infrastructure of a modern

State while, at the same time, going beyond monetary
assistance to provide the Afghan people the
wherewithal to help themselves.

