The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to the representative of
the presidency of the African Union, Mr. Francisco
Madeira, Minister of the Presidency for Parliamentary
and Diplomatic Issues of Mozambique.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the representative of the presidency of the
African Union, the Minister of the Presidency for
Parliamentary and Diplomatic Issues of Mozambique.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Madeira
(Mozambique), took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to invite the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania to participate in the discussion, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the United Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Abdulkader
Shareef.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Shareef
(United Republic of Tanzania), took a seat at the
Council table.


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Italy, in Which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Spatafora
(Italy), took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to the Special Envoy of
the Chairperson of the Commission of the African
Union for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Keli Walubita.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of
the Commission of the African Union for the Great
Lakes Region.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Walubita
(African Union), took a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ibrahima Fall,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes region.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I welcome Mr. Fall and invite him to take a seat
at the Council table.

Expression of sympathy to the Government and
people of Turkey and the Government and people of
the United Kingdom in connection with the recent
terrorist acts in Istanbul


The President: On behalf of the members of the
Security Council, I wish to express to the Government
and people of Turkey, as well as the Government and
people of the United Kingdom, our heartfelt sympathy
for the innocent lives lost as a result of the terrorists
acts in Istanbul today and over the weekend, which the
Council strongly condemns.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members have before them the report of the Secretary-
General on the preparations for an international
conference on the Great Lakes Region (S/2003/1099).

As there is no list of speakers, I would like to
invite Council members to indicate to the Secretariat if
they wish to take the floor.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and I invite him to take the floor.


