Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert
for being with us today and for her helpful and
comprehensive briefing.

Today's unanimous adoption of resolution 2470
(2019) to renew the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) once again underscores the strong
and continued commitment of the international
community to support stability, prosperity and security
in Iraq. As the Government of Iraq transitions from a
period of crisis to one of sustainable development and
political stability, UNAMI will be essential to enhance
those efforts. The transition is reflected clearly in this
year's mandate renewal.

As Iraq begins a new chapter, efforts to stabilize
areas liberated from the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham, address the plight of internally displaced
persons and further integrate Iraq into the surrounding
region must also be accelerated. Taken together, those
efforts will help set Iraq on a path towards stability
and prosperity. It is important, however, to note that
the complexity of the challenges that UNAMI and Iraq
will face moving forward is great. We encourage the
Government of Iraq to fill the remaining vacancies in
its Cabinet and focus on delivering basic services to
the Iraqi people. Restoring key services, health care,
education and infrastructure is an important place to
start, as is addressing corruption and strengthening
viable and responsive State institutions. Those are
key components of Iraq's own national Government
programme. The United States also encourages the
Government of Iraq to rein in all armed groups under
effective state control.

The Funding Facility for Stabilization of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is essential
to stabilization, recovery and reconstruction efforts.
For its part, in March the United States announced a
$100 million contribution to the Facility for stabilization
efforts in Anbar. Other members of the international
community should consider similar contributions.
The Government of Iraq should also make good on its
pledge to the programme or to projects from UNDP's
Facility list.

This year's mandate once again underscores the
importance of supporting UNAMI's efforts to help meet
the needs of all Iraqis, including women, children and
members of religious and ethnic minority groups. This
is an area of particular interest to the United States.
We continue to encourage UNAMI to work closely with
the Government of Iraq to address the unique needs of
these groups and individuals as part and parcel of the
broader national and community-level dialogue needed
in Iraq. We also encourage the Government of Iraq to
ensure the successful reintegration of the children of
alleged members of ISIS and the children of former
captives. Many of those children are indeed Victims,
and we call on Iraq to offer them the same benefits
afforded to refugees and IDPs.

Today's mandate renewal is another reminder of
the constructive role that the United Nations can play
around the world and especially in the Middle East. We
look forward to Iraq's continuing to lead the way in
playing a positive role in its region, and we thank the
Special Representative and the entire UNAMI team for
their continued excellent work.

