Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to welcome the presence of His
Excellency President Oscar Arias Senchez at this
debate. I would like to congratulate his delegation on
their accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. I would also like
to thank the delegation of Costa Rica for this
praiseworthy initiative of organizing an open debate on
such an important topic.

The year 2008 marks the 30th anniversary of the
first special session of the General Assembly devoted
to disarmament, which was a historic turning point in
multilateral efforts for general disarmament and in the
role of the General Assembly in particular. The
outcome document of that session served as a guide for
the efforts of the Organization in that area.

That awakening of the international community
brought about a climate of detente and cooperation that
promised better prospects for dialogue and consultation
on the subject of disarmament. We saw a qualitative
change in attitudes, which allowed for more flexible
positions and the undertaking of initiatives that had
long been held up by narrow-minded power struggles.

Today, we are forced to acknowledge that the
hope prompted by those efforts to free humankind from
the threat of weapons of mass destruction has
dwindled. As a result, many questions have arisen, as
the risks related to the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and the development of a new
generation of arms have never been greater. That
situation is obviously highlighted by the emergence of
new and pressing threats that are of great concern for
the entire international community.

Given the situation, the preservation of
international peace and security and the resolution of
conflicts, in particular conflicts that are related to
decolonization, represent a common challenge for the
entire international community. We have to tackle this
task in order to establish together the conditions
necessary for a thorough change in attitudes and to lay
the foundations of the collective security system that
we all aspire to and that is the safest path to peace and
development.

Such a challenge, in our opinion, requires a
commitment to the promotion of the rule of law and the
rehabilitation of a multilateral negotiating framework
in order to provide global and sustainable solutions to
questions of disarmament and non-proliferation. Such
efforts depend on the implementation of commitments
that we have all undertaken together in the area of
disarmament and the total elimination of weapons of
mass destruction, which is the only real guarantee of
security for all.

Algeria is resolutely committed to fulfilling all its
obligations stemming from the regional and
international instruments to which it is a party. We will
spare no effort, within the framework of the regional
and multilateral entities to which we belong, to support
and promote initiatives designed to relaunch the
process of nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control.

In this respect, my delegation shares the concerns
of many delegations, notably African delegations,
regarding the risks presented by proliferation and the
illicit trafficking of light weapons, the destabilizing
effects of which seriously undermine international
peace and stability and development.
