Mr. Plumbly (United Kingdom): The actions of the
Bosnian Serbs over the past few days in the Srebrenica
area represent the latest in a long line of failures by them
to keep faith with the international community. Their
actions, both in their attacks on the civilian population in
Srebrenica and in their intimidation and violence against
United Nations peace-keepers there, are totally
unacceptable. By the adoption of this resolution, of which
my Government was a sponsor, the Council has made
clear its condemnation of such actions in the strongest
possible terms.

Srebrenica was established as the first safe area
precisely to afford protection to the civilian population by
the presence of United Nations peace-keepers. The basis
for this was the parties' agreement in April 1993 to a
total cease-fire in the Srebrenica area and to its
demilitarization. It is a matter of great regret to my
Government that from the very beginning the Bosnian
Serb forces violated that cease-fire repeatedly. We also
regret that the demilitarization of Srebrenica was not
implemented by the Bosnian Government. But let me
make it clear that, whatever the excuses given by the
Bosnian Serb authorities, there can be no justification
whatsoever for their recent actions.

I should like to take this opportunity to pay
particular tribute to the Dutch United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) personnel in Srebrenica for the
bravery with which they have withstood attacks by
Bosnian Serb forces which greatly outnumbered them.
Attacks on United Nations peace-keepers by any party are
unacceptable. We express our condolences to the Dutch
Government and to the family of the Dutch soldier who
gave his life.

We are now faced with an immediate humanitarian
crisis in Srebrenica. Many of the people there have
already been displaced from the surrounding areas owing
to Bosnian Serb attacks. It is essential that the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) be given immediate access to cope with these
people's needs and to facilitate the departure of those who
wish to leave. My Government has already offered
assistance to UNHCR, and we look to the international
community to play its part in dealing with this

 

humanitarian crisis. We also look to the parties to cooperate
fully.

This Council has now requested the Secretary-General
to use all resources available to him to promote the
restoration of the status of Srebrenica as a safe area, as
agreed by the parties in April 1993. It is through
demilitarization of the area that the civilian population who
wish to do so will be able to remain without fear. This
Council has reaffirmed that objective. We hope that
UNPROFOR, acting within its mandate, can bring the
parties once more to recognize that full implementation of
the April 1993 Agreement represents the best way forward.

We demand that the Bosnian Serb forces, who claim
to respect soldiers carrying out their duty, immediately and
unconditionally release all detained UNPROF OR personnel,
cooperate fully with UNPROFOR and allow full access for
resupply of the Dutch contingent so that it can carry out its
mandate.

We have set out the immediate priorities. But we also
need to consider the wider implications of recent events.
My Government fully supports the Co-Chairmen's efforts
to find a negotiated settlement to the conflict in Bosnia and,
in particular, the efforts of Mr. Bildt with those in the
region who have a role to play in reinforcing United
Nations efforts to re-establish the Srebrenica safe area.

It is essential that the parties demonstrate their
readiness to return to the negotiating table to reach a
political solution. It is fashionable in some areas to belittle
UNPROFOR's achievements. The fact is that the United
Nations, through UNPROFOR and UNHCR and together
with other agencies, has saved tens of thousands of lives
over the past three years. So far, the conflict, which
threatened a wider Balkan war, has been contained. But by
itself UNPROFOR cannot impose a peace that the parties
are not prepared to accept. Nor can United Nations forces
remain in Bosnia for ever. We must all recognize that
continued fighting in Bosnia could put a question mark over
the presence of United Nations forces, which requires a
minimum level of consent from the parties.

My Government's very full support for UNPROFOR
is none the less demonstrated by our decision to make
troops available to form the rapid reaction force which is
being deployed at this moment. We look to the authorities
in the region to cooperate fully in ensuring that that
deployment is completed without delay. But UNPROFOR
cannot impose a settlement in the absence of the parties'
willingness to negotiate.

The structure for a political solution already exists.
We must recognize that negotiating time is running out.

