Mr. Kubis: This Security Council meeting is
taking place just days after the Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq, so generously co-hosted by
His Highness the Amir of Kuwait, thereby showing
once again his and his country's commitment to the
humanitarian, peace and development cause in the
region and in the world. The Conference was attended
by more than 70 Member States and international
organizations and 2,000 private-sector companies. It
mobilized nearly $30 billion to support reconstruction.
That massive regional and international response is
extraordinary proof of the continuous solidarity with,
and confidence in, the Government and the people
of Iraq. In his concluding remarks, the Secretary-
General stated,

"[i]n a world where unfortunately good news is
scarce, and in the region where unfortunately we see
many situations getting worse, the fact that Iraq is
on the right track and the fact that the international
community has shown its confidence in Iraq is a
very important piece of good news."

As the security forces continue to clear out remnants
ofDa'esh, Iraq is increasingly focusing on the upcoming
parliamentary elections on 12 May. Many Iraqi political
forces decided to form cross-sectarian, cross-ethnic
coalitions across the political spectrum. It is indeed
essential that the elections will confirm the vision of
Iraqis working together across the sectarian and ethnic
divides in pursuit of the needed political, economic and
social reforms based on the principles of citizenship
with equal rights, justice and opportunity for all and
good governance, devoid of the compromised quota
system and corruption. Only a new Government, based
on such approach, will guarantee the future of Iraq as
a united, democratic, fully sovereign and independent
federal State and as a factor of stability, cooperation
and prosperity for its people and the region.

The Independent High Electoral Commission has
steadily continued its preparations for the parliamentary
elections. The Commission has registered 205 political
parties, and 27 political coalitions have been approved
to contest the elections. Yet a number of challenges
remain. The voluntary and dignified return of
internally displaced persons (IDPs), under conditions
of safety and security, is an critical issue for the success
and credibility of the elections. In the months ahead,
the Government expects that as many as 2 million
of the 2.5 million who are still displaced will return
home. I am also encouraged by the decision of the
Government to establish voluntary return committees
with humanitarian representatives in each governorate
to oversee the return process.

The Iraqi security forces providing an environment
of security, which would enable voters to exercise
their right to vote in safety, free from terror and fear
of intimidation, is an overriding concern. Although
Da'esh's so-called caliphate has been defeated, the
terrorist organization and its sleeper cells, including
among IDPs, continue to pose a threat. On 18 February,
in the course of a counter-terrorism operation in Hawija
and surrounding areas, a special force from the popular
mobilization forces was ambushed and over 20 fighters
were martyred.

In addition, the new electronic ballot counting
system, including the customization and development
of the software for results tabulation, continues
to be a work in progress and requires accelerated
support, including from the United Nations and other
international partners, in order to ensure the envisaged
enhanced integrity and credibility of the elections.
Observation of the elections, both domestic and
international, will be a vital component in fostering
credibility and acceptance ofthe results. I strongly urge
domestic observer groups, as well as the international
community, to participate in observing the elections,
and the international community in providing the
necessary support. Credible and acceptable elections
with high voter turnout, including in the liberated
areas and in the Kurdistan region of Iraq, with specific
measures to facilitate women's participation, will
empower the new Government to implement reforms,
improve accountability and promote inclusiveness and
reconciliation among various components and groups
in Iraq.

I am encouraged by the recent positive
developments in relations between Baghdad and Erbil.
Prime Minister Al Abadi confirmed days ago that
the federal and regional Governments are in the final
stages of negotiations with regard to some concrete
areas that would address urgent needs and concerns of
the people of the region, beginning with the payment of
salaries and the re-opening of the airports in Erbil and
Suleimaniyah. Such steps are urgently needed.

I commend the Iraqi federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government for their
concerted efforts and strong coordination aimed at the
implementation of the national action plan on women
and peace and security. With elections looming, we
urge Iraqi senior political leaders to broaden women's
political space and appoint them to leadership positions
within political parties, as well as ensure their
meaningful participation in all electoral processes,
including participating in negotiations leading to the
Government's formation following the holding of
national elections.

I welcome the Government's willingness to
work with the United Nations country task force on
monitoring and reporting to develop an action plan
to address violations committed against children in
times of conflict. To that end, Prime Minister Al
Abadi has endorsed the establishment of the national
inter-ministerial senior committee for monitoring and
reporting on children affected by the armed conflict.

The Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization
(FFIS) of the United Nations Development Programme
has continued to scale-up its efforts to stabilize newly
liberated areas of Iraq. The FFIS is now cleared to
work in 31 of the more than 40 cities and districts that
have been liberated by Iraqi security forces. Since we
last reported to the Security Council (see S/PV.8112),
360 projects have either been completed or are under
development, thereby bringing the total number of
stabilization projects to 1,887. In Mosul alone, nearly
600 stabilization projects are under way.

Despite the strong support demonstrated by
Kuwait and the commitment to its international and
humanitarian obligations shown by Iraq, the full
normalization of relations will take place only once all
outstanding issues concerning Kuwaiti missing persons
and property have been resolved. The Government of
Iraq, in particular its Ministry of Defence, is making
proactive efforts to re-animate the search for missing
Kuwaiti persons. I deeply regret that the past 13 years
have not yielded tangible results. During the latest
meeting of the tripartite mechanism, which took
place on 6 February in Kuwait, tripartite members
meaningfully acknowledged the review project of the
International Committee of the Red Cross that would
serve to streamline and prioritize work, re-orient
activities and guide the mechanism.

I would like to take this opportunity to call on the
international community to consider ways in which it
could support the search for missing Kuwaiti persons,
including through the procurement of field equipment
and providing forensic, DNA and anthropological
training and capacity-building for the Iraqi and Kuwaiti
technical teams. Those Member States in possession
of satellite imagery from 1990-1991 are particularly
encouraged to come forward and provide analysis and
information that could help in identifying burial sites
to the Government of Iraq. I also reiterate my call on
Iraq and Kuwait to come to an agreement on the swift
repatriation of located Kuwaiti academic textbooks that
have been awaiting an official handover for more than
a year.

In conclusion, allow me to take this opportunity
to thank my outgoing Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, who is also Resident and
Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq and Resident
Representative of the United Nations Development
Programme, Ms. Lise Grande, for the truly outstanding
work in her over three years in Iraq. When we praise
major achievements in the areas of stabilization
and when we applaud the hard work and significant
outcomes achieved in the humanitarian area, including
the civilian-military cooperation that succeeded
so well in the protection and for the benefit of the
affected civilian population, notably during the
Mosul liberation campaign, we need first of all to
recognize the leadership and achievements of Deputy
Special Representative Grande, who, together with her
colleagues, made it happen.

