Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to warmly thank Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Central African Republic; Mr. Matias Bertino
Matondo, African Union Special Representative; and
Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of
the European Union External Action Service, for their
very enlightening briefings. In particular, I would like
to welcome Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ndiaye, who is here in the Chamber for the
first time. I commend his efforts since he assumed his
post and pledge France's full support in helping him
carry out his important tasks.

The signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, on
6 February in Bangui, created genuine prospects for
emerging from the crisis and achieving lasting peace
in the Central African Republic. We are therefore fully
committed to its implementation and welcome the first
measures taken by the Central African authorities, under
the direction of President Touadera, for the agreement to
be translated into action. I would mention in particular
the formation of a new inclusive Government, the work
undertaken to expedite the operationalization of the
Unites speciales mixtes de securite, the establishment
of structures for monitoring the implementation of the
agreement, including the first meetings ofthe executive
monitoring committee, and the revival this past May
of the joint commission between the Central African
Republic and Cameroon.

Nonetheless, we remain alarmed by the continued
violence by armed groups, which continue to recruit
children into their ranks and violate the arms embargo
to re-arm themselves. The humanitarian consequences
are horrific, primarily impacting the most vulnerable
populations: internally displaced persons, children and
women. The recent violence perpetrated by the Retour,
reclamation et rehabilitation group in the Paoua region,
which claimed the lives of more than 50 civilians, is
unacceptable. It constitutes a serious violation of the
peace agreement, and we strongly condemn it, as we do
some armed groups' targeting of humanitarian workers,
who at times pay with their lives for their commitment.
We have taken note of the reaction of the leaders
of Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation group following
the attack in late May to put an end to such acts. We
expect them to locate the individuals responsible within
their ranks and deliver them without delay to justice to
answer for their crimes.

We also welcome the response ofthe United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in adopting a
firm and robust posture towards the Retour, reclamation
et rehabilitation group, thereby safeguarding the peace
agreement. That posture is indispensable and must
continue to be deployed towards armed groups. In that
regard, too, MINUSCA can count on our full support.

Against that backdrop, we believe that the priority
in implementing the peace agreement must be to stop
the violence perpetrated by armed groups, disarm
and demobilize them and to gradually re-establish
State authority throughout the territory. The Central
African Government, for its part, must also continue its
communication efforts on the peace agreement, embark
upon the process towards the adoption of a law on
decentralization and make progress in the establishment
of the truth, justice, reconciliation and reparations
commission. Those are ways to ensure greater
involvement by the people, especially women and young
people, in implementing the agreement, to make local
Government closer to the population and to respond
to the demands of the Central African population for
justice, which also entails the continuation of its work
by the Special Criminal Court and the strengthening of
the national judicial system.

For the implementation of the peace agreement
to succeed, the international community's full and
coordinated engagement in support it, both politically
and financially, is indispensable. In that regard, the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and the countries of the region,
as guarantors of the peace agreement, have a crucial
role to play. We therefore encourage the African Union
and ECCAS to continue their efforts, together with the
United Nations and the countries of the region.

For its part, France is and will remain fully
committed to supporting the implementation of a peace
agreement. France has thus far - and this is not an
exhaustive list - provided €10 million in budgetary
support to strengthen public administration in the
Central African Republic, and we are continuing to
train 200 national public servants. On the security
front, we are providing complementary training for
between 850 and 950 members of the Central African
Armed Forces trained by the European Union Military
Training Mission in the Central African Republic
(EUTM-RCA). In terms of rehabilitation, we are
funding quick-impact projects totalling €28 million
for the development of economic activities and the
integration of the population.

Beyond our bilateral commitment, I would also
like to welcome the commitment of the European
Union, which is the leading development partner of the
Central African Republic. The EUTM-RCA, of which
France will take command on 1 July, remains the point
of reference in the training of Central African Armed
Forces. It has trained and qualified more than 3,000
Central African soldiers and began training another
1,000. It will contribute to the establishment of the
garrison army model with the redeployment of Central
Africa Armed Forces contingents in Bouar.

Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
reaffirm France's full support for MINUSCA. As we all
know, MINUSCA operates in a difficult environment,
but it plays a vital role in stabilizing the Central African
Republic. It plays a crucial role in the implementation
of the peace agreement. In that regard, I would refer to
the establishment and deployment of Unite's spe'ciales
mixtes de securite, which must help improve security
across the country and restore State authority. That is
why we will continue to ensure that MINUSCA has the
necessary means to fulfil its mission.

I would like to pay tribute here to troop- and
police-contributing countries for their commitment
in the Central African Republic and to commend all
the efforts undertaken by MINUSCA to increase its
mobility, improve its operational performance where
shortcomings had been identified and continue the
work undertaken to prevent cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse and ensure that they do not go unpunished.

Finally, with the elections of 2020 and 2021 on
the horizon, which must anchor the Central African
Republic in democracy, we believe that MINUSCA
should be able to play a supporting role to the conduct
of the elections, in support of the Central African
authorities. The recommendations that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General will make
in that regard will therefore be considered with the
greatest attention. We call on all Central African actors
to assume their responsibilities to ensure that the
preparations for the elections can take place in a calm
and constructive environment.
The peace agreement can and must mark a new
beginning for the Central African Republic, which
is why it is essential for the Security Council and the
international community to remain mobilized and
united in supporting the Central African Republic
and MINUSCA.

