Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Farid Zarif for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/68) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We likewise welcome the participation of the Prime
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and of Mr. Hashim
Thacic.

Argentina wishes to highlight, as is traditional, the
fundamental role played by the Organization in Kosovo
through UNMIK in promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights, as well as its cooperation with
the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission, all the while remaining status-neutral under
the auspices of the United Nations.

It is worth recalling that Argentina voted in
favour of resolution 1244 (1999), when we were also
a member of the Security Council. We believe that the
resolution continues to be the applicable international
legal framework for Kosovo to reach a comprehensive
solution through a political process and negotiations.

The importance of UNMIK was demonstrated
once again with the conclusion of the electoral process
in Kosovo. We agree with the Secretary-General that
we should acknowledge the firm leadership shown by
Belgrade and Pristina in the peaceful way in which
that process unfolded, thereby sending firm political
messages that allowed procedural irregularities to be
overcome and the elections to be completed. At the same
time, we must express our concern at the incidents of
violence and intimidation which, although isolated and
eventually overcome, did hinder the free expression
and exercise of democratic rights.

We firmly condemn the brutal assassination of
a member-elect of the North Mitrovica Municipal
Assembly, and wejoin the call on all parties to cooperate
closely in the investigation to identify those responsible
and bring them to justice, as well as to do their utmost
to prevent such incidents occurring in future.

We welcome the commitment of the parties to
continuing the high-level dialogue under the auspices
of the European Union and we highlight the significant
progress made in the implementation of the historic
19 April 2013 Agreement. Nevertheless, we must
continue to call for the pursuit of those efforts and the
consolidation of the progress made in order to reach
an agreement on the establishment on the association/
community of Serbian municipalities.

A pending issue of particular sensitivity is the need
to overcome delays and move forward in the transition
ofpolice structures in northern Kosovo, which should be
accompanied by progress in the connected issue of the
judiciary and other areas of the rule of law. The Republic
of Serbia in particular has amply demonstrated its
genuine commitment to the process of implementing the
April 2013 Agreement. We encourage all international
presences on the ground to continue cooperating in
accordance with their respective mandates in order to
contribute to the consolidation of achievements and the
successful resolution of pending issues.

Although we are encouraged that the general
security situation in Kosovo has been on the whole
calm, we cannot fail to focus on the security situation in
northern Mitrovica. In that context, we should reiterate
that the important work of UNMIK continues to be
essential in providing the greatest support possible to
political processes, giving special attention to those
issues related to the implementation of the 19 April
Agreement.

Argentina believes that it is very important to achieve
full respect for the human rights of displaced persons
and members of minority groups so that they can return
to their places of origin and accede to substantive rights
and not be the victims of discrimination. We associate
ourselves with the request of the Special Rapporteur
on the rights of internally displaced persons to deal
with discrimination, the high rates of unemployment,
deficient access to education and the failure to return
illegally seized properties, which continue to have
negative effects on the return of internally displaced
persons.

We are concerned that the rate of voluntary return
continues to be relatively low, which demonstrates that
it is essential to continue working to ensure the return
and the permanent reintegration of internally displaced
persons, while recognizing that the main obstacles
to increasing that rate of return continue to be issues
that are unresolved with regard to property, security
problems and poor economic prospects.
It is also crucially important to continue to give
priority to the tasks of overcoming the traces and legacy
of the conflict, including pending cases of disappeared
persons. Accordingly, we find it encouraging that
UNMIK continues to support efforts to ascertain
the fate of disappeared persons. We join the call for
redoubled efforts and cooperation so that impunity is
not the last word on grave violations of human rights.

We highlight the work being done by UNMIK in its
efforts to support the rule oflaw, especially cooperation
with all the pertinent interested parties with regard to
the main problems on the ground. As currently indicated
by the Secretary-General in his report, it is also key
for international presences in the Kosovo to continue
strengthening mutual cooperation in order to achieve
the common goal of establishing appropriate conditions
for the upcoming stages of the implementation of the
19 April 2013 Agreement.

We conclude by highlighting the work done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
promote security, stability and respect for human rights
in Kosovo in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

