Mr. Fowler (Canada): I would like to join others in
expressing personal thanks to you, Mr. President, for so
eloquently commemorating the loss of 24 people last Friday
in the World Food Programme flight into Kosovo. Among
them was a young Canadian named Dan Rowan, who was
on his way to Pristina to offer advice on penal reform in
response to an appeal that Mr. Kouchner had issued in the
Security Council a few weeks ago. I know that his family
will very much appreciate your words and the Council's
expression of sympathy.

I would also like to thank you on behalf of Canada for
organizing this important meeting with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency, which will reinforce the Security
Council's continuing engagement in the process of bringing
sustainable peace to that country and to the Balkan region
more generally. We hope this engagement, manifested by
today's briefing and by the recent appearances of Mr. Klein
and Mr. Petritsch before the Security Council, will serve to
underline the international community's resolve to see the
Bosnia and Herzegovina peace process fully implemented.

The international community and the Office of the
High Representative will continue to support the process,
but ultimately Bosnia and Herzegovina has to implement its
own peace. This is the substance of the ownership strategy
which the High Representative outlined to the Council last
week. Canada supports this strategy and urges the
Presidency to cooperate fully with Mr. Petritsch in bringing
it about.

We also urge the Presidency and the Council of
Ministers to work with other levels of government,
including the entities, to reform national institutions in
order to make them more efficient, transparent and
democratic. The building of common institutions is, of
course, crucial to the development of both the State and
civil society.
To this end, we are pleased that the draft permanent
election law has recently been presented to the Bosnia
and Herzegovina institutions. We hope that it will
promote a democratic and multi-ethnic political process
and make elected officials more accountable to the voters.
The law should be adopted as soon as possible. The
Steering Board is ready to do its part to help ensure that
this issue is resolved in a timely manner.

Despite progress in some areas, there are clearly
elements of the peace implementation process that require
more commitment and resolve from the Bosnia and
Herzegovina governments. For example, Canada is
concerned with the issue of resettlement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as are others who have spoken. The return
of refugees and displaced persons to their homes must
continue to be given top priority. We acknowledge the
progress made thus far. Clearly, however, further progress
on this front is critical in measuring real commitment to
a lasting peace within the Dayton framework.

The flawed judicial system in Bosnia remains a
major obstacle to the development of a modern
democratic State. A self-sustaining peace in Bosnia can
be achieved only with a judiciary that is independent from
political pressure. Canada urges Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities at all levels to improve cooperation with the
international experts in developing plans for judicial reform.

Further, we urge the Council of Ministers and the
Members of the Presidency to adopt - as they have
agreed in their New York Declaration - in a timely
manner, the proposed border service law, in keeping with
their 24 June commitment on this issue. Without adoption
of this law, Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue to
haemorrhage resources that are vitally needed for the
provision of key public services, including efforts to
improve the financial situation of pensioners, teachers and
workers.

Lastly, the long-term success of the Dayton Peace
Accords depends on Bosnia and Herzegovina's ability to
develop a self-sustaining economy, which creates jobs,
keeps inflation in check and provides a strong basis for

 

local and foreign investment. Authorities must help create
an enabling environment in which business can thrive and
prosper.

Today's discussion demonstrates the commitment of
the international community to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the path to lasting peace. We call on all
parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to do their part to
achieve this goal.

