Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, and the European Free Trade
Association countries, Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area,
declare that they align themselves with this statement.

I would like to join other speakers in welcoming
the presence of the Secretary-General, Foreign Minister
Svilanovic of Serbia and Montenegro and Foreign
Minister Fischer of Germany.

The European Union calls for an immediate end
to the violence which has claimed lives and caused
injury to large numbers of people in Kosovo. We add
our voice to those of Special Representative Harri
Holkeri and Secretary-General Kofi Annan in
condemning the violence which has erupted between
Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs and which has
resulted in many deaths as well as in injuries to a large
number of civilians, KFOR soldiers and civilian police
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). Our deep sympathies are with the
families of the victims. We extend our condolences to
them.

The immediate priority is that calm must be
restored in Kosovo. It is essential that the violence stop
now and that it not be allowed to escalate. There is also
no place for those who burn churches and mosques,
schools and hospitals, and who destroy the religious
and cultural heritage which is the common property of
us all. The European Union calls on all local leaders to
act responsibly at this dangerous moment and to use all
their influence to bring an end to the violence and to
restore calm.

The European Union strongly supports the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Harri Holkeri, to calm the situation. I would like to
underscore the European Union's strong support for
Special Representative Holkeri in his task of
implementing in full Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and UNMIK's policy of "standards before
status". These remain the foundation of the
international community's commitment to Kosovo. The
path ahead for Kosovo lies in the implementation of the
standards, and these violent events risk undermining
the painfully achieved progress which has been made
thus far.

Those responsible for the violence must be
brought to justice. There is a heavy responsibility on
all to avoid actions which would undermine the work
under way to ensure a stable future for a secure,
democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo within its place in
Europe.

