Mr. Costa: I am honoured, of course, to attend
this meeting and thank the President for the invitation.

Previous debates on violent theatres - for example,
Afghanistan, the Congo, Central America, Somalia and
West Africa - and on transnational crime issues,

including drug trafficking, piracy, natural resources
and smuggling, have shown how seriously the Council
takes these threats to peace and security.

The background is well known. International
mafias exploit the instability caused by conflicts. They
thrive in areas lost to insurgency and take advantage of
a Government's inability to provide security. This
creates a vicious circle, illustrated in our report entitled
"Crime and instability: case studies of transnational
threats", which is to be released in the course of the
day and is available in the Chamber. The report
underlines and demonstrates that vulnerability attracts
crime and that crime, in turn, deepens vulnerability. In
a chain reaction, humanitarian crises follow,
development is stalled and peacekeepers are deployed.

Historically, these problems have been limited to
a few trouble spots. Yet in our globalized world,
violence in faraway locations eventually affects
everybody. Today's unimpeded movement of goods,
services, capital, people and information is creating
wealth and freedom, of course; but it has also
unleashed unprecedented opportunities for organized
crime to wreck both.

In the Council's past reviews of these issues it
faced a tough dilemma. How can a multilateral system
created to deal with tensions between nations fight
criminal groups that are non-State, yet transnational
and powerful enough to threaten sovereign States? The
answer is two-pronged. Of course, States must
strengthen their own capacity, but also, given the
global nature of this threat, national efforts must
become part of a multilateral framework. How can this
be done?

Let me look at the issues of development and
security. First, vulnerability to organized crime can be
reduced most effectively through both development
and security - the two basic pillars of the Council's
work. I stress that development is the best prevention.
Throughout the world, prosperity and good governance
are vaccines against violence, and reaching the
Millennium Development Goals will be the most
effective antidote to crime, while crime prevention will
help to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
3

Security is equally crucial. By resolving conflicts
and helping Governments to enforce the rule of law,
this Council will not only build peace, but will indeed
make an affected region less prone to crime, as the
Secretary-General said in his statement. Conversely,
fighting crime helps to remove spoilers who invest in
violence and instability. To illustrate this point, we
need only take a map of illicit trafficking routes - of
which there are a few in the report - overlay that map
with a map of conflict areas, and juxtapose a histogram
of per capita income. We will see that crime, violence
and underdevelopment all overlap, and that these
regions coincide with United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

Then there is the role of justice. We cannot only
throw money or troops at a problem. Peace and
prosperity also depend on justice, namely, on the legal
frameworks and judicial institutions needed to ensure
the rule of law. A global legal framework exists. The
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, adopted 10 years ago in Palermo,
Italy, is a twenty-first century solution to a twenty-first
century problem. Yet, I am sorry to say, one third of
Member States, including some major countries, have
not ratified it. Its implementation is patchy, there is no
review mechanism and some of its protocols have been
neglected.

But this Council can help. Later in the year, a
treaty event of the General Assembly will take place,
followed by two high-level ministerial sessions in New
York and Vienna, and a Conference of the Parties will
promote ratification of the Convention. Those events
will call for technical assistance and consider a
mechanism to review implementation. I am pleased
that this morning the Secretary-General invited the
Council to send a strong signal to take these
Convention-related events seriously, which would add
a sense of purpose and urgency to the various events.

Equally important are the institutions needed to
administer justice. So many countries, especially in
Africa, lack the resources to make those institutions
work. I invite the development assistance community
to help vulnerable countries, perhaps through the
intermediation and technical assistance of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), to
upgrade their criminal justice systems. West Africa and
East Africa come to mind right now.
There is also an often-forgotten health dimension.
Unless the threat posed by organized crime is
confronted resolutely, we will hear renewed calls to
dump the three United Nations drug conventions that
critics say are the cause of the crime problem. The
cause of the problem is, of course, the enormous
resources generated by drug trafficking. Let me stress
that drug legalization would cause a health disaster,
especially in poor countries. Africa does not need that
new tragedy.

Greater knowledge and better intelligence are
also needed. We need further knowledge about the
ways organized crime operates. Technology has
practically abolished time and space. We should know
what goes on anywhere on the planet at any moment,
but we do not. There are so many places outside of
Government control that are too scary for investors and
tourists. Those are precisely the places where
smugglers, insurgents and terrorists operate
undisturbed and undetected. They run fleets of ships,
planes, trucks and containers that carry tons of drugs
and weapons. Their activities are mostly discovered by
chance - the crash of a phantom plane, a drug ship
that runs short of fuel, or the fortuitous seizure of an
illegal cargo.

There are so many blank spots on our radar
screens, and our ignorance about what goes on in the
world has deadly consequences. Therefore, we need a
change of attitude. It is time to regard intelligence-
sharing as a way of strengthening sovereignty, not of
surrendering it. When a police car stops at the border,
while criminals cross the border freely, sovereignty has
already been breached. It has, in fact, been surrendered
to those who break the law. A more comprehensive
attitude would help to establish networks to monitor
illicit flows, share intelligence and carry out joint
operations. Our Office, the UNODC, supports these
efforts in Central and West Asia, in the Gulf, in West
Africa, along the main drug routes into Europe and
across Mesoamerica. More help is needed, for example
across the Sahara-Sahel region. That was proposed to
the Council in December (see S/PV.6233), as members
may recall.

We must also be able to measure progress and
report to the Council accordingly. At the moment, I
would like this to be another area in which the United
Nations is the world's best information provider. We
cannot report on crime trends; we cannot propose an
integrated understanding of its causes and
consequences. The data is not there. Even the logistics
for gathering data are not there. Intellectual and
financial resources are required to develop the right
expertise to serve the needs of the Council.

My fourth point is on the factors that enable
crime to prosper. The first and foremost factor is
corruption. I am pleased that the Conference of the
States Parties in Doha agreed in November 2009 on a
mechanism to monitor implementation of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption. I commit my
Office to providing periodic evidence of the progress
made in fighting a crime that not only steals from the
needy to enrich the greedy, but lubricates other crimes.

Let me go back to the cargo plane loaded with
guns and drugs that crashed in Mali, where I was only
three days ago. I now ask how the fraudulent pilot
certificates, false registration, forged bills of landing
and lading and altered tail numbers were produced.
Looking perhaps at other countries in Africa, how are
massive shipments of counterfeit goods, illegally cut
timber or toxic waste shipped worldwide without
anyone noticing? The "C" word - "C" for corruption
- has a lot to do with that. But the theory is that the
basis of corruption is money-laundering. Current
arrangements have made it harder to recycle money
through the financial system. There are so many black
holes - informal money transfer, the hawala system,
offshore banking, recycling to real estate, recycling to
legal assets - all of which must be plugged.

In order to put in perspective the massive
proceeds from crime, let us recall that the regular
budget of UNODC is l per cent of the United Nations
budget. And the United Nations budget is less than 1
per cent of the yearly proceeds of the global drug trade,
which is more than $300 billion. Or, to put it another
way, consider this: a line of cocaine snorted in Europe
destroys one square metre of Andean rainforest and
buys 100 rounds of AK-47 ammunition in West Africa.
Multiply that line of cocaine by the 850 tons of cocaine
produced every year, and you get a sense that this is a
more uneven fight than even that between David and
Goliath.

My final point is about system-wide response,
something already raised by the Secretary-General.
Because of the cross-cutting nature of organized crime,
a United Nations-wide response is of course needed,
and I welcome the Secretary-General's statement. I am
pleased that the Security Council supports the growing
cooperation among the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNODC
and the Peacebuilding Commission. This will ensure
that United Nations conflict prevention, crisis
management and peacekeeping all include a criminal
justice component.

Concerning the future, I am pleased with the
suggestion that the Security Council hold periodic
debates on the threat to stability posed by organized
crime. Early warnings could be brought to the
Council's attention, as we did some time ago when we
discovered the attacks on West Africa by cocaine
traffickers and, later, on East Africa by heroin
traffickers. The Council may also want to consider
including a criminal justice component in relevant
peacekeeping missions.

To conclude, we need deeds more than words.
Last week in West Africa, ministers of the Economic
Community of West African States told me - I was on
a mission there for an entire week - that cocaine
trafficking in the region had declined in the past 18
months. That is a very good omen. In a sense, our
efforts - the efforts of the Security Council - are
paying off. However, there are warning signs that
traffickers are reappearing on the scene, disguised, in
other parts of West Africa, because tough words have
not been fully matched by equally robust actions. Let
us learn from that lesson.

