Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing.
The Chinese delegation is pleased that, thanks to the
energetic efforts of the facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire,
the preparatory meeting of the inter-Congolese
dialogue was successfully held at Gaborone from 20 to
24 August and that it yielded positive results. That was
a most important meeting.

The final communique of the meeting showed
that broad agreement had been reached on the timing
and venue of the inter-Congolese dialogue, as well as
on the scope of the items for discussion. That has laid
the foundations for the peace process and it will have a
positive impact on the situation in the Great Lakes
region. We believe that this success is the result of the
common efforts of representatives of all the parties of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We commend
all the Congolese parties for their willingness to act in
the interests of the people and put aside their
differences in order to seek common ground. We must,
however, recognize that this is only the beginning. The
task that remains is onerous. It is a challenge not only
for the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo but for the countries of the Great Lakes region
and the international community as a whole.

The Chinese delegation believes that all the
parties of the Democratic Republic of the Congo must
continue to consider the overall interests of their
nation. The country must continue to make common
efforts to seek the path of national reconciliation,
which is in the fundamental interests of the people, so
that its national independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity can be safeguarded and peace and
development can be enjoyed as soon as possible.

We believe that the Rassemblement congolais
pour la democratie (RCD) must comply with all the
resolutions of the Security Council and quicken the
pace of the demilitarization of Kisangani. We also
demand the immediate, full and unconditional
withdrawal of foreign forces from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the cessation of all
assistance to armed groups and an end to the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo so that it can contribute to the
peace, stability and development of the whole of the
Great Lakes region. The Security Council must
continue to make efforts in this regard.

We hope that the international community will
fulfil its commitments by providing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with the economic assistance
that it urgently needs. This will be important for the
peace and stability of that country, as well as for the
peace process itself. The timely and orderly
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) is one guarantee of continued progress in
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The second phase of the deployment of MONUC
must be completed as soon as possible. In this regard,
we demand that all parties of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo fully cooperate with MONUC and create
conditions necessary for its orderly deployment and the
carrying out of its mandate. We hope that the
Secretary-General will submit recommendations with
regard to the deployment of the third phase of MONUC
as soon as possible. At the same time, we suggest that
the Council begin considering the question of the third
phase deployment.

Finally, the Chinese delegation highly commends
Sir Ketumile Masire for the enormous efforts that he
has made in the interests of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

