Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): Let me start
by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting and the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and informative briefing. Like many
others, I am also looking forward to haring Prime
Minister Maiga give his perspective on the challenges
that his country faces. However, I would like to begin
by addressing the Prime Minister, on behalf of the
United Kingdom Government, by offering our sincere
condolences for the tragic deaths of more than 160
people in the most recent violence in Ogossagou.
Given the ongoing security challenges, we particularly
welcome the recent steps that his Government has
taken to implement the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, including on the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.

Nevertheless, while progress in recent months has
been more encouraging than in previous years, the
United Kingdom notes that the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/207) highlights a number of areas in
which progress has not matched the benchmarks set out
in the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
It is clear that more still needs to be done to ensure that
Mali is able to achieve long-term peace and stability.

Even where positive steps have been taken,
more fundamental changes are required to achieve
peace, sustainable development and prosperity. That
is particularly the case with constitutional reform,
decentralization, security sector reform, economic
development in northern Mali and the meaningful
participation of women in the peace process. I
commend the Government of Mali's commitment to
holding a constitutional referendum before the end
of June. In order to give the reform process the best
chance of success, we would urge the Government to
ensure that it is properly inclusive, involving genuine
consultations with all signatory parties to the peace
agreement and all sectors of Malian society. We also
welcome the Prime Minister's clear commitment to
stabilizing the situation in central Mali. We hope that
he can give assurances that the Government's plan will
be both truly comprehensive and properly funded, in
order to ensure its effectiveness.

MINUSMA plays a crucial role in Mali in
extremely challenging circumstances. The United
Kingdom unequivocally condemns the recent attacks
on MINUSMA personnel, and we would like to express
our condolences to the families of those who lost their
lives. As we approach the June renewal of MINUSMA's
mandate, the United Kingdom wants to work with
everyone here today to build on recent progress and
further enhance the effectiveness of the Mission. In
particular, we want to see a mandate that enables it
to continue to focus on its core task in the north and
its areas of strength. MINUSMA has had the greatest
political impact when it has used its good offices to
defuse tensions and enable agreement to form around
the tough compromises necessary. Those compromises
are absolutely essential to peace, and we believe that
the Mission can do more in that area, particularly in
central Mali.

Where MINUSMA's military operations are
concerned, we are worried about the fact that the
Mission still spends too much time and money on
resupply and force protection rather than protecting
the Malian people. We want to support the Mission
in making longer-term cost savings so that it can free
up capacity, because that is crucial to saving lives.
Finally, we should all recognize that MINUSMA is not
a permanent solution but a means to an end, which is
the achievement of sustainable peace in Mali. We all
need to work together across the whole United Nations
family to achieve that.

I want to conclude by underlining the importance
that the United Kingdom attaches to progress in
Mali and the broader Sahel region. The issues that
we are discussing here today have major long-term
implications not only for the security and prosperity of
the people of Mali but also for the broader region and,
indeed, for Europe. That is why the United Kingdom
is stepping up its engagement in the Sahel. We already
work with countries of the region to support peace,
development and prosperity. We are the region's third
largest humanitarian donor. We are enlarging our
Embassy in Mali, which spearheads our work on the
very issues that we have been discussing so far today.
We are also establishing new embassies in the Niger and
Chad and building a broader stability and development
programme. As we step up our engagement over
the coming years, the principles of frank and open
partnership will be central to our approach, both with
the people and Governments of the region and with
our broader international partners. I look forward to
working with many here, the Government of Mali and
all partners to achieve our shared ambitions and our
shared goals.

