Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the very outset, I wish to tell you how delighted I
am, Sir, to see you preside on behalf of your country,
Japan, over this ministerial debate on a comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy to prevent the recurrence of
conflict. I also welcome Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, who wished to participate personally in this
debate, and thank him for his significant contribution.

I also thank the Ministers of Afghanistan, Timor-
Leste and Sierra Leone, for their illuminating
statements, which showcased the significant
achievements of their respective countries. Finally, I
welcome the participation in this debate of Mrs. Ngozi
Okonjo-Iweala, Managing Director of the World Bank,
and fully appreciate the valuable support of her
institution for the Peacebuilding Commission.

We appreciate the relevance and timeliness of this
debate, at a time when the danger to countries
emerging from conflict of relapsing into a continuous
cycle of violence has become even greater. This
approach to preventing the recurrence of conflict ties in
with our philosophy in terms of crisis prevention, as
reaffirmed by the President of the Gabonese Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, in the
statement he made on 8 March here in New York on
conflict prevention in Africa.

The decision taken by the heads of State and
Government at the 2005 World Summit to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission resulted from their
observation of gaps in the transition from activities to
re-establish security and post-conflict reconstruction.
Thus, at a time when the Peacebuilding Commission is
engaged in reform and in evaluating post-conflict
experiences, it may be wise to rethink the
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy based on an
integrated, coordinated and coherent approach.

Drawing from post-conflict experiences in
several African countries, I should now like to share
with the Council some thoughts on the main elements
of a potential new post-conflict comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy.

One of the key conditions for ensuring an
exemplary transition from a situation of war to a
situation of peace is helping countries emerging from
conflict to take responsibility for their own affairs in
the political, legal and institutional, security, economic
and social spheres. It is therefore critical to create an
enabling environment for the peace process by
promoting dialogue and reconciliation between the
various political actors.

The examples of Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Timor-Leste illustrate post-conflict success. Such
results are possible only if countries emerging from
conflict have the means to achieve the objective of
peace. It is in that context that the good offices and
assistance of the international community, in particular

the United Nations and regional organizations, are
necessary.

I should like here to commend the considerable
support of the United Nations to the process of
restoring peace in several post-conflict countries in
Africa. In Liberia, for example, the Economic
Community of West African States and the United
Nations Mission in Liberia together monitored the
elections that marked the end of the terrible civil war
in that country. The African Union, which will soon
establish a framework for post-conflict reconstruction
and development, has made significant efforts in this
area, in cooperation with the subregional economic
communities, by initiating and concluding numerous
peace negotiations, as witnessed by the peace
agreements concluded in Burundi, the Comoros, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, the Sudan
and the Central African Republic.

Gabon has always promoted dialogue as the best
way of resolving situations of crisis and conflict. For
many years now it has been involved in the political
processes of national reconciliation. For example, in
the Central African Republic, Gabon successfully
headed the inclusive political dialogue in December
2008 with the involvement of the main political forces
of the country, which led to the establishment of a
national reconciliation Government and an electoral
timetable. The signing of peace agreements among the
parties to a conflict is not enough to ensure that a peace
process is permanent. It is also necessary to strive to
ensure the respect and effective implementation, in
good faith, of those agreements by the signatories.

In that regard, Gabon welcomes the operation,
since 2006, of the Peacebuilding Fund, established to
support the efforts of countries emerging from crises to
rebuild, to strengthen peace and to respond to
immediate threats to post-conflict peace processes.

In Africa, ethnic tensions are frequently among
the main causes of conflict. In that context, in countries
emerging from conflict, dialogue with the various
ethnic groups must be maintained in order to preserve
both national cohesion and territorial unity. Indeed, it
is when all the ethnic characteristics are taken into
account in drawing up a joint development project that
the aspirations of populations, recently divided, can
crystallize around a national ideal that contains the
seed of a shared future. The example of Rwanda, which
emerged from a genocidal crisis, is the perfect
illustration of a country of post-conflict internal
reconciliation.

In order to achieve such a goal, peace processes
must take into account security concerns, including by
effectively implementing disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes. Likewise, it is
important to ensure constant control of borders that,
because they are porous, have become the scene of
illicit activities and sources of conflict, such as drug
trafficking, organized transnational crime and the
unchecked and destabilizing circulation of small arms
and light weapons.

In Central Africa, such illicit activities have a
significant impact on the peace and security of our
countries, in particular those emerging from conflict. In
that regard, we welcome the fact that the Security
Council, under Gabon's presidency, addressed such
issues during its open debate on 19 March 2010 (see S/PV.6288).

In our view, a key element of a comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy is for countries emerging from
conflict to take on the political and security process.
That is all the more evident as the other aspects of
post-conflict reconstruction - promoting the rule of
law, organizing free and transparent elections and
economic and social governance - are largely
dependent on a stable political and security climate.

As we routinely say, development is another
name for peace and stability. A comprehensive post-
conflict peacebuilding strategy must address the root
cause of conflicts, which is poverty. From that
standpoint, it would be desirable for the international
community, in particular donor countries and
international financial institutions, to further focus its
financing on development programmes in those
countries. The European Union is already doing that by
setting up development hubs in some African countries,
including the Central African Republic and Guinea-
Bissau.

The economic and social development of
countries weakened by conflict is absolutely crucial in
order to put them back on the path of growth and to
ensure the well-being of their populations, who have
long suffered the agonies of war.

The Gabonese delegation supports the draft
presidential statement to be endorsed following this
debate.

