Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank China for convening this debate on
a topic of great relevance to the Organization and to the
international community.

In the twenty-first century, it is an illusion to
think that States can solve problems of a global nature
on their own or in isolation, or even undertake major
regional or national transformations. That is so because
of the economic, cultural and even technological
interdependence in which we live. It is not correct to
argue that international organizations function only
when external conditions and international relations
are propitious. Multilateral forums were created so
that nations could develop relations of friendship
and cooperation, discuss problems and find common
solutions to shared problems on the basis of the legal
equality of States and mutual respect.
Multilateral forums, and especially the United
Nations, give or withhold legitimacy to the behaviour
of States as subjects of international law. They create
customs, consolidate norms and forge principles. They
do not do away with power relations between States,
but they transform those relations by establishing the
line that divides civilization from the law of the jungle
and chaos.

Those States that, like Mexico, defend
multilateralism do so as a matter of principle. Mexico
is a State that loves peace and international law, but
we also do so because effective and robust global
governance is at the heart of our national interests.
That is why the confrontation between sovereignty
or the primacy of nationalism and multilateralism is
a false dilemma. We nations exercise and assert our
sovereignty through multilateralism.

The multilateral architecture of the twenty-
first century covers almost every aspect of human
activities and delivers results on the ground. Like any
human construct, multilateralism is perfectible. It
could be more efficient, it could produce results more
effectively, and it could work in a more coherent and
coordinated way. However, the multilateral machinery
is the best arrangement that we States have. Attacks on
multilateralism, and especially on the United Nations,
should not be considered as true or as omens of the
disappearance of the Organization. We must not let
them breed mistrust.

The United Nations has very clear purposes and
principles that seek the good of humankind. Defending
the United Nations should be simple. In the face of
criticism and attacks, we must analyse their deep
motivation; whether they are driven by the best interests
of humankind or seek to harm it; whether they seek to
build for the benefit ofall or to destroy. Once that is done,
we will have some clarity, because, as has been pointed
out, the United Nations is perfectible in its operations
but not in its ends or its purposes, as they are based
on universal and immanent values. We commend the
progress being made in United Nations reforms aimed
at making the Organization more efficient, effective
and coherent in its work in operational, institutional and
financial areas. We therefore welcomed the briefing by
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and reaffirm our
support for the reform process headed by him.

The Security Council bears the supreme
responsibility for preserving both multilateralism and
multilaterally agreed norms on the preservation of
international security. We need to strengthen that body
through a comprehensive reform process in line with
the values of the twenty-first century, thereby making it
truly representative, democratic, transparent, efficient
and effective, and providing the greatest benefit
for all, not just for a handful of countries seeking
permanent membership. In that regard, we reiterate
that the Uniting for Consensus proposal is the most
democratic, achievable, realistic and comprehensive
proposal available to us for strengthening genuine
multilateralism. Similarly, we must continue our work
in addressing the working methods of the Organization,
especially those of the Security Council. Using the
right to veto to block Security Council measures
against atrocity crimes runs counter to multilateralism.
It is an expression of unilateralism that contravenes
the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
The French-Mexican initiative to limit the use of
the veto in cases of mass atrocities is a step towards
promoting multilateralism.

We live in a world shaped by multilateralism,
and Mexico therefore reiterates its concern regarding
the excessive use of the so-called consensus rule, as
it is misleading to contend that that rule equates with
unanimity or a form of veto rather than a genuine
aspiration. A putative consensus undermines the ability
of multilateral forums to function effectively and slows
progress to a minimal speed, thereby perpetuating the
status quo and occasionally making the progress that
humankind needs much harder to achieve. Sustainable
peace - the new paradigmatic concept of the
Organization - has made linking the pillar of peace
and security with the pillar of sustainable development
into a reality. That effective linkage, which enables us
to focus on prevention and to build communities with a
healthy social fabric, constitutes a new avenue of work
for the United Nations that requires a new and more
robust and purposeful architecture, which we must
promote and perfect in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

Contemporary multilateralism has the best
interests of the individual - not simply the avoidance
of military hostilities, as was our main concern in
1945 - at its core. The new face of multilateralism is
inclusive, with women and girls at its centre, as they
must enjoy equal opportunities. The effectiveness of
multilateral action will be measured by our ability
to improve the lives of our communities by working
towards the universal fulfilment of the 169 targets of
the Sustainable Development Goals. The new face of
multilateralism has been enriched by the participation
of civil-society organizations, the private sector,
academia and the media, which have found ways to
promote issues of interest that have an impact at the
local level and to ensure citizens' participation within
multilateral spaces,

In conclusion, multilateralism is cannot be called
into question just because one or more countries violate
the Charter of the United Nations with the threat of the
use of force, contravene majority decisions or decide
to break international agreements and decide that it
is better to act in isolation. Multilateralism would be
a dead letter if all other members of the international
community were to abandon the purposes and principles
that humankind has agreed upon over the past several
centuries for the common good and prosperity, or if we
were to decide to give up the search for joint solutions
to shared challenges, or if we were to consider as
normal the selective and conditional compliance with
agreements forged by the collective community for the
benefit of individual interests.

We reaffirm our unwavering multilateral
vocation and commitment to and confidence in the
United Nations.

