Mr. Palous (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

I would like to thank the Libyan presidency of the
Security Council, which currently also holds the
chairmanship of the African Union (AU), for
organizing this open debate; the Secretary-General for
his informative briefing; and Mr. Prodi for introducing
the report (8/2008/813) on behalf of the African
Union-United Nations panel established by the
Secretary-General.

Allow me to begin by saying that the European
Union attaches great importance to the existing and
further developing partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. I would also like to
highlight, right from the outset, how much we
appreciate the recent key efforts of the African Union
in the area of peace and security, including the
deployment of African Union peace-support operations
and the African Peace and Security Architecture. These
efforts are fully in line with the principle of African
ownership, which the European Union is also fully
committed to. In this context, the European Union
appreciates the efforts of the African Union-United
Nations panel led by Mr. Prodi in preparing the report.

The United Nations cooperation with regional,
subregional and other international organizations under
2

Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, has, for a
number of years now, been in the spotlight of the
Security Council. This has been duly reflected in
several Council decisions. Allow me to highlight at
least two such resolutions: resolutions 1631 (2005) and
1809 (2008). These are truly strategic partnerships. The
European Union strongly believes in such partnerships
and fully supports any effective, focused and well-
coordinated effort, be it on the side of the United
Nations Secretariat or on the side of the United Nations
Member States, to further develop and operationalize
them.

The European Union is proud to be building one
such strategic partnership with the United Nations in
many fields, including in the area of international
peace and security, the maintenance of which, under
the Charter, is the primary responsibility of the
Security Council. Today, the European Union and the
United Nations increasingly develop together thematic,
strategic responses and operations. Allow me to recall
here today the example of Operation Artemis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2003, which was
a landmark in the particularly close European Union-
United Nations cooperation in crisis management. It
was subsequently formalized in the first joint European
Union-United Nations declaration, signed on
24 September 2003, and supplemented by a joint
statement of 7 June 2007.

In recent years, approximately twenty EU
military and civilian operations under the European
Security and Defence Policy have been launched in all
continents. Many of them are carried out under
Security Council mandates, including in cases when
the United Nations is no longer present in the
particular territories. In 2006, for example, mainly in
response to the call by the Secretary-General for
reinforcement of the United Nations operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the European
Union launched a EU-led force (EUFOR) mission in
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In January 2008,
the European Union launched the bridging operation
EUFOR Tchad/RCA in eastern Chad and north-eastern
Central African Republic, the main task of which was
to set the ground for a full-fledged United Nations
operation in the same territory, the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT). Only three days ago, on 15 March
2009, based on close partnership and effective
coordination between the United Nations and the
09-27223
European Union, most members of EUFOR
Tchad/RCA were re-hatted, and today MINURCAT
operates with its own military component, with around
1,650 nationals of European Union member States in it.
Most recently, as of December 2008, the European
Union launched the military operation called Operation
Atalanta (EU NAVFOR Somalia), which is being
conducted in support of resolutions 1814 (2008), 1816
(2008), 1838 (2008) and 1846 (2008).

Of course, what I have just referred to is in no
way a complete account of the various forms of EU-
United Nations partnership and cooperation in the area
of international peace and security. I have mentioned
these examples mainly to clearly demonstrate that
partnerships between the United Nations and its
regional and subregional partners, such as the one
between the United Nations and the European Union,
are not only important but are effective and make a
tremendous difference on the ground.

The European Union fully supports efforts aimed
at enhancing dialogue and interaction between the
Security Council and representatives of regional,
subregional and other international organizations. This
is directly linked to providing for more effective and
efficient carrying out of the Security Council's work
and to contributing to making the Council's
deliberations more strategically oriented, as well as to
ensuring that better account is taken of the current
realities on the ground. The expertise, first-hand inputs
and leverage that regional and subregional
organizations have to offer are major assets that the
United Nations and the Security Council can truly
benefit from.

It is a well-known fact that today many
challenges to international peace and security lie in
Africa. Nine of the 19 current United Nations
peacekeeping operations and numerous other types of
United Nations missions and offices are situated in
Africa. About 70 per cent of United Nations
peacekeepers and 73 per cent of the United Nations
peacekeeping budget go to Africa. Just from these
basic facts, it is obvious that it is essential for the
United Nations to have established and to further
develop effective partnerships and cooperation with the
African Union.

The European Union fully supports efforts aimed
at widening and strengthening United Nations
cooperation with the African Union. In practical terms,
09-27223

close cooperation between the African Union and
United Nations institutions and relevant bodies should
be developed. We are encouraged by the fact that the
modalities and parameters of such cooperation have
been well established thus far, including through
regular interactions between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. These interactions are also
fundamental in view of the relevant decision-making
processes for peace support operations. They can, inter
alia, provide for a better understanding of the conflict
situations and challenges at hand and contribute to
ensuring clarity of shared goals.

As I have already mentioned, the European Union
greatly appreciates recent endeavours by African
regional and subregional organizations, in particular by
the African Union, to deliver peace in the continent.
We commend the progress made in this regard so far.
This is in line with the principle of African ownership,
which the European Union fully supports. The African
Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as well as efforts
aimed at creating an African standby force, are recent,
highly visible demonstrations in this respect. For its
part, the European Union has provided major support
to those African Union Missions and will continue to
do so, including through its naval operation EU
NAVFOR ATALANTA by contributing to the
protection at sea of United Nations vessels delivering
the logistical support package to AMISOM.

The immensity of the tasks, which stems from
increasingly difficult conflict environments and other
related challenges, requires substantial institutional and
operational capacity, including on the part of the
African Union. Among these tasks and challenges, the
European Union attaches great importance to the
protection of civilians as an integral part of most
peacekeeping operations, as well as to the attainment
of high standards in peacekeeping, including in
particular the principle of zero-tolerance for sexual
exploitation and abuse.

The European Union is committed to assisting the
African Union in developing its peacekeeping
capabilities and human capacities. We fully support
similar endeavours in relations between the African
Union and the United Nations. Support in the area of
logistics and training are essential elements of such
cooperation. Furthermore, the European Union
supports the idea of a multi-donor trust fund to finance
3
long-term African Union capacity-building. In this
context, the European Union believes it will be
pertinent to address specific modalities of such a fund,
as well as its relations with existing funding
mechanisms, including the European Union African
Peace Facility, in order to provide additional resources
to the African Union.

With regard to funding mechanisms for African
Union peace operations carried out under United
Nations mandates in particular, the European Union
understands the need for predictability and
sustainability. Sustainable and predictable funding
mechanisms should be reflective of the different scope
and nature of the United Nations and its regional
partners and should avoid restraining the independence
of the respective partners in their specific spheres of
competence and responsibility. These conditions fully
apply, for example, to the instrument of a multi-donor
trust fund, which could, inter alia, enable donors to
assist the African Union and troop-contributing
countries during operations. On the use of United
Nations assessed funds, additional discussions will be
needed. The European Union looks forward to the
assessment that the Secretary-General will prepare,
taking into account the report of the panel as well as
the implementation of resolution 1863 (2009).

The European Union strongly believes that
security is a precondition for development. The
European Union is the biggest donor of development
aid to Africa. The European Union and the African
Union have a well-established partnership, and the
European Union is fully committed to developing it
further.

A cornerstone of the European Union-African
Union partnership is the joint Africa-European Union
Strategy agreed upon in 2007, which is accompanied
by an ambitious and concrete three-year action plan for
the period until 2010. It focuses on important
objectives that range from security to democratic
governance, human rights and development. The first
of the eight strategic partnerships under the strategy is
the partnership for peace and security. It includes
projects such as joint evaluation missions to conflict
and post-conflict areas, comprehensive consultation
mechanisms, the training of experts, the development
ofjoint strategies and so on.

Joint European Union-African Union activities in
this regard also include frequent political dialogue, the
strengthening of the African Continental Early Warning
System, ongoing assistance to African Union political-
military structures and extensive training programmes.
The three priority areas of the partnership for peace
and security are, first, dialogue on challenges to peace
and security, secondly, full operationalization of the
African Peace and Security Architecture, and, thirdly,
predictable funding for African-led peace-support
operations.

The Africa-European Union strategic partnership
on peace and security is underpinned by a financing
architecture. The European Union instrument called the
African Peace Facility (APF), which was established
on the request of the African Union, represents a major
source of predictable, sustainable and flexible funding
for African-led peace-support operations, as well as for
the building of the required capacity to plan, lead and
manage operations. With a total allocation of €440
million since 2004, the APF has provided a major part
of the funding to a number of African-led peace
operations - AMIS in the Sudan/Darfur, AMISOM. in
Somalia, the Central African Multinational Force
(FOMUC), now the Mission for the Consolidation of
Peace in Central Africa (MICOPAX), and two African
Union operations in the Comoros - and to
strengthening the capacities of relevant institutions and
structures, as well as to strengthening interactions
between the African Union and African subregional
organizations.

As decided just a month ago, the APF will
continue to function over the next three years with the
allocation of €300 million. It will also allow for the
funding of African-led mediation efforts and post-
conflict stabilization activities. This substantial support
package is further reinforced by an additional €200
million being provided for building the peace and
security capacity, activities and missions of the African
subregional organizations.

In conclusion, let me emphasize once again that
the European Union is strongly committed to further
developing its own strategic partnership with the
African Union and to providing long-term support to it
in a wide range of areas. At the same time, the
European Union fully supports further strengthening
the strategic partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations, including and in particular in
the field of peace and security. In view of recent
developments in Africa that remind us of the
importance of effective conflict management, conflict
09-27223
prevention and the rule of law, the European Union is
determined to continue assisting the African Union in
developing its own capacity to deliver peace and
stability on the continent and to become an
increasingly strong partner to the United Nations and
the entire international community. We see today's
open debate as part of a long-term dialogue in this
regard.

