Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General and
Executive Director Achim Steiner of the United
Nations Environment Programme for their statements.
The interest and participation that today's open debate
has evoked testifies to the importance that we all attach
to the subject of climate change. I would therefore like
to particularly acknowledge the presence of His
Excellency the President of Nauru and of other
dignitaries in our midst today. I look forward to
hearing their views on the issue under our
consideration. It is a challenge that lies at the forefront
of the global development agenda and that is close to
the hearts of small island States, for which it poses an
existential threat.

Climate change, in an overarching sense, is
beginning to impact the security of the global
community in the same way as poverty, food security
and underdevelopment continue to undermine
international well-being. Sweeping generalizations
about climate change leading to droughts, floods,
changes in weather patterns, water and food scarcity,
and violent conflicts are, however, yet to be fully tested
against empirical and scientific analyses.
The Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and other
scientific authorities unequivocally speak of this
uncertainty. This is also corroborated by the
Secretary-General's report entitled "Climate Change
and its possible security implications", which
concludes that
"[w]hile climate modelling has made
considerable advances in forecasting the future
behaviour of natural systems over long time
spans, the science of climate change and its
physical impacts still confronts a number of
uncertainties" (A/64/350, para. 8).

Sea-level rise, on the other hand, is happening.
There is verifiable evidence to suggest sea-level
increases of a metre or more by 2100, which could lead
to the disappearance of several small island States and
the submergence of low-lying coastal areas in many
littoral States. We are particularly aware of its gravity,
given the vulnerability of our own people living on
island chains and in coastal areas. There are also issues
of statelessness and the displacement of people that are
deeply worrisome.

Faced with these challenges, what must the global
community do? The answer quite clearly lies first and
foremost in taking remedial action today rather than in
focusing on the implications of such climate-induced
disasters in the distant future.

The concept paper for this debate (S/2011/408, annex) states that the purpose of today's engagement is
to allow the Council to deliberate the security
implications of climate change, consistent with its
mandate, and to advance the dialogue on this issue
from the security perspective. In this context, it is
worth keeping in mind that while the Security Council
can debate the issue and may recognize the
vulnerabilities and threats induced by climate change,
it does not have the wherewithal to address the
situation. The existential threat to island States or the
emergence of food insecurity as a result of climate
change cannot be resolved or remedied by the Council
under Article 39 of the United Nations Charter. Clearly,
these issues need a broader approach anchored in
development, adaptive capacity, risk assessment and
institutional build-up. We therefore have some
difficulty in accepting the assertion that the effects of
climate change go beyond the mandate of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC).

If we are serious about addressing the
vulnerabilities arising out of climate change, then our
deliberations on climate change must focus on
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and strengthening
the adaptive capacities of vulnerable countries. Our
agreed global goal for climate stabilization by limiting

the increase in global average temperature below 2°C
above preindustrial levels needs to be backed by
mitigation commitments based on the principles of
common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities and equity. Preserving the
structure of the Kyoto Protocol and its second
commitment period, the early disbursement of the Fast
Start Finance agreed at Cancun and the
operationalization of the Green Climate Fund, the
Technology Mechanism and the Adaptation Committee
are vital to imparting a renewed momentum to the
UNFCCC process.

Those who are historically responsible for
climate change must come forward with firm
greenhouse gas commitments and ensure that there is
adequate resource and technology flow to developing
countries, in particular the small island States, to allow
them to adapt to climate change. If we are successful in
undertaking the necessary mitigation and adaptation
measures, our preoccupations about the security
implications of climate change, which in any case are
yet to be fully established, would to a large extent be
put to rest. This would also lighten the burden of
preventive diplomacy, which has been so passionately
argued for by some delegations.

In our view, what constitutes a bigger concern for
international peace and security today is the threat that
developing countries face from possible conflicts
arising out of inadequate resources for development
and poverty eradication. Sustained economic growth
and development must therefore be pursued in order to
allow developing countries to alleviate poverty and
meet basic standards of living for all. This in itself will
make them more resilient to climate change
vulnerabilities.

The concept paper also highlights the
vulnerability of food security while postulating its
veritable nexus with climate change impact. That may
well be the case. However, our recent experience of
food scarcity, as arose in 2008, and high inflation this
year point to the preponderance of factors far removed
from climate change that are holding global food
security to ransom. Agricultural protectionism,
excessive speculation in food commodity trading and
the diversion of crops to non-food purposes are leading
us to an unsustainable global food situation. This calls
for urgent global attention.

Our efforts to deliberate the possible security
implications of climate change will bear fruit only if
we realize where the centre of gravity on this issue lies.
We must not confuse political motion with action.
Climate change needs the collective understanding and
support of all Member States. Action must therefore lie
in the UNFCCC. When confronted with the question of
an existential threat to the small island States, I am
reminded of the words of Mahatma Gandhi that "all
compromise is based on give and take, but there can be
no give and take on fundamentals". Let us do our best
for the small island States and for humankind.

