Mr. Thiiresson (Sweden): Today I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden. Let me first of all thank you, Madam
President, for organizing today's debate. As Chair ofthe
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, Argentina has made important
contributions to improving the working methods of the
Security Council. We hope that your successor as Chair
will be equally diligent.

Let me also thank the two briefers from this
morning, Ombudsperson Kimberly Prost, and the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Mrs. Fatou Bensouda, for their presentations and
tireless efforts.

Let me start by addressing the two subject areas that
are the focus of the excellent concept paper (S/2014/725, annex) on enhancing due process in sanctions regimes
and the follow-up to Security Council referrals to the
ICC.

The Nordic countries welcome this opportunity
to take stock of the situation concerning listing and
de-listing. A gradual approach by the Council has
made steady advances possible for the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime, as most recently witnessed by some
further improvements made in resolution 2161 (2014)
and usefully discussed in the Ombudsperson's eighth
report (S/2014/553). However, we urge the Council to
actively consider how similar due process guarantees
could be introduced into other sanctions regimes. The
informal group of like-minded countries has repeatedly
emphasized the importance of taking such a broader
perspective. Here as well, a gradual approach would
yield the best results.

The Nordic countries commend the important and
persistent work of the Office of the ICC Prosecutor
aimed at developing the cooperation between the
ICC and the Security Council on effective follow-up
to referred situations. As has also been noted in the
concept paper, the fulfilment of the mandate of the
Court is dependent upon full cooperation by States. The
ultimate aim of a referral by the Council is in jeopardy
if States fail to cooperate without the Council taking
appropriate action. An effective mechanism to follow
up on referrals would therefore not only strengthen
international justice, but also bolster the relevance and
integrity of Council decisions.

In the past year, the attention to the working methods
of the Council has been further strengthened. The
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group, now in its second year, has made important
contributions in that regard, and we fully support its
statement, as presented by our Swiss colleague earlier
today. I would also like to mention the important report
of the Security Council, entitled "Security Council
Working Methods: A Tale of Two Councils", not least
its publication earlier this year. It provides an extensive
history of the working methods of the Council. That
was followed by ajoint ACT-Security Council seminar
on the report.

The presidential notes that have been adopted
since we last met on this topic in October 2013 cover a
number of important issues. In particular, we would like
to highlight the note on penholders, which was adopted
in April (S/2014/268). In our View, it is imperative
that all members of the Council, permanent members
and non-permanent members, have a real possibility
of drafting and presenting products. The later note
(S/2013/515) on enhancing the dialogue among Council
members is also very relevant in that regard. While
we welcome the new presidential notes, we continue,
however, to stress the importance of implementation.
There can be no real progress unless there is sufficient
follow-up, and there is still much to do in that regard.

The core of the discussion on working methods has
not changed since last year. For the Nordic countries it
is all about the effectiveness and transparency of the
Council, and the possibilities available to non-members
to interact with members of the Council in a substantive
way. With the challenges facing the international
community today, it is imperative that the Council draw
upon other relevant United Nations entities in order
to help resolve crises, but also as a means to prevent
crises at the outset. In particular, we believe that the
cooperation between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Council should be further developed. The
horrendous public health catastrophe in West Africa,
with its broad socioeconomic implications for the
whole region, has strengthened our conviction in that
regard. The upcoming 2015 review ofthe peacebuilding
architecture will be a good opportunity to explore that
further.

Finally, in the past few years we have unfortunately
seen several examples of inaction on the part of the
Council in the face of unspeakable human suffering and
mass atrocities. That has led to warranted criticism and
a necessary debate about the Council's role, and more
precisely the use of the veto. We would like to commend
France for taking up the proposal that the permanent
members voluntarily commit to refrain from the use of
the veto to block Council action aimed at preventing, or
ending, atrocities. We welcome the ministerial meeting
held in September on that important topic under the
co-chairmanship of France and Mexico. The Nordic
countries would like to emphasize the importance of
keeping that question high on the agenda with a view
to framing a code of conduct that is consistent with the
common commitment of United Nations members to
halt atrocities.

In the meantime, we commend the increased use of
briefings in the Council by the United Nations Office of
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and
the Office of the Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect, as well as relevant Special Rapporteurs,
where populations are at risk of mass atrocities.

