Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month and the delegation of Costa Rica
on a successful Council presidency last month. I thank
Commissioner Bellemare for his report to the Council
on the progress made in the work of the International
Independent Investigation Commission and for his
detailed briefing today. I take this opportunity to
08-6561]
express to him and his team my great appreciation and
that of my Government for their efforts.

Some might consider that the format of this
meeting, at which the Council hears briefings by
Commissioner Bellemare, has become a routine affair.
However, this meeting has a particular meaning for
Lebanon because it coincides with the international
celebration of the sixtieth anniversary of the adoption
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in the
drafting of which Lebanon had the honour to
participate. Included among those rights is the right to
life, liberty and security of person - a basic right that
cowardly terrorists tried to undermine by assassinating
a number of my country's leaders and other innocent
civilians through a sinister and criminal plot involving
a series of explosions. This meeting also coincides with
the third anniversary of the assassination of Lebanese
Member of Parliament Gebran Tueni and the first
anniversary of the assassination of Brigadier General
Francois al-Hajj, and is being held only two months
before the fourth anniversary of the assassination of
Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and a number of his
colleagues.

It was following that event that, for the first time,
we addressed the Security Council to seek support for
our efforts to find the truth and put an end to the
impunity of the perpetrators. Since then, we have
sought only to find the truth and to administer justice,
because we believe that that is the best and most
effective way to prevent terrorists from continuing
their crimes.

The Lebanese Government of National Unity,
formed after the adoption of the Doha Agreement and
the holding of our presidential elections, highlighted in
its statement to Parliament its commitment to the
international tribunal established under Security
Council resolution 1757 (2007) to prosecute the crime
of the assassination of the martyred Prime Minister
Rafiq Hariri and his colleagues and other assassination
attempts and to administer justice, rather than seek
vengeance and politicization. That commitment was
reaffirmed by President Michel Sleiman in his address
to the General Assembly on 23 September. Today's
meeting also follows the Secretary-General's
declaration on 30 November that the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon is fully prepared to begin its work on
1 March 2009. For all those reasons, today's meeting is
an important event not only for the families of the
08-65611
martyrs and victims, but also for all Lebanese citizens,
who have the right to a secure, dignified life far
removed from terrorists and terrorism.

With regard to the content of the eleventh report
of the Commission submitted by Commissioner
Bellemare, my delegation cannot fail to welcome the
progress made in the investigations and the new
information received by the Commission, which will
enable it to determine the identities of additional
persons related to the terrorist network that carried out
the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq
Hariri. We welcome the finding that that crime is
linked with others being investigated by the
Commission. In addition, we commend the
Commission for its efforts to base its work on concrete
evidence, in accordance with the highest norms of
international law.

We hope that the Security Council will respond
positively to the request that it extend the
Commission's mandate from 31 December 2008 to
28 February 2009 in order to ensure a smooth
transition between the investigation and the
commencement of the Special Tribunal's work, when
Commissioner Bellemare will begin his duties as
Prosecutor. We look forward to the commencement of
the Special Tribunal's work upon the completion of the
transitional phase. We wish to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his continued efforts to support the
progress of justice for Lebanon and the Lebanese. We
reaffirm that cooperation among the Commission, the
Lebanese authorities and the investigation on logistical
matters regarding the security of the Commission and
its personnel will continue.

Finally, we wish to thank all Member States that
have supported the work of the Commission. Whenever
the Commission makes progress in searching for the
truth, we come closer to the time when the Tribunal
can begin its work so that we can achieve justice and
breathe life into the ancient Roman maxim that truth is
the mother of justice.

