Mr. Hyseni: I had so hoped that I would not have
to ask to speak a second time today, but a number of
inaccuracies that we heard today from Mr. Jeremie
require a response.

Unfortunately, the efforts to mislead this Council
have continued with the presentation of various figures
that have nothing in common with reality and with
definitions that are in fact profound distortions of
reality. What one ethnic group calls secession another
calls a declaration of independence. I wish to recall for
the Council that the independence of Kosovo was
declared and has been supported by every single ethnic
group living in Kosovo but the Serb community.
Anyone who wishes to see that for themselves has only
to go through the signatures signed under the
declaration of independence. Turkish, Roma, Egyptian,
Bosnian, Ashkali and many other names -
non-Albanian members of Parliament of the Republic
of Kosovo - will be found there.

Organized crime and terrorism are the only words
used by some to describe Kosovo. The Kosovo
Liberation Army is labelled a terrorist organization.
The freedom-fighters of the Kosovo Liberation Army
are freedom-fighters. Kosovo, on the other hand, is
firmly committed to investigating, pursuing and
punishing any crime committed on the territory of the
Republic of Kosovo, regardless of the perpetrator.
Isolated cases will in no way be allowed to overshadow
the efforts of the suffering people of Kosovo to
safeguard their freedom and their very existence.

I will not respond to each and every inaccuracy
that we have heard tonight because I do not want to
waste the Council's time. But let me just say that it is
regrettably amazing that we never heard Mr. Jeremie
speak of the 12,000 to 15,000 slaughtered Albanians.
We never heard Mr. Jeremic' speak of the hundreds of
mosques destroyed. We never heard Mr. Jeremic' speak
of atrocities committed throughout the former
Yugoslavia that were sponsored, organized, planned
and carried out by the Government of the Republic of
Serbia.

The Serbian patrimony is the cultural heritage of
Kosovo. It is our cultural heritage, and we intend to
protect it by all means and at any cost. We intend to
investigate and prosecute any crime committed in
Kosovo. I am not going to turn myself either into an
investigator or into a judge tonight. I am not the one.
We have an independent justice system that is fully
functional and will be more and more so with the help
and support of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX).

We invited EULEX to deploy in Kosovo to help
us in the police and justice sectors. We, and not the
Republic of Serbia, will prosecute crimes committed
by our people in the territory of our country. The old
way is over, and will never happen again. We know the
ways that the Republic of Serbia used to punish crimes
in Kosovo - by collectively wiping villages and
thousands of civilians off the face of the Earth.

Mr. Jeremic' failed to speak of missing persons,
the many persons still missing from Kosovo, the
remains of whom are, unfortunately, still somewhere in
Serbia in mass graves. I am confident that the
authorities in Belgrade are quite aware of many of
those mass graves. The best thing to do would be to
give the families in Kosovo the information on the
whereabouts of their loved ones instead of trying to
blame Kosovo, Kosovar Albanians and the Kosovar
population for all the atrocities that the Republic of
Serbia has, in a very planned manner, carefully carried
out through its military, paramilitary or police forces.

Finally, I would like to once again thank you, Sir,
for your time and patience. I would like to call on you
to refer to various statistical data on the number of
Serbs ever living in Kosovo. Serb officials continue to
speak of 200,000 or 300,000 displaced persons, while,
in the best possible case, less than 200,000 Serbs ever
lived in Kosovo. We still have 135,000 Serbs living in
Kosovo, some in the north, but most of them in the
southern part of the country. 70 per cent of the Kosovo
Serbs live south of the Ibar river.

I believe this forum, the Council, should not be
misused to spread inaccuracies that are profoundly
misleading. Once again, I assure members that they can
count on our firm determination to fight organized
crime and corruption. But it is we who will do that, not
the Republic of Serbia. The Republic of Serbia will
never again be able to hold any court sessions in the
Republic of Kosovo.

