Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the convening of
today's meeting. I thank High Representative Valentin
Inzko for his briefing. We commend him for his efforts
in promoting the political process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I also welcome the participation in
today's meeting of Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
thank him for his statement.

Over the past year, the political situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been generally stable.
Some reform initiatives in the areas of the
Constitution, the rule of law, the economy and national
defence have made some progress. Meanwhile, we are
also aware of the worrisome picture described by the
High Representative in his report (S/2009/588*). There
has been almost no major progress in the
implementation of the reform agenda. The Republika
Srpska often challenges the State institutions, authority
and laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina and questions the
authority of the High Representative and the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council.

The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina faces
many difficulties, including demonstrations by veterans
and victims of the fighting in Sarajevo. We express our
concern in this regard and hope that the European
Union and the United States will strengthen their good
offices and promote high-level political dialogue to
achieve real results as soon as possible.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We earnestly
hope that all the country's political leaders will
effectively implement the Dayton Peace Agreement,
actively engage in dialogue, enhance political and
mutual trust, push for Government institution-building,
constitutional reform and the rule of law, and make
greater progress in these areas so as to preserve lasting
peace, security and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Balkan region.

We also hope that the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the International Monetary Fund and
other parties will pay greater attention to the negative
impact of the global economic crisis on economic,
development and political reform in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and take corresponding active measures.

China welcomes the prospect of the gradual
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the
European Union. We are happy to see Bosnian reform
proceed in accordance with the European
Commission's road map on visa liberalization or
elimination. We believe that, in accordance with the
mandate of the Dayton Peace Agreement, the High
Representative should continue to take positive
measures to promote the accession of Bosnia and
Herzegovina into the European Union.

The European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in close cooperation with the Armed
Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, is an important
force in guaranteeing local security. We welcome the
European Union's ongoing positive role in maintaining
peace and stability and promoting economic and social
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

China will continue to support the High
Representative in fulfilling his duties and
responsibilities. Together with the international
community, we are ready, to the extent possible, to
offer Bosnia and Herzegovina our help in achieving
lasting peace, stability and development.

