The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset we would very much like to thank
our briefers, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Mr. Matias Bertino
Matondo and Mr. Koen Vervaeke. I will focus my
statement on three basic issues.

The first is the political developments and the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic. The most important
development since the last official meeting of the
Security Council in February to discuss the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/PV.8467) was
the signing of the political agreement between the
Government and 14 armed groups. Like all the previous
speakers, I would like to say how much we welcomed
the signing of the agreement on 6 February. The most
important stage has gone beyond the mere signing of the
Agreement, which has now been in place for more than
four months, and represents the full commitment of the
signatories to implementing all of its provisions. We
would like to say how pleased we are that the 14 armed
groups have sat down together with the Government to
engage in dialogue and have begun talks following the
signing of the Agreement.

We welcome the steps that President Touadera of
the Central African Republic has taken to ensure that
the Muslim community also shares ministerial positions
and participates in the decision-making process. We
also support his decision to engage women in forming
the Government and call for those positive steps to
continue in the future. We would like to pay tribute to
another initiative of President Touadera, who joined the
Muslim community during Eid Al-Fitr prayers in one of
the mosques of the country's capital of Bangui. We urge
all citizens of the Central African Republic to work
together to promote peaceful coexistence between the
various components of the society and to address the
problem of hate speech so as to ensure that everyone
can enjoy peace and security.

We welcome the steps taken by the Government
to implement the main provisions of the political
agreement, such as establishing technical committees
in various regions and governorates, with the support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), in order to bring together local authorities,
civil society and representatives of armed groups in the
quest to settle differences and prevent the outbreak of
conflict. The National Assembly enacted the electoral
law for 2020 and 2021 and a draft budget and timeline
for the elections unanimously. We hope the elections
will be held as scheduled without any delays.

The Government has also taken measures to
foster cooperation with regional and international
organizations such as the African Union, the European
Union and the United Nations, embodied in the
visit to the Central African Republic in April of
Mr. Smai'l Chergui, the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of
the European External Action Service, with the aim of
mobilizing regional and international support for the
political agreement.

Secondly, on the security situation, acts of violence
against civilians in the Central African Republic still
constitute a great challenge to the Government. Despite
the signing of the agreement and the political progress
that has been achieved, as well as the decline in violence
in some areas, the security situation remains fragile
in others. Looting and the illegal taxation of civilians
persist. In that regard, we are very concerned about the
repeated violations and aggressions by armed groups
against United Nations staff, members of MINUSCA
and humanitarian workers. We strongly condemn the
attacks by the anti-balaka and Retour, reclamation
et rehabilitation groups on civilians, as well as other
military groups, the latest of which was an attack by
Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation in May near the
city of Paoua that killed 39 civilians, including one
child. If such attacks continue they will undermine all
the efforts put into reaching the political agreement and
hinder the implementation of its main provisions. We
urge the Government to take immediate steps to ensure
that the perpetrators of acts of violence and crimes
against civilians are held accountable and brought to
justice with a view to maintaining security, establishing
peace and ending impunity.

Thirdly, we deplore the very critical humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic. Millions
of people, by some estimates half of the country's
population, are still in dire need of urgent humanitarian
assistance. The number of people who need assistance
and protection and suffer from food insecurity continues
to rise, and it is very worrying that many of those who
need assistance are children.

Before concluding, I would like to affirm that the
only path to a resolution of the crisis in the Central
African Republic is a political dialogue among all
the stakeholders. It was dialogue that produced the
political progress that culminated on 6 February with
the signing of the political agreement. If the dialogue
can succeed in leading to a sustained consensus among
all the country's political stakeholders, it will have a
positive impact on the humanitarian, economic and
development situations, as well as ensuring the return
of internally displaced persons to their regions and of
refugees from neighbouring countries.

We would like to express our appreciation for
Mr. Ndiaye's efforts in the past few months since
he took office as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of MINUSCA, and for the efforts of all the
Mission's personnel.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.

