Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I also would like
to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing and for
presenting her fifth report to the Security Council in
accordance with resolution 1970 (2011).

Azerbaijan is not a party to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. Nevertheless, as we have
repeatedly stated on previously occasions, the protection
of civilians, respect for international human rights and
humanitarian law and the fight against impunity for
the most serious crimes are the responsibility of the
international community as a whole.

Libya's progress demonstrates the irreversibility
of the democratic transition process in the country.
We know of the efforts of the Government towards the
implementation of the required policies and strategies
to address the challenges that the country is facing. We
commend the Libyan Government for its constructive
cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor and its
engagement in the judicial process at the International
Criminal Court (ICC).

As the report notes, the strength of the Rome
system lies in the possibility for shared responsibilty
and complementary actions between the Court and
Libyan judicial institutions. During the reporting
period, the Libyan authorities continued to demonstrate
their commitment to ensuring an effective and genuine
investigation and fair trials, consistent with the required
international standards.

We note that, based on its assessment of Libya's
relevant submission, the Office of the Prosecutor
asserted that the case of Abdullah Al-Senussi was
inadmissible and should therefore be prosecuted at the
national level. We look forward to a decision by the
judges of the Pre-Trial Chamber as to whether both
cases remain admissible before the ICC. It is therefore
essential that the Government of Libya continue to
cooperate with the ICC and provide it with all the
necessary information that might be needed by the
Court to properly assess the admissibility challenges.

We take note of the Prosecutor's update in relation
to gender crimes and on other ongoing investigations,
including with regard to those individuals outside
Libya who continue to pose a security threat to the
Government. The close cooperation between the
authorities and the Office of the Prosecutor is essential
in that regard.

The Government of Libya is committed to a
comprehensive strategy to address all crimes and end
impunity in the country. It is important to continue to
demonstrate that justice remains a key priority and to
ensure that victims of all crimes have the opportunity
to seek resolution within the national legal system.

