Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): An overall appraisal of resolution 1511
(2003), which we have just adopted, is contained in the
joint French-German-Russian statement distributed to
members. In addition, we should like to emphasize
that, from the moment that work on the draft resolution
began, the Russian Federation was guided by the
objectives of promoting the earliest possible political
settlement, under United Nations auspices, of the
situation in Iraq; helping the Iraqi people to regain
their sovereignty; and preventing a situation whereby
the Iraq crisis would destabilize the situation in the
region.

A continuation of the trends towards a crisis in
Iraq serves no one's interests. Therefore, it is essential
that international efforts be united in the search for a
long-term and stable political settlement that will
enable the Iraqi people to take their country's
leadership into their own hands through a legitimately
elected Government and that will allow Iraq's
neighbours to feel secure.

We are pleased that, as a result of the efforts of
Russia, France, Germany, China and other members of
the Security Council - together with those of the
Secretary-General - we were able, during the course
of negotiations with the draft resolution's sponsors, to
arrive at a resolution that provides a real chance for the
Iraqi situation to make a transition from the occupation
phase to a phase of practical measures to restore Iraqi
sovereignty.

The resolution unambiguously stresses the Iraqi
people's right to determine its own political future and
to manage its own natural resources. There is provision
for the elaboration of a specific timetable for the
political process, including the adoption of an Iraqi
constitution and the formation of a Government
through democratic elections. There is recognition of
the significance of support on the part of States in the
region - first and foremost Iraq's neighbours - for
that process, and emphasis is placed on the need to
undertake concrete measures at this stage to transfer
leadership and administrative functions to the Iraqis
themselves. With the election of an internationally
recognized Government of Iraq, the authority of the
occupying Powers will completely end.

Although under the current circumstances - in
which Iraq has lacked security - the United Nations
has not been in a position to play a full-fledged role in
bringing order to the country, the resolution gives the
Secretary-General the right to take decisions, within
the framework of the political process, regarding
timetables and modalities for, inter alia, forming the
membership of a constitutional conference and the
holding of elections. We are convinced that, as the
Iraqi situation is stabilized, the United Nations will
carry out the powers reserved to it in the spheres where
it truly can and must lead. It is an important matter of
principle that the Secretary-General report to the
Security Council on the course of the political process
in all of its aspects.

Yet another very important point is the agreement
on the mandate approved by the Security Council for
the multinational force. In the final, agreed version, its
functions - as Russia believes - are subordinate to
the tasks of promoting the restoration of Iraq's
sovereignty, and as soon as that happens the
multinational force's mandate will expire. If the
legitimately elected Government of Iraq requests some
form of assistance to maintain security, then the
Security Council will consider such a request. This
provision of the resolution - along with the regular
reports that it requires of the Secretary-General, the
leaders of the multinational force and the Coalition
Provisional Authority - guarantees permanent
Security Council control over the political settlement
and the overall restoration of Iraq. The Council can
make the necessary amendments to that process.

In the economic sphere, the resolution recalls the
need to ensure complete transparency in the activities
of the Development Fund for Iraq, including through
the swift establishment of an International Advisory
and Monitoring Board, whose formation has clearly
been delayed for too long without any convincing
reason. The resolution also fails to address such
pending issues as the problem of Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction, the fate of those missing in action during
the course of the first Gulf War and Kuwaiti property.
However, it is clear that the Security Council will still
have to address those problems, in conformity with
resolution 1483 (2003).

On the whole, of course, the new resolution is not
ideal. Not all of its provisions have managed to provide
for the necessary conditions. The result we have
achieved is a compromise that does not resolve all the
problems. However, at this stage, in the light of all the
factors, we see more pluses in the resolution than
minuses. It is fundamentally important that, during the
negotiations, we were able to achieve a consensus in
the Security Council - something to which Russia
attached priority significance from the outset.

Now, all of us, as members of the international
community - and first and foremost the occupying
Powers - must do our utmost to accomplish the
fundamental task set out in the resolution, to see to it
that the day will come as swiftly as possible when the
Iraqis can manage their own future. Once again, we
emphasize that the resolution provides the conditions
necessary for that. Our overall obligation is to do
everything we can so that the goals set out in the
resolution do not remain dead letters but are actually
implemented. Only then will the efforts expended to
reach agreement on the resolution be justified.

