Mr. Spoerri: On behalf of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), I am pleased and
honoured to once again brief the Security Council, and
I thank the Republic of Korea for the invitation.

Since I last addressed members of this Council
eight months ago (see S/PV.6790), a number of armed
conflicts have seen a resurgence or have intensified,
and others have continued to rumble on, as they have
for many years. All of them, regardless of their causes
or where they are in the world - be it in the Syrian
Arab Republic or Mali, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo or Afghanistan - have at least one thing
in common. In all of them, the grim reality is that
civilian men, women and children continue to suffer
the overwhelming burden of the fallout, while efforts
to protect those civilians are fraught with difficulties.

During the debate held in June 2012, I focused
on three issues of fundamental concern to the ICRC.
The continuing urgency of those issues justifies
my returning to them today. They are, first, threats
affecting access to health care for the wounded and sick
in armed conflicts and other emergencies; secondly, the
availability and use of arms; and thirdly, the overarching
lack of compliance with international humanitarian
law on the part of States and non-State armed groups,
which lies at the heart of the massive suffering to which
we are witness.

On the issue of violence against health care
personnel and facilities, I will start with some modest
but encouraging good news. Following the adoption of
a far-reaching resolution on health care in dangerous
situations at the thirty-first International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva in
December 2011, the ICRC began a series ofconsultations
with States and other major stakeholders on making the
delivery of health care safer in dangerous situations
worldwide. Some concrete steps have already been
taken. A series of experts' workshops, which began in
2012 and will continue into 2014, has mobilized health
authorities, medical associations, national Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies and non-governmental
organizations from around the world. They have
helped to raise awareness and understanding of the
issue and have put forward practical recommendations
for safe practices. States have in some cases, of their
own volition, undertaken diplomatic initiatives aimed
at facilitating the delivery of health care in conflict-
affected countries. In others - Colombia and Yemen,
for example - they have taken specific steps towards
ensuring respect for health care structures and personnel
in their own countries.

Sadly, the good news cannot detract from the bad.
ICRC health care data for 2012 shows that the vast
majority of violent incidents, or over 80 per cent of the
almost 900 incidents recorded in 22 countries, affect
local health care workers. Of those health workers caught
up in such incidents, around 25 per cent were killed or
wounded. In some cases, secondary explosions targeted
those trying to assist the victims of an initial explosion,
a particularly repugnant practice causing further injury
and death and preventing care from reaching those
who urgently need it. A further trend with sometimes
catastrophic consequences is the large-scale flight of
health workers in the face of attacks, threats or general
insecurity.

Thus, while there may be some steps in the right
direction, much more needs to be done. As States
bear the primary responsibility for improving the
situation, the ICRC once again urges members of the
Council to initiate or actively support efforts to tackle
this pressing humanitarian concern and to influence
others to do the same. Indeed, that is required under the
obligation to respect and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law in accordance with common article 1
of the 1949 Geneva Conventions.

That brings me to the second major concern,
which is closely linked with the first, and that is the
massive circulation and widespread availability of
arms and ammunition. In many contexts, that may put
civilians at a risk of being wounded or killed after an
armed conflict has ended equal to the risk during the
conflict. The poorly regulated international trade in
conventional arms, including the inadequate standards
for their transfer, is at least partly to blame.

A strong and effective arms trade treaty is urgently
needed to enhance the protection of civilians as well
as health-care and humanitarian workers working to
assist those who are most vulnerable and to help ensure
that international humanitarian law is respected by
all parties to armed conflicts, be they international or
non-international in nature.

The next diplomatic conference, to be held in just
a few weeks' time, will be a golden opportunity, which
we urge States to seize decisively in order to redouble
their efforts to ensure the adoption of a robust arms
trade treaty, one that sets strict criteria for all transfers
of all conventional arms. The ICRC remains committed
to helping to achieve that goal, working with States,
national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, the
United Nations and other organizations.

The third major concern - namely, the prevailing
lack of respect for international humanitarian law
by both States and non-State armed groups, coupled
with a dominant culture of impunity - is the main
common denominator of all other protection concerns.
Some progress has undoubtedly been made at both
the national and the international levels to improve
compliance and accountability. That ranges from the
implementation of domestic legislation to the training
of security forces and the judicial processes of the
international criminal tribunals. In addition, in 2011,
the International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent endorsed the ICRC proposal to further
work aimed at strengthening legal protection for people
affected by armed conflict. The joint Swiss-ICRC
initiative to strengthen compliance with international
humanitarian law has gained momentum, with an
increasing number of States engaging in substantive
discussions on that issue.

The ICRC works at all levels - diplomatic, policy
and operational - towards ensuring better respect
for international humanitarian law. To be credible and
effective, that requires a rigorously impartial, neutral
and independent approach, one that remains consistently
distinct from any kind of political or judicial process.
That in turn helps to facilitate dialogue with parties
on all sides to a conflict and humanitarian access to
people in need. Protection lies at the heart of the ICRC
mandate and mission and provides a framework for our
assistance activities.

Of course, there are numerous challenges and
constraints that make that task all the more difficult.
The humanitarian environment is an increasingly
complex one. Just one aspect of that is the sometimes
baffling array of new actors, both those involved in
armed conflict and those responding to its humanitarian
consequences, with at times a blurred line between the
two. Increasing numbers of civilian and military actors
are working for the protection of civilians with very
different mandates, objectives and approaches. At the
same time, the limitations on access to people in need
of protection that have been imposed by States and
non-State actors are a severe constraint in numerous
situations of armed conflict.

The challenge here is to clearly distinguish and
separate principled humanitarian action from pure
relief assistance. Whereas the latter may have military,
political or economic objectives underpinning it,
the former must always be based purely on actual
needs. Blurring the lines between the two ultimately
complicates or hinders impartial humanitarian access
to people on both sides of a conflict for all actors. To
that end, the principles of humanity and impartiality
must be the essential guide for all humanitarian actors,
regardless of their particular mandate or approach.

As the ICRC marks its 150th anniversary this week,
it is a fitting moment to reflect on not only the profound
changes in the humanitarian environment over the years
and the necessity to adapt to those changes, but also on
what has remained constant. Henri Dunant's vision of
humane treatment for wounded and captured soldiers
on all sides - which has extended to one of providing
protection and assistance to all people affected by
armed conflict, on the basis of humanitarian need
alone - must surely remain the bedrock of humanitarian
action, as much today, as was the case 150 years ago.
The desire and ambition to uphold human dignity, even
in the midst of armed conflict, must surely continue to
be our common goal. Respect for the laws of war also
provides the foundation on which people can rebuild
and recover after conflict has ended.

Tackling the problems ranging from combatting
Violence to health care workers, ensuring the adoption
of a strong arms trade treaty to taking concrete measures
to improve compliance with international humanitarian
law would already represent great strides towards
achieving our common goal. I end, therefore, with the
ICRC's urgent plea to the members of the Council to do
all they can to address those issues.

