Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Abou Moussa for his briefing and the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2014/319). The report of the
Secretary-General on Central Africa is illustration of
an alarming deterioration of the political, security and
humanitarian situation in the region.

At the previous Council meeting on this subject,
in November 2013 (see S/PV.7065), I sounded the
alarm on the Central African Republic in order to
mobilize our partners to address that crisis, which
had been ignored for too long. Six months later, the
regional consequences that we predicted have become a
reality, and the humanitarian crisis in that country is a
tragedy. Fortunately, the international community and
the Council have rallied. We hope that the concerted
commitment of the countries of the region, the African
Union, the United Nations, the European Union,
the United States and France will finally stop this
downward spiral.

As can be seen in the report of the Secretary-
General, the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) is taking
advantage of the security vacuum in certain remote
areas of the vast country of the Central African
Republic and, it is likely, the complicity of armed
groups, including the ex-Seleka. While the threat is
diminishing in other regions, such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we must continue our efforts to
ensure that LRA members cannot thrive in those areas
such as the Kafia Kingi enclave, on the border of the
Central African Republic, the Sudan and South Sudan,
where Joseph Kony and his entourage have again found
refuge.

We welcome the work of the African Union
Regional Task Force ofthe African Union-led Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord's
Resistance Army, and the commitment of its constituent
countries and the partners that support it. The Task
Force's operations were successful, and we hope that
the commitment of the main countries concerned will
not falter until the threat is eradicated. Such robust
military action must also be undertaken alongside
continued humanitarian efforts for the victims of
that insecure situation. We are happy to read that the
number of displaced persons has decreased. We urge
the Governments of the region to take interest in the
fate of those who have returned home, who are often
impoverished and have lost everything.

Finally, we must not forget the need forjustice, and
thus bring to justice the senior leaders of the Lord's
Resistance Army. Joseph Kony is the subject of an
international arrest warrant issued by the International
Criminal Court (ICC) on 8 July 2005 that has still not
been implemented. We encourage the States concerned
that are parties to the Rome Statute to strengthen their
cooperation and collaboration with the Court so that
Kony can be arrested, delivered and held to account for
his heinous acts.

While the threat of the LRA is diminishing, we are

now witnessing the emergence of another movement on
the regional scene, the Boko Haram and Ansaru terrorist
groups. In that connection, the abduction of hundreds of
young girls and the increasing attacks claimed by Boko
Haram in Nigeria are disgusting. We condemn them
firmly and reiterate our support and our sympathies for
the Nigerian authorities. The Secretary-General's report
on Central Africa highlights the regional consequences
of the group's activities in Cameroon, and we cannot
completely exclude their potential to affect the Central
African Republic and Chad. We welcome the initiatives
undertaken by States of the region to combat this
threat and offer them our full support, including, as the
President of France just announced, through a summit
for the countries bordering Nigeria to be held in Paris
on Saturday 17 May, in order to discuss the security
problems linked to Boko Haram. We encourage the
United Nations Regional Office to continue supporting
the authorities in the region.

There are numerous transnational threats in the
region, including not just terrorism but also trafficking
in endangered species and drugs, as well as piracy. With
South Sudan's collapse into civil war on 15 December,
there is little room for optimism. In this difficult
atmosphere, we encourage States and subregional
organizations in the region to continue to cooperate,
and we call on every State to help them. The support
of the United Nations Regional Office is essential and
we are grateful for its efforts to conduct preventive
diplomacy and dialogue in this area.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Mr. Abou Moussa for his commitment as Head of
the United Nations Regional Office in Central Africa
for the past three years, and to welcome his successor,
Mr. Bathily, who has the difficult task of continuing
to mobilize the countries of the region to combat these
threats and destabilizing factors together.

