Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Gambari for his briefing.

Before I begin, we would like to align ourselves
with the statement that will be delivered shortly on
behalf of the European Union by the representative of
Finland.

Slovakia has followed with great concern the
recent developments in the escalation of hostilities

between Israel and Hizbollah, which has led to great
suffering for innocent people in both Lebanon and
Israel. We have underlined on several occasions that
the crisis can be solved only through political and
diplomatic means. We therefore welcome the cessation
of hostilities and violence and the return to political
and diplomatic means to resolve the crisis, although the
recent violent incidents of last week have shown that
the situation is still very fragile. In that regard, we
would like to underline that any violations of
resolution 1701 (2006) will aggravate the volatile
atmosphere. We therefore call upon all parties to fully
respect the resolution, exercise maximum restraint and
avoid any actions that could lead to misinterpretation.

It is also important that all parties concerned act
in good faith, in the spirit of resolution 1701 (2006),
thus allowing the international community to assist
with the rapid deployment and reinforcement of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in
order to achieve a long-term resolution of the crisis.
We share the concern of the Secretary-General that an
escalation of the recent crisis and Violence could have
dire consequences not only for the countries involved
but also for regional and global security.

We have repeatedly condemned terrorist actions
and provocations by Hizbollah, which have led to the
current crisis. In that regard, we would like to reiterate
our firm belief that there can be no military solution to
the Middle East conflict; the only way to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting settlement is through
peaceful negotiations and full implementation of all
relevant Security Council resolutions and of the
principles defined by the Quartet in the road map.

While we recognize the right of Israel to self-
defence against terrorism and its perpetrators, we
would like to underscore that it is important to exercise
that right with utmost caution and restraint and to do
everything possible to avoid the loss of innocent lives,
the destruction of civilian infrastructure and increased
suffering by the civilian population. In that regard, we
are particularly concerned at the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Lebanon and the exodus of
Lebanese people, caused by Israel's military action.
We highly appreciate the work of UNIFIL, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and United Nations agencies, which strive, often under
very difficult and dangerous circumstances, to help
alleviate the human suffering of the increasing number
of internally displaced persons and refugees.

We support the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of Lebanon. We believe that
these can best be achieved through the full
implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680
(2006). We are convinced that it now crucial to develop
a plan for the full implementation of those two
resolutions, and especially for helping the Government
of Lebanon to assume full control over the whole
territory of the country and to disarm all militias,
which in our opinion is key to achieving a lasting and
sustainable solution and is an important precondition
for the stabilization and continuation of democratic
processes in Lebanon. It is also very important to take
appropriate measures against the illegal movement of
arms and people across the borders of Lebanon and
against hostile attacks against the territory of
neighbouring States.

The international community should assist the
Lebanese Government to achieve those goals. In that
regard, we believe that it is necessary to take all steps
to expeditiously enhance the strength and mandate of
UNIFIL so that it can cope effectively with the tasks
envisaged in resolution 1701 (2006).

Last but not least, as is also reflected in
resolution 1701 (2006), we should not forget about the
need to address urgently the causes that have given rise
to the current crisis, including through the
unconditional release of the abducted Israeli soldiers
and, mindful of the sensitivity of the issue of prisoners,
by encouraging efforts aimed at urgently settling the
issue of the Lebanese citizens detained in Israel.

We would like to underscore that the restoration
of calm in Lebanon is also an important step towards
revitalizing the peace process in the Middle East region
as a whole. In that regard, we are concerned at the
deteriorating situation between Israel and the
Palestinians and at the increasing number of civilian
casualties on both sides as a result of hostilities and
terrorist actions. We think that the Palestinian
Government led by Hamas has missed an important
opportunity to advance the peace process through its
continued refusal to accept three principles defined by
the Quartet as a precondition for becoming a reliable
partner in the peace talks. We hope that President
Abbas will be successful in his efforts to create
appropriate support among the Palestinian people for

the objectives of the road map. We think that the
international community should provide him with its
full support in that endeavour, including by addressing
urgent humanitarian needs of the Palestinian population
through the Temporary International Mechanism
administered by the European Union.

In that context, we urge Israel to resume the
transfer of withheld Palestinian tax and customs
revenues. Israel should also release the Palestinian
officials and should refrain from a disproportionate and
excessive use of force. At the same time, we recognize
the right to fight terrorism and organized crime.

Finally, we take this opportunity to reaffirm our
full support for a just, comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the Middle East conflict based on all
relevant Security Council resolutions, and negotiations
leading to implementation of the Vision of two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security. Slovakia, as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council, will
continue to do its utmost to contribute constructively to
a diplomatic solution to the ongoing tragic conflict in
the region of the Middle East.

