Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Hedi Annabi, for the very useful information he
has shared with us about the ballot organized on 17
November 2001 in Kosovo, by which the province
provided itself with democratic institutions. It is clear
that this vote, designed to elect the Kosovar parliament,
gave all the communities of Kosovo the chance to build
a truly democratic, multi-ethnic and prosperous society.
My delegation welcomes the successful holding
of the elections, the high level of participation -
63 per cent - and the mobilization of the minority
communities, which met expectations. The positive
climate in which the elections took place shows that
Kosovo is evolving in the right direction to overcome
the traumas of the recent past. The entry of the Serb
community in the political life of Kosovo, with nearly
11 per cent of the vote, is a very positive sign that
shows that the Serbs Wish to take part in the
development of Kosovo.

In this regard, we are glad to be able to salute the
maturity and sense of responsibility that the people of
Kosovo have shown in the holding of the legislative
elections, which without question were a decisive
turning point in the democratic evolution of the
province. The delegation of Mali hopes that the new
institutions that have thus been created will promote
reconciliation between the Serbs and the Albanian-
speaking population by encouraging the members of
the two communities to work together. We invite the
new Kosovar administration to concentrate on
reconstructing the economy, combating crime and
raising the standard of living while strictly abiding by
the constitutional framework of the provisional self-
government.

Finally, we believe that the time has come for
placing the interests of Kosovo above those of the
political parties. From this perspective, Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) should continue to be
the main thread of all policies on Kosovo.

