Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this important briefing on the situation
in Somalia. I want to welcome President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud and commend him for his leadership. I also
want to welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Michael Keating,
and the Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations, Ambassador Tete Antonio.

One of the key priorities for Spain in the Security
Council is to make headway in efforts to restore peace
and stability in Somalia in the wake of so many years of
senseless violence and conflict. There still a long road
ahead, but considering the extraordinary difficulties
that the Somali people and its leaders have managed
to overcome in recent years, we have no doubt that
success is within grasp. It is now the responsibility of
everybody to not let such success slip from our fingers.

The year 2016 is crucial for various reasons. First, in
the political sphere, the Somali leadership just approved
the electoral process for 2016, after innumerable efforts
and an encouraging agreement between the Federal
Government of Somalia and Puntland. We welcome that
agreement and trust that the Federal Parliament will
soon ratify it and that its provisions will be enacted.
The adopted format seems to be the most feasible at
present and strikes a key balance between two essential
elements in the politics of Somali society: the regions,
on the one hand, and the clans, on the other. Spain
would like to congratulate the Government of Somalia
on its decision to set aside 30 per cent of parliamentary
seats for women, who must continue to play a key role
in the Somali political process, as indeed should civil
society as a whole.

The successful conclusion of the electoral process
in August 2016, as provided for in the Constitution,
is a key step towards making further progress in the
establishment of peace in and the stabilization of
Somalia so that universal elections can be held in 2020
under the formula of one person, one vote.

We urge the Somali leadership to stick to the path
of dialogue and agreement, and to avoid relapsing back
into the divisions that derailed the political process in
the past. As I said earlier, success is within grasp, but
it is incredibly fragile. Let us not forget that a political
crisis is capable ofdestroying injust a matter ofdays the
costly progress that took years to achieve. We therefore
now have a historic responsibility. In that regard, we
must not lose sight ofthe importance ofmaking progress
in the constitutional review process. In addition, with
respect to federal State-building, Spain, which has
always recognized the territorial integrity of Somalia,
hopes that significant progress will soon be made in
Hiran and Middle Shabelle in order to establish a new
interim administration, and we trust that reconciliation
efforts between clans will be stepped up.

Secondly, turning to the security sector, we robustly
condemn the terrorist attacks carried out by Al-Shabaab
against the Somali people, their representatives,
officials and institutions. We also condemn the attacks
carried out against the contingents of the countries of the

African Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), who are fighting shoulder to shoulder with
Somali forces in order to restore stability and peace in
Somalia. We wish to express our full solidarity with the
people and Government of Somalia, AMISOM. and the
Somali security forces.

Somalians should have no doubt on two issues.
First, Al-Shabaab can be destroyed and the future
Somalia will be defined not by terrorists but by the
people of Somalia. Secondly, AMISOM. and the Somali
National Army will always be on their side. Al-Shabaab
represents the greatest threat to the security and
stability of Somalia and to the entire Horn of Africa
region. Its terrorist activities over the past year show
that the group continues to be active, that it has great
operational capacity, and that it intends to wreak the
greatest possible havoc. Given that challenge, we
cannot let down our guard.

After several challenging months, AMISOM. and
the Somali forces have taken the initiative, although
it remains essential that they work in a coordinated
fashion to defeat Al-Shabaab. We do not doubt that
this is possible, although we continue to insist that
AMISOM. must develop a more unified and effective
command-and-control structure, in line with the
recommendations of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union. To that end, it will be necessary
to build on the key understanding established at the
recent summit of the Heads of State and Government
of the Troop- and Police-Contributing Countries of
AMISOM, held in Djibouti, which was an important
step forward in the right direction.

It is urgent that AMISOM. have strengthened and
centralized intelligence capacity in place, and we hope
that the already committed enabling elements that the
Mission needs will be made available as soon as possible.
All ofthat is crucial in order to respond to the asymmetric
war tactics employed by Al-Shabaab. The role of the
Somali National Army and police is, of course, vital
to the achievement of that goal. Both institutions must
gradually assume greater responsibility, commensurate
with the security demanded by the Somali people, with
a view to developing an exit strategy for AMISOM. To
that end, we must redouble our efforts to achieve rapid

and substantive progress in the area of security sector
reform. We urge the Somali authorities to effectively
implement the relevant plans.

The Somali army and police should increase their
role and effectiveness so as to guarantee security in
the areas freed from Al-Shabaab, and also to secure
the main supply routes. We wish to stress that the
fight against Al-Shabaab is more than a military
operation. It should be rooted in a firm strategy that
prevents radicalization and recruitment from various
sectors of the Somali population, in particular youth.
Young people must believe that Somali institutions
and the international community are on their side. The
fight against AI-Shabaab must take place within the
framework of respect for the political leadership and
human rights, and go hand in hand with genuine and
systematic efforts to ensure security, the provision of
basic services and opportunities for the populations in
recovered areas.

For my third point, which is no less important, I
wish to speak about the grave humanitarian situation.
Some 4.9 million Somalis are in need of humanitarian
aid. The drought that is racking the north of the country,
in particular Somaliland and Puntland, as a result of
the weather phenomenon known as El Nifio has left
some 900,000 individuals facing severe malnutrition.
That tragic situation, exacerbated by desertification,
is unacceptable and unsustainable. Alleviating the
humanitarian emergency faced by Somalia is essential
in building on the efforts made in the area of politics
and security, given that all of those dimensions
are interrelated.

Rebuilding Somalia will require the rebuilding of
Somalians' trust in their institutions. It is therefore
necessary that members of civil society perceive a
tangible improvement in their quality of life - in their
access not only to water and food, but also to education
and employment. All of that will ultimately determine
the success of the Somali process and the ultimate
defeat of Al-Shabaab.

Our leaders are preparing to sign the Paris
Agreement on climate change next Friday in these very
Headquarters. We must now be more aware than ever
that climate change is neither an abstract issue nor
a problem for the future. It is a threat that is already
shaping the life expectancy of millions of people around
the world, thrusting specific populations and countries,
such as Somalia, into a situation of environmental,
economic and social stress, with direct repercussions
for international peace and security. This is a horizontal
and structural challenge that we must rise to meet with
all resources as soon as we have them.

In conclusion, I wish to underscore that Spain is
convinced that the establishment of peace and stability
in and the development of Somalia will not be possible
without the reconstruction of the Somali State and
civil society. We can achieve those goals only if we
have a unified and committed leadership that acts in
the interests of all Somalians. The United Nations,
regional organizations and countries that have friendly
relations with Somalia will continue to support the
country on that path. With every passing month, we are
increasingly convinced that we are drawing closer to a
time in which Somalians can take full responsibility of
their own future.

