Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to ask you how you managed
to get hold of our secret diplomatic textbook. You could
almost have been reading it aloud. I recognized it from
my time at the Moscow State Institute of International
Relations. That was exactly what it was like. Some other
time I will tell you about what else you can find there.

I would like to share the feelings I was left with
after the statements by our Western colleagues and
Mr. Yelchenko, particularly since he asked me a direct
question that I want to answer. In general, we heard
nothing new today, just the same tired, unfounded
accusations and even openly distorted facts. I was
especially amused to hear that Russia apparently
blocked the Easter truce in Donbas. Mr. Sajdik, who
participated in the meeting of the Trilateral Contract
Group, knows more about that. I will not ask him today
how many Russian troops he has seen in Donbas since
the last time we met with him. That question I will not
ask. But what I would like to ask him is why the Easter
truce between the parties did not happen.

Based on today's discussion, any observer could
be left with the impression that nothing has changed.
However, I would like to point out that in the past
month a great deal has changed. The Ukrainian people
categorically and resoundingly rejected everything that
President Poroshenko has done in the past five years,
both in Ukraine and in relation to Russia. And no
attempts to use Poroshenko's usual lying anti-Russian
rhetoric can change that situation, which testifies to the
fact that the Ukrainian people have spoken very clearly.
They want real change, normal relations with Russia, a
dignified life and a peaceful future for their children.
They are tired of the attempts to blame Russia for all
Ukraine's troubles, which is frankly what President
Poroshenko has done during all his years in power. The
people of Ukraine need real action and steps towards
peace, which means having a real dialogue with the
people of Donetsk and Luhansk. That is the basis for
settling any conflict - a direct dialogue between
the conflicting parties, which the Ukrainian side has
consistently refused to do this entire time. The keys to
resolving the Ukrainian issue are in Kyiv, not Moscow,
and in the Western capitals that have enabled Kyiv to
sabotage the Minsk agreements.

As regards the rhetorical flowers that you suggested
sending to President-elect Zelensky, Mr. President, it is
still too early for flowers. So far he has been sending
mixed signals. We are genuinely interested in seeing
him take real steps to deal with the situation, but we will
learn his intentions from his actions, and not before. We
will therefore wait to see how he realizes his declared
intention of changing the situation in Donbas. We will
see if he complies with the Minsk agreements or comes
up with new formats for how to do it. Time will tell.

As for Mr. Yelchenko's question, he undoubtedly
knows that hundreds of thousands of people in Russia
have dual citizenship. And incidentally, he knows
very well that some of Ukraine's neighbours issue
their countries' passports to Ukrainian citizens of
non-Ukrainian extraction, and there are hundreds of
thousands of them. And there are hundreds of thousands,
if not millions, of citizens in Russia who have dual
citizenship. That is well known both in our country
and in the rest of the world, and we are not going to
deprive them of their right to accept if someone offers
them citizenship of another country, whether it borders
us or not. I want to emphasize once again that unlike
what Mr. Yelchenko said, no one is going to make these
people take a Russian passport. It is their choice of
their own free will. No one is going to drag them into a
Russian internal affairs office and force them to accept
a passport.

I will say it again. They have the right to keep their
Ukrainian citizenship. This is a humanitarian measure.
Please try to understand that. Russia truly wants peace,
and seeing our brother country of Ukraine stable and
flourishing is in our interests. That is essentially the
purpose of the President's decree, which is aimed at
ensuring that citizens who have ended up in terrible,
wretched living conditions have an opportunity for
social protection and development, and for an education
for themselves and their children in Russian schools
alongside Russian citizens. It has nothing to do with
the Minsk agreements and is no way prevents Ukraine,
Donetsk and Luhansk from implementing them. That
can be done if the political will for it is there.

