Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela abstained in
the voting on resolution 2244 (2015) because we feel
that the negotiating process that led to its adoption was
not broad enough to take into account the various points
of View held by delegations. Our request to extend the
consultations in order to produce a consensus text
was disregarded, and the text was drafted in a silent
procedure despite our reservations. Venezuela tried to
create a space conducive to understanding so that the
varied points of view might be reflected in a balanced
text that reflected the political and security dynamic
prevailing in the Horn of Africa.

After silence was broken on the draft resolution
so as to pursue dialogue and achieve a consensus
text, we were surprised when negotiations were
reopened among a small group of countries, without
the participation of Venezuela and the majority of the
non-permanent members of the Security Council. This
recurring practice affects the working methods of this
organ, in particular the transparency and inclusiveness
that should prevail at all stages of negotiation in order
to guarantee the participation of all its members and,
ultimately, the unity of the Security Council.

My country demands respect in the Security
Council - respect from the penholders for the opinions
and points of Views of every country, whether permanent
or elected Council members. Speaking not only in
my capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
but also in my national capacity, we have reasonable
concerns that there is bad interpretation and a self-
attributed expansion to the Committee when it comes
to what is set out in the resolutions that established the
Somalia/Eritrea Sanctions Committee.

Venezuela assumed the chairmanship of this
Committee with a belief in the need to move forward
constructively with all Member States to improve
the relations between the Committee and affected
countries, with a view to arriving at the ultimate goal of
finding a political solution to the conflict. That should
be the purpose of the sanctions instrument, which
cannot be used for hidden purposes to punish countries
and impact peoples. Sanctions committees make sense
only insofar as they contribute to a political solution to
conflicts. Their purpose is not to maintain or manage
conflicts indefinitely, but to help to end them.
It is clear - and the fourteenth preambular
paragraph and paragraph 26 of the resolution, among
others, reflect this - that some permanent members
perceive this sanctions regime as an end in itsself, and
under that premise seek to continue to indefinitely
expand the mandate and scope of the resolution to new
areas, distorting any political goal that the sanctions
may have had at the time of their initial establishment.

Venezuela is committed to the peaceful settlement
of disputes throughout the world, in line with Article
2 of the Charter of the United Nations. Our position is
based on the importance of respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, their Governments
and their peoples, as well as confidence in their ability
to resolve their own problems without tutelage or
interference, but by choosing political and peaceful
means for resolving conflicts.

In conclusion, I should like to appeal to members
of the Committee. Our chairmanship has coincided
with the important task of reviewing the Committee's
working methods. I believe that the goals and
functioning of sanctions committees should be subject
to a thorough review on the part of the Council.

