Mr. Eick (Germany): I also wish to thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing today.

The latest International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Director General's report (S/2011/695, annex)
on the implementation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Safeguards Agreement in Iran is alarming. It gives rise
to increasing concerns about a possible military
dimension to Iran's nuclear programme. We are deeply
concerned about the report's findings that Iran has

carried out activities relevant to the development of a
nuclear explosive device. The annex to the report
describes in detail that Iran has conducted activities in
all key areas relevant to a nuclear weapon.

The report paints a very disturbing picture. It
remains a matter of the utmost concern that the IAEA
continues to be unable to provide assurances about the
absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities in
Iran. The Agency has carefully checked the consistency
of the information available to it. Overall, the IAEA
finds the information, which comes from a variety of
independent sources, credible. The onus is therefore on
Iran, which must provide access to information,
documentation, sites, material and personnel. It is
disturbing that Iran has recently taken decisions and
actions that add to our previous doubts about the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
The decision to increase its capacity to enrich uranium
up to 20 per cent U-235 and bury it deep under a
mountain is of particular concern against a background
of indications of weaponization activities and the
development of a ballistic missile programme.

In a first reaction to the IAEA report, the E3+3
co-sponsored a resolution at the Board of Governors in
Vienna that supports the Agency's efforts to implement
the Safeguards Agreement in Iran and to resolve the
outstanding issues. The resolution calls on Iran to
comply fully and without delay with its legally binding
obligations.

On 21 October, the European Union High
Representative addressed a letter to the Secretary of the
Supreme National Security Council of the Islamic
Republic of Iran. In her letter, Catherine Ashton called
on Iran to engage seriously in meaningful discussions
on concrete steps aimed at restoring confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme. As of today, Iran has failed to respond. In
addition, the report of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) points out that Iran is in continued violation of
its legally binding international obligations. More
sanctions violations have been reported. We reiterate
our concern about the many cases of weapons exports
from Iran to other countries, and repeatedly to Syria.
All Member States should carefully implement the
weapons embargo as contained in resolution 1747
(2007).

Against that background, we remain committed to
our dual-track approach. We continue to be ready to
engage Iran in meaningful negotiations about its
nuclear programme. That continues to be our preferred
choice. However, as long as Iran does not cooperate
and is not even ready to talk about its nuclear
programme, we see no option but to pursue the
pressure track.

Germany attaches great importance to the proper
implementation of sanctions. We believe that this
remains vital in order to keep up the pressure on Iran
and make the Iranians return to the negotiation table.
The 1737 Committee plays a vital role in that regard.
We want to thank the Panel of Experts for its valuable
work. We particularly welcome the five
implementation assistance notices that are currently
under consideration by the Committee. We hope they
can be finalized soon, as we expect them to provide
guidance to Member States in implementing the United
Nations sanctions regime.

On 7 May the Panel of Experts presented its final
report. We deeply regret that this important report has
yet to be published. We reiterate our call for it to be
finally released. In that context, we welcome the
proposal to inform the broader membership in an open
briefing about how to implement the Iran resolutions.

Let me reiterate that, together with our partners in
the international community, particularly in the
framework of the E3+3, we remain committed to
finding a long-lasting and peaceful solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue. We call on Iran to respond in a
positive and constructive spirit to our offers of
engagement.

