Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): The
Government of the United Kingdom welcomes the
unanimous adoption today of resolution 1870 (2009),
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS). The Security Council's unity in
support of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and
the North-South peace process is an important signal to
the Government of the Sudan and to the wider
international community. The Comprehensive Peace
Agreement ended one of Africa's longest and bloodiest
civil wars, and it remains the bedrock for peace and
security in the Sudan.

As resolution 1870 (2009) makes clear, the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement has reached a critical stage, and significant
tests lie ahead: on elections; on the process of
disarming and rehabilitating former combatants; on
developing effective security in the border areas; on
the national census, with regard to which the resolution
expresses concern about the delay in announcing the
3
results; and on the referendum on unity, due in January
201 1.

In the light of the Sudan's recent expulsion of 13
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
the United Kingdom particularly welcomes the
language in the resolution stressing the importance of
providing humanitarian assistance to the civilian
populations throughout the Sudan. The expulsions
affect not only the people of Darfur, but also the
delivery of humanitarian aid across the whole of the
country, including the Three Areas on the borders
between North and South.

Resolution 1870 (2009) urges the Sudan to
support the three-track approach delineated by the
Secretary-General to ensure continuity of humanitarian
assistance. The first of those tracks is for the Sudan to
reverse its decision to expel the NGOs. The United
Kingdom repeats today its condemnation of that
decision and, in line with resolution 1870 (2009), urges
the Sudan to immediately reverse it. We hope that the
Sudan will respond to the Council's call.

Finally, the United Kingdom also welcomes the
request, contained in the resolution, that the Secretary-
General develop benchmarks for measuring and
tracking progress in the implementation of UNMIS'S
mandate and assess progress against these in his
regular reports. That request, relating to the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan, follows similar requests
from the Council on other peacekeeping missions, such
as the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It is an important step in the Council's
efforts to further improve the effectiveness and
direction of United Nations peacekeeping across the
continent of Africa.

