Mr. Inzko: Let me begin by thanking the Council
and its members for their continued attention to
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As I outlined in my report to the Secretary General
(S/2018/416, annex), despite some positive steps taken
by the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina towards
Euro-Atlantic integration, which I wholeheartedly
welcome and support, the pace of real reform remains
slow and our common goal of irreversible stability for
the country has not yet been fully achieved.

During the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina took an important step towards becoming
a candidate country of the European Union when the
authorities handed over 20,000 pages of responses to
the European Commission's questionnaire in February
during President Juncker and Commissioner Hahn's
visit to Sarajevo. The country also managed to adopt
several strategies and a package of excise tax changes,
which unlocked funding from the International
Monetary Fund, especially for road construction.
Those important developments demonstrate that,
when political leaders have a common goal, they
make the necessary compromises and find a solution.
Unfortunately, such achievements have been few, as
many of the most prominent elected officials remain
disproportionately focused on nationalistic and divisive
issues. At the same time, the authorities and relevant
entities at the State level are repeatedly challenged and
undermined in a way that runs contrary to the logic of
integration within European structures.

As I have reported in the past, irresponsible and
inflammatory rhetoric challenging fundamental aspects
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina is
not new. We have witnessed the worrisome escalation
of such statements in the past six months. As I made
clear in my report to the Secretary-General, I am
deeply concerned about the more recent readiness
among some politicians to refer to the possibility of a
renewed conflict, including controversial statements by
senior Bosniak politicians suggesting that a rearming
effort is under way to respond in preparation for a
hypothetical war scenario. Those comments followed
controversy earlier in the reporting period about the
large-scale purchase of long-barrel, military type
weapons by Republika Srpska police and media
exposure of nationalist extremist groups. Accordingly,
there is a general trend of armament under way, and
that is a reason for deep concern. I will report on that
issue in November.

Inflammatory rhetoric has also continued to be
used by some senior officials from Republika Srpska
denying the statehood of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
advocating for eventual secession. Public comments
were also made glorifying convicted war criminals
and calling for the return of a Republika Srpska army.
Certain Croat officials have mused over the territorial
reorganization of the country and threatened the
dissolution of the State if the current electoral issues
are not resolved to their satisfaction. All public figures
must choose their words carefully and responsibly.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a single and multi-ethnic
sovereign State consisting of two entities, in which
all citizens - the three constituent peoples and
others - live and work together, and, above all, elected
officials have a responsibility to contribute to peace
and reconciliation. It is within such a general political
climate that Bosnia and Herzegovina is entering
another election cycle, with the Central Electoral
Commission expected today to announce the next poll
for October 2018.

Six months ago, I briefed the Council (see S/PV.8089) on the risk of a deeper political crisis that
could follow October 2018 elections should the parties
fail to agree before then on the rules regulating the
indirect election of delegates to one of the Houses
of Parliament - the House of Peoples. Following a
decision by the Constitutional Court in 2017 deleting
provisions of the election law regarding that issue, the
State-level Parliament needs to adopt amendments to
the law. Otherwise, the process of forming authorities
after elections could prove extremely difficult, or even
impossible. The European Union and the United States
are currently working to facilitate an agreement between
the main political parties concerning that issue, and my
Office supports them in that effort. But the ultimate
responsibility lies with political leaders. A range of
possible solutions exists, which could accommodate
a compromise, if the main parties are willing to step
back from maximalist demands and negotiate in good
faith, but time is short. As I speak, the Central Election
Commission has announced the holding of general
elections on 7 October 2018, although there is no
solution to the issue of the House of Peoples has been
found in terms of the election law.

Another area of concern in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is the deterioration in the rule of law. Prominent elected
officials continue to ignore and reject the final and
binding decisions of State-level courts, and corruption
is prevalent in the political system. Those two elements
converged in a recent case concerning the State-level
judiciary. In July 2017, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional several
provisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Criminal
Procedure Code. As the deadline of six months has
passed without the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliament
correcting the issue, the Court could soon rule on
non-enforcement, thereby leaving the Bosnia and
Herzegovina judiciary without the tools necessary
to combat organized crime and corruption. It is
unfortunate that some political parties object to the
adoption of amendments in line with international
standards. It is also very telling that the parties that
oppose the latter are the same ones challenging the
State-level institutions in the current arrangement of
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I also need to highlight once again the fact
that the citizens of Mostar continue to be deprived
of the basic democratic right to elect their local
representatives * which they have been unable to do
for nearly a decade - owing to the failure of the parties
in the Parliament to implement a decision of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court related to the
Mostar electoral system. I am, however, encouraged by
the fact that representatives of several political parties
in Mostar have begun meetings at their own initiative
in Mostar, in what appears to be a sincere attempt
to finally resolve that issue after 10 years. I urge the
parties to reach a compromise that would enable the
citizens of Mostar to enjoy the same democratic right
to elect their local leaders, which the citizens in the rest
of the country enjoy.

Additionally, I recall another long-standing
pending Constitutional Court decision and a related
decision of the High Representative, which concern the
constitutional equality of Serbs within the Federation
and which still need to be reflected in three of the
cantonal Constitutions after more than 15 years. That
means that Serbs are not equal and do not enjoy the
same rights in those three cantons. They are not even
mentioned in the three cantons' Constitutions, which is
really outrageous after 15 years. In that regard, there
is also a Constitutional Court decision that has not
been respected.

In conclusion, the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina requires the continued attention and
unified effort of the international community. Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made enormous strides since the
end of hostilities in 1995 in building its institutions and
the establishment of security and normalcy. But we
must not take that progress for granted. Although the
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina remain committed
to integration with the European Union, that has not
yet had an effect on the day-to-day political climate,
in which some political figures are all too ready to
use irresponsible rhetoric and seem predominantly
concerned with maintaining their positions. The risk is
that that divisiveness and a sense of unease about the
future of the country will slowly seep into the fabric
of society. As we all know, many people have left over
the past five years, including more than 100,000 young
people, because of that insecurity. We should not forget
the risks of nationalism and extremism on all sides,
combined with a growing sense of socioeconomic
stagnation in the country. It is for that reason that
I believe that the international community needs
to urgently increase its efforts aimed at promoting
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the
region. The United Nations, along with others, is well
placed to play a prominent role in such efforts.

Beyond that, there needs to be a change in the way
in which politics are conducted within the country. That
change needs to come from the politicians themselves,
but, as an international community - individually and
collectively - we have an interest in encouraging that
change. To begin with, in the current environment, we
need to maintain all ofthe tools at our disposal to prevent
any further deterioration of the situation. I am thinking
here about the civilian and military executive mandates.
I also believe that we should be ready to be more
prescriptive about the reforms that are needed to take
the country forward, and more ready to respond against
words and actions by leading political figures when
they risk further destabilizing the political and security
environment. Lastly, I appeal to everyone as part of the
international community to be united in our approach
and coordinated in our efforts. After all, we share the
same goal: a sovereign, united and decentralized - but
also stable and functional - Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
believe that we all want to see Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a shining example of tolerance and trust where the
traditional common life of all cultures, nations and
citizens is possible.

