Mr. Olgui'n Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Nigerian presidency for convening this
meeting on the global response to the outbreak of Ebola
in West Africa. We also thank the briefers for their
statements.

The recent outbreak of Ebola produced important
lessons learned and best practices, foremost the
importance of having a coordinated system at the
regional, subregional and global levels to address, at
an early stage, scourges that threaten health and cause
health emergencies affecting international peace and
security. Early-warning systems require coordinated
participation while avoiding duplication of effort on
the part of the various agencies of the United Nations
system, civil society, the private sector and regional
and subregional organizations, which are fundamental
and irreplaceable pillars. We appreciate the fact that
some United Nations agencies have revised their
initial response protocols and decided to restructure in
search of more effective mechanisms to combat such
epidemics.

We have learned the importance of preventing
scenarios of discrimination against the people and
countries affected. It is imperative to take measures
that include a cross-cutting approach to respect for
human rights to prevent new forms of exclusion and
stigmatization.

Resolution 2177 (2014), which my country
co-sponsored, includes the idea that a health crisis could
threaten international peace and security. We therefore
pay special tribute to all regional and subregional
actors who did not hesitate to assist in the most difficult
moments of the epidemic, even at the cost of risking
their lives. Such gestures of generosity and solidarity
deserve special recognition.

We stress the importance of a proper process
of recovery after the crisis. Several of the countries
affected by the outbreak of Ebola was their economies
collapse, thereby exposing the vulnerability of their
public health systems. We support and encourage
the efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
various agencies and programmes of the United Nations,
especially the World Health Organization, as well as
other organizations, in building national capacity in the
areas most affected by the crisis.

Finally, we agree with the Secretary-General, in
the sense that the outbreak of Ebola serve to reveal a
world united in the face of the problem. However, our
investments and sacrifices may be lost if the job is not
properly completed. So long as there are Ebola cases in
any part of the world, we are all at risk.

