Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council is meeting today to consider the
reports submitted by UNSCOM. and by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in order to follow up on
the Security Council resolutions concerning Iraq and to
examine whether Iraq has discharged its obligations vis-a-
vis these two authorities to attain the objectives
determined by the relevant Security Council resolutions,
and in order to adopt the necessary measures and
recommendations to ensure that Iraq cooperates with the
Council on this matter.

We have heard with keen interest the assessment
given by Mr. Hans Blix, Director-General of the IAEA,
to the Council. He has informed us of the progress made
by the Iraqi Government with regard to nuclear matters
and has pointed out that it is advisable to obtain greater
cooperation on the part of that Government in order to
conclude pending questions, so that the IAEA can present
a report on the completion of its technical functions.

We have listened with equal attention to the report
presented to the Council by Mr. Richard Butler, Executive
Chairman of UNSCOM. He confirms the progress with
regard to disarmament indicated in the report, especially
in the area of missiles and chemical agents. In this
connection, I should particularly like to emphasize the
importance of paragraph 147 of the report:

"It should be recognized that UNSCOM. has
registered significant achievements in the
disarmament field and is well launched in the field
of monitoring."

On the basis of the two reports, Egypt has drawn
certain conclusions that it would like to have seen
included in the draft resolution before us today, with
regard to the evaluation of the implementation of the
Council's resolutions and the Council's future actions.
Those conclusions are as follows.

 

First, notwithstanding the fact that the reports indicate
certain negative aspects of Iraq's conduct, there are also
some positive aspects that the draft resolution should have
taken into account and credited to the Iraqi Government,
because they give an indication of what UNSCOM. and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have achieved
so far that may provide us a foundation in the future - for
example, the completion of the missiles investigation, the
fact that it has been possible to establish the number of
missiles in Iraq's possession and the achievements in the
nuclear and chemical spheres.

Second, despite our wholehearted support for
Ambassador Butler, for the Special Commission's mandate
and for continued consultations with the Security Council
on the best way of fulfilling that mandate, we wish to stress
that the Council must be the only body responsible for
making the right decision, following consultations and
discussions, on the basis of reports submitted by the Special
Commission.

Third, the reports that have been submitted and the
comments made by the Director-General of the IAEA and
by the Executive Chairman of the Special Commission
indicate that those two bodies deal with purely technical
matters. The question of verifying what has been destroyed
is a vital one and deserves the Council's attention.
Although it is difficult, from the purely technical standpoint
of the IAEA and the Special Commission, to assert that
nothing remains to be destroyed, it is important that the
Council take a clear decision defining the ultimate goal of
the activities of those two bodies in order that the Council's
resolutions can be fully implemented in detail.

Fourth, the evaluation of the extent to which Iraq
implements the Security Council's resolutions is determined
by those resolutions. There is no doubt about this, but it
still depends on the arrangements, measures and modalities
determined by the Special Commission in consultation with
the Government of Iraq, which has sovereignty over its own
territory. Though the Security Council has not formally
adopted such arrangements and modalities, they are set
forth in the reports of the Special Commission, of which
the Council has taken note, and they have therefore become
an integral part of the machinery in place for evaluating the
extent to which Iraq implements the Council's resolutions.
This is why the difference of opinion between the Special
Commission and Iraq with regard to the interpretation of
these modalities and the manner of implementing them
demands that we take the time to study the question
objectively. Iraq must cooperate even further and implement
what has been agreed, and the Special Commission, for its
part, must make an effort to cooperate in establishing
clear-cut modalities so that it can fully discharge its
responsibilities and submit a good assessment to the
Council.

Fifth, assessing the manner in which Iraq is
discharging its responsibilities means taking into
consideration what the reports say: that only sporadically
has Iraq not acted in conformity with Security Council
resolutions. We must therefore ask the following
questions: are we here faced with recurring, systematic
non-cooperation with the Special Commission? Do the
number of instances indicate a real pattern of
unwillingness to comply with the Council's resolutions?
During the period covered by the present report, the
Executive Chairman notes that the Special Commission
has made more than 860 inspections. In considering these
isolated instances of differences between Iraq and the
Commission over the manner of implementing the agreed
modalities, we must study them objectively and precisely
in order to decide whether they can be described as
having been respected by Iraq or whether Iraq has not
lived up to its commitments.

Sixth, Egypt is opposed in principle to the
imposition of any additional sanctions against Iraq, since
Iraq has, in our opinion, made further efforts in the past
six months to cooperate with the Special Commission and
the IAEA. Although the draft resolution now before us
does serve notice on the Government of Iraq by
threatening the imposition of special sanctions, we do not
believe that any measure that the Council might take to
prompt the Government of Iraq to cooperate further with
the Special Commission should apply retroactively, since
the proper legal interpretation of Security Council
resolution 1115 (1997) is that the Council is prepared to
impose additional measures if the Executive Chairman of
the Special Commission advises it that Iraq is not in
compliance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of that resolution.
Should the Council today adopt a resolution based on the
report of the Executive Chairman dated 6 October 1997,
the date of implementation of any measures should be
that of the report submitted to the Council by the Special
Commission, not the date of resolution 1115 (1997).

Seventh, the preparation of lists of individuals who
have impeded the work of the Special Commission
without specifying the person entrusted with preparing the
lists or the modality of their preparation is ambiguous.
The Council should have mandated the sanctions
committee to determine clear criteria for the modalities
for the implementation of the resolution, as well as the

 

respective roles of the Special Commission and the Iraqi
Government in this connection, so that the Council could
avoid contributing to aggravating the tensions between Iraq
and the Special Commission, which would complicate the
task of eliminating weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Butler's functions as Executive Chairman would also
be made more difficult, and he deserves all our support.

As a matter of principle, Egypt is also opposed to any
measures that might increase tensions in the region, for that
would not be in the short- or long-term interests of any
State in the region. What we need to do today is to reaffirm
the objectives of the Security Council's prior resolutions
and to encourage Iraq to implement them precisely. That is
why we call upon Iraq and the Special Commission to
undertake further cooperation in a climate of calm and
mutual respect.

I take this opportunity to recall once again the
importance of settling pending questions concerning
prisoners of war and Kuwaiti property, including Kuwaiti
national archives. These are humanitarian questions that
should be settled without delay.

In view of all that, this morning in informal
consultations the Egyptian delegation made a point of
asking that the calm and constructive dialogue in good faith
that has been pursued in recent days with regard to the
provisions of the draft resolution before us today be
continued so as to take into account all proposals designed
to achieve consensus in the Council on this important draft.
However, the sponsors of the draft resolution insisted on its
being put to the vote today without taking into
consideration the majority of the proposals put forward in
recent days, particularly the proposals made today so that
the draft resolution would respect logic, legality and the
provisions of resolution 1115 (1997), and so that it might,
once adopted, inspire the Iraqi Government to cooperate
more fully with the Special Commission.

All these reasons have prompted the Government of
Egypt to reconsider its position. For that reason, we shall
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.

