The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ukraine.

My delegation welcomes today's meeting as a
good opportunity to promote closer cooperation
between the Security Council and the new leadership of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). With Mr. Haekkerup's vast
experience as a prominent statesman and political
figure and the steps taken by UNMIK, we feel
confident that the Mission is in good hands now.
Meanwhile, it is clear that the current phase of
implementing the Mission's mandate is not an easy
one, given the persistent challenges to peace in and
around Kosovo.

As we have stated on previous occasions, despite
a new, favourable political climate in the region and
encouraging tendencies towards general stabilization in
Kosovo, the situation in the province remains
characterized by a number of worrisome features.
These include inter-ethnic and political violence, a lack
of security for the national minorities, a high level of
organized crime, an abundance of illegal small
weapons and drugs, human trafficking, and so on.

Against this background, we welcome the
priorities set by Mr. Haekkerup for UNMIK's activities
in the coming months. Of particular importance, in our
view, is the establishment of a legal framework for
provisional self-government in Kosovo as a
precondition for the holding of Kosovo-wide elections.
We welcome the establishment of the Working Group
on these issues, which comprises representatives from
Kosovo's major political parties and communities as
well as international experts.

However, the recent withdrawal of the Kosovo
Serb representative from that Working Group has
become a real impediment to the whole exercise. The
absence of the representative of the Serb community in
that Group could entail the risk of that community's
refusing to recognize and accept the outcome of its
work, and thus could lead to the abstention of the
Kosovo Serb community from participation in the
Kosovo-wide elections, undermining the legitimacy of
their results. Therefore we call on UNMIK to do its
utmost to encourage the Kosovo Serb representative to
re-engage into the activities of the Working Group.

Of no less significance is the implementation of
other priorities of UNMIK, in particular the further
development of an effective law-enforcement and
judicial system. We applaud UNMIK police activities
aimed at reducing ethnically targeted crime and
political violence, and its success in developing the
Kosovo police service. The efforts of UNMIK's
international judges and prosecutors also deserve our
appreciation. We recognize the special importance of
the regulations on criminal penalties for human
trafficking and on the authorization of weapons
possession in Kosovo.

My country totally agrees with the view that the
establishment of a proper and regular dialogue and
closer cooperation between UNMIK and the Yugoslav
authorities will contribute to the implementation of
UNMIK's priorities. In this regard, my delegation
supports the ongoing development of a constructive
relationship between the Yugoslav Government and
UNMIK and the measures undertaken to open
UNMIK's office in Belgrade.

We welcome the adoption by the Yugoslav
Parliament in late February of the amnesty law that
paved the way for the release of more than 100 Kosovo
Albanians detained in Serbian prisons. While noting
the achievements of UNMIK and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), we remain concerned at the grave security
situation in and around Kosovo. The dangerous
developments of the past few weeks in southern Serbia
and in the Republic of Macedonia clearly demonstrated
in practice that the problem of Kosovo has a strong
regional dimension. In the past two weeks alone, the
situation in the Presevo Valley has reached a critical
stage as a result, in our view, of the belated measures
taken by the international community to curb the
expanding terrorism, to put an end to provocations by
the Albanian insurgents, in defiance of all efforts aimed
at bringing security and stability to the region.

In this context, we regard as a welcome and
instrumental step the decision by the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) to carry out the phased
and conditioned reduction of the ground safety zone
and to allow the subsequent return of the Yugoslav
troops to this zone.

We were also relieved to hear the news of the
signing, on 12 March 2001, of a ceasefire agreement
between the Yugoslav troops and ethnic Albanian
fighters. It was highlighted in the relevant statement by
the Foreign Minister of Ukraine on 13 March.

Today our major concern is the pending critical
situation in the Republic of Macedonia, which has
shifted from the border area with Kosovo deeper into
that country's territory. We support the closer
interaction between NATO and the Macedonian
Government, and we believe that UNMIK and KFOR
should intensify their efforts aimed at strengthening
control and security on the Kosovo side of the border.
In this context, we applaud the resolution adopted by
the European Parliament yesterday calling on KFOR to
act more resolutely and to use force if necessary to
prevent the penetration of Albanian extremists into the
territory of the Republic of Macedonia. I hope that the
strong message in this regard contained in today's
presidential statement will be heard.

In conclusion, I should like to wish Mr.
Haekkerup and his team every success in the discharge
of their difficult mandate. In these endeavours, they
can count on Ukraine's support.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Sweden.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

