Ms. Ramirez (Argentina)(interpretation from Spanish): As is stated by the Secretary-General in his recent
report, the events of the past two weeks in Angola have
been very encouraging. The inauguration of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation on 11
April 1997 - with the appointment of four Ministers and
seven Vice-Ministers from UNITA, the swearing in of 67
of the 70 UNITA deputies in the National Assembly and
that body's adoption of the law on the special status of
Mr. Jonas Savimbi - allows us to say with deep
satisfaction that after more than 20 years, this fratricidal
struggle seems finally to have been left behind and there
is a sincere commitment to the peace process.

At this crucial time, the people of Angola deserve all
our admiration for having, maintained, despite adversity,
their faith in a shared goal of peace, liberty, justice and
prosperity, and for having stoically endured the sufferings
of war. Such faith demands the support of the
international community.

A stable and lasting peace inevitably calls for mutual
sacrifice and concessions. We therefore appeal once again
to both parties to the Angolan conflict not to miss this
new and invaluable opportunity, but to work together on
the task of consolidating peace by resolving all the issues
under the Lusaka Protocol left pending. In this
connection, it is essential that the process of unification
of the Armed Forces and the National Police be
completed, as well as the demobilization of surplus
UNITA military personnel. A new and definitive impetus
must be given to the task of social reintegration of the ex-
combatants, and State administration must be normalized
throughout the country.

In this context, we hope that the meeting between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi will take
place as soon as possible. They cannot avoid this
responsibility to the people of Angola.
Our commitment to international peace and security,
as well as our friendship for the people of Angola, led to
our participation in UNAVEM. III. We believe that
UNAVEM. 111 has played and will continue to play an
important role in the peace process. We therefore support
the Secretary-General's recommendation, in his report of
14 April 1997, regarding the need to extend the mandate
of UNAVEM. III to 30 June 1997.

We would also express our appreciation for the
tireless efforts of the United States, the Russian
Federation and Portugal to find a peaceful solution to the
dispute, as well as for those of the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Blondin Beye of the Republic
of Mali. We must make special mention of the Secretary-
General's decision to visit Angola and hold a frank, direct
and substantive dialogue with President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi.

 

Finally, Mr. President, on behalf of the delegation of
Argentina, I wish to express our deep and sincere
appreciation for your initiative in encouraging the holding
of formal meetings of the Security Council, which are an
essential contribution to the transparency of its work and
the legitimacy of its decisions.

