Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): As always, we would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix for his presentation of the
special report (S/2019/816) of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission on the current situation
in Darfur and the future of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I am
delivering this statement on behalf of the three African
countries on the Security Council: Cote d'Ivoire, South
Africa and Equatorial Guinea.

We appreciate the ongoing assurances and specific
measures by the Sudanese transitional authorities,
led by Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok, with regard
to implementing the Constitutional Declaration of
17 August and the agreement governing the 39-month
transition period, which will help to bring about a
just and comprehensive peace in the Sudan. To that
end, we are convinced that the commitments to the
confidence-building measures contained in the Juba
Declaration represent the appropriate road map for
achieving that goal.

The profound changes that we have seen in the
country over the past year were achieved by paying
a high price in terms of human lives. The sacrifices
made by many have brought about a historic window
of opportunity to put the Sudanese on the path towards
a lasting peace that will enable the country to develop
and prosper by achieving the vision of a new Sudan that
is in line with the pan-African aspirations enshrined in
the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.

The ongoing and constructive engagement of
the international community is essential during and
after this transition period. We reiterate the call on
the relevant parties to immediately lift all economic
and financial sanctions against the Sudan, including
its removal from the list of countries sponsoring
terrorism, in order to promote its economic activities
and encourage foreign investment.

Like the Sudan itself, UNAMID has also reached a
critical moment in its history. Over the years, there have
been many initiatives by the international community
to protect and ease the suffering of the local population
since the widespread atrocities in Darfur began in 2004.
To date, none of those plans has succeeded in bringing
about peace. Yet now that UNAMID is preparing to
leave and hand over the responsibility for ensuring the
protection of civilians to the Sudanese authorities, we
are closer than ever to restoring an acceptable standard
of living in the region.

In considering this transition from a peacekeeping
to a peacebuilding approach, decisions with far-
reaching implications must be taken. Darfur does not
exist in a vacuum. For that reason, when it comes to
taking decisions, we must always bear in mind all
stakeholders and issues that determine the context in
which UNAMID operates. The main concern of the
three African countries in that regard is shared by all,
namely, that the course of action adopted should not
jeopardize or reverse the progress that has already been
made in Darfur.

The three African countries welcome the
proposed joint African Union-United Nations follow-
on mechanism to UNAMID. We look forward to a
responsible withdrawal of the hybrid presence in
Darfur and the ultimate end of the mission, including
the handover of facilities, in line with resolution 2429
(2018). In that regard, we commend the realignment
of the Sudanese authorities in relation to the future of
UNAMID and the use of its facilities. The capacity of
the Sudanese State and of the transitional Government
to extend its authority over the entire territory is very
limited. Appropriate conditions must therefore be
created before the closure of the mission.

We hereby wish to request that any measures
mandated by the Council in relation to the drawdown,
withdrawal and exit of UNAMID take into account
the regional situation, the aspirations of the Sudanese
people and the views of the authorities, particularly
regarding the time of the closure.

As the report under consideration makes clear, the
security situation in the Darfur region is fragile and
volatile. There is a high risk ofintercommunal Violence,
violent disputes and increased crime and illicit activity
in a context where the humanitarian situation is already
desperate owing to forced displacement and ongoing
human rights violations, including conflict-related
sexual violence.

To put it clearly and unequivocally, there can be no
place for spoilers in the Sudanese peace process. Anyone
who refuses to commit to an inclusive dialogue designed
to reach a permanent and peaceful solution gives up all
claims to legitimacy, and we should therefore consider
punitive measures for those who obstruct the peace
process. Cote d'Ivoire, South Africa and my country,
Equatorial Guinea, affirm their condemnation of the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid militia and urge
Council members and the international community to
do the same.

In conclusion, we reiterate our appreciation for
the great work that UNAMID has done over the years
to stabilize the situation in the Sudan. We also thank
all United Nations and African Union staff and the
Member States and international stakeholders that have
helped to make this possible. We believe that the work
done by the hybrid mission and the transition itself in
the Sudan exemplify the fact that when the relevant
actors' efforts are concerted and genuine, significant
results can be achieved on the ground. We stand ready
to engage constructively with all the parties on the
future of UNAMID and the peace process in the Sudan.

