Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to express its appreciation to the Egyptian
presidency for guiding the Council smoothly and
effectively through the month of May. We congratulate
you, Ambassador Aboulatta, and your team. And we
wish the incoming French presidency all the best for
the month of June.

African issues have been a focus of this month's
work. A Security Council mission visited Somalia,
Kenya and Egypt, in a reflection of the Council's
strong commitment to finding a political solution to
the question of Somalia and promoting peace and
stability on the African continent. China appreciates
the holding, on Egypt's initiative, of an open debate
(see S/PV.7694) on the question of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the area of peace and security, and the adoption of an
accompanying presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/8).
The meeting evaluated the successful experiences of
the past decade of cooperation between the two parties,
consolidated international consensus on the issue and
further enhanced support to the cause of peace and
security in Africa. China welcomes the road map for
the African Peace and Security Architecture from 2016
to 2020, and hopes that the United Nations and the
African Union will strengthen their cooperation in the
area of peace and security.

We support the African approach of African
solutions to African problems, as well as the African
Union's efforts to resolve differences through peaceful
means such as dialogue, negotiation, good offices and
mediation.

The international community should provide
greater support for capacity-building of the African
Union and its collective security mechanism and
help Africa to achieve durable peace, prosperity and
development as early as possible.

Terrorism is a common security threat faced by
humankind. Counter-terrorism has consistently been a
focus of the Council's work. China welcomes the fact that
this month, at the initiative of Egypt, the Council held
an open debate on counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7690)
that highlighted the importance of the international
community's coordination and cooperation in fighting

terrorism, creating international synergies. The
international community should form a united front on
counter-terrorism, and full play must be given to the
central coordinating role of the United Nations and
the Security Council. In the fight against terrorism,
we should abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and adhere to standard
criteria. This fight must not be linked to a specific
ethnicity or religion.

The focus should be on halting the trans-border
movement of terrorists and cutting off their financial
resources and their supplies of weapons. Attention must
also be given to effectively fighting terrorist activities
conducted via the Internet and social media.

On the question of the Middle East, at present the
conflict between Palestine and Israel continues, as the
peace negotiations remain deadlocked. China is deeply
concerned about the situation. As a fundamental issue
having direct bearing on peace in the Middle East,
the question of Palestine must not be overlooked and
certainly not forgotten. To preserve the legitimate
national rights of the Palestinian people is the joint
responsibility of the international community. More
robust efforts are required to push forward the
peace process, on the political front, and to promote
reconstruction, on the economic front. The key to
breaking the current impasse is to jumpstart the
peace process.

China welcomes the international community's
efforts in terms of good offices and welcomes the new
approaches proposed in that regard. The international
support group will hold a meeting of foreign ministers
on 3 June in Paris. China hopes that this will inject
fresh vitality into our efforts to find a solution. China's
Foreign Minister, Wang Yi, will head the Chinese
delegation to the meeting and work with the rest of the
international community to facilitate the peace process
in the Middle East and help find a solution to the
question of Palestine and Israel at an early date.

