Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto for his briefing, and especially for his
focus on both opportunity and hope. The United States
welcomes his appointment and thanks him and his
team for their sustained commitment to the Afghan
people. I also thank you, Foreign Minister McCully,
for presiding over this meeting and for New Zealand's
commitment to supporting Afghanistan, including
through your country's contribution of personnel
to train Afghan security forces. We also thank you,
Mr. President, for reading out today's presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/l4, which we believe accurately
reflects the realities on the ground, in particular with
regard to security and terrorism.

As we all know, Afghanistan continues to face grave
challenges. But now is not the time for the international
community to disengage from Afghanistan. To the
contrary, we must continue to work with the Afghan
Government and its neighbours to advance a more
secure, prosperous and inclusive future for the Afghan
people. Let me point out three essential ways we can
do that.

First, we can redouble our commitment to
Afghanistan's security. The United States condemns
the increased attacks this year by the Taliban against
civilians, humanitarian workers and the Government.
The meticulous data collection of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has
made clear the tremendous toll that that violence
has taken on Afghanistan's civilians. According to
UNAMA, 5,166 civilians were killed or injured in
the first six months of this year - the highest six-
month figure since 2009. Afghanistan's children are
among the most vulnerable, as Special Representative
Yamamoto just noted. Between January and June
of this year, 1,509 children were killed or wounded.
Behind those statistics, of course, are devastated and
broken families left behind to experience suffering that
stretches across generations.

Take 25-year-old Mohammed Hassan, a
construction worker killed in a 23 July suicide attack
claimed by Da'esh against peaceful Hazara protesters
in Kabul. When Mohammed was a child, according to
a family member, he lost his father to Afghanistan's
former communist Government. Mohammed's death
leaves behind a 5-year-old son and a baby daughter,
another Afghan generation suddenly fatherless due
to violence. As Ambassador Saikal noted, a few
weeks ago the world witnessed the Taliban's brutality
during the attack against the American University of
Afghanistan, which killed 13 people and wounded
nearly 50 more. The United States extends its deepest
condolences to the families of the victims. One of
those killed was a law lecturer named Naqib Ahmad
thulwak. As an undergraduate at Nangarhar
University, he finished first in his class and went on to
study here in the United States at Stanford Law School,
where he served as a visiting student research scholar
at the Afghanistan Legal Education Project and at Old
Dominion University. He was about to start a doctoral
programme at Oxford. Naqib returned to his country
to help because he believed in it, and now he is gone.
According to reporting, authorities told his family that
he died while trying to help his students escape.

All of us need to step up to help Afghanistan and
end this scourge. The United States is committed to
helping Afghan security forces respond to such attacks
and to counter terrorist groups. That is why President
Obama decided to maintain approximately 8,400 United
States service members in Afghanistan until 2017. As
President Obama said,

"It is in our national security interest that we give
our Afghan partners the very best opportunity
to succeed."

In recent weeks, the Afghan military and security
services have conducted offensive operations across
the country and thus far have held major cities in this
fighting season. It will nonetheless take years for Afghan
security forces to counter terrorist groups alone. That is
why NATO allies and partners recommitted in Warsaw
in July to help Afghanistan develop the capabilities
of its security forces through 2020. The international
community can further help to end the conflict and
enable a responsible drawdown by helping to establish
a peace and reconciliation process among the Afghan
Government, the Taliban and other armed groups. The
Afghan Government deserves credit for working to
foster that process, and the United States continues to
explore all avenues to bring the Taliban to the table. We
remain open to exploring new opportunities to nurture
regional cooperation once peace negotiations are under
way. And we encourage Afghanistan's neighbours in
particular to support the Afghan Government in its
pursuit of a negotiated settlement. Promoting peace
also means that all countries in the region must work to
end safe havens for militants and terrorists.

One consequence of Afghanistan's insecurity is
the challenge of internal displacement. Since early
July, there has been a sharp increase in the return to
Afghanistan of refugees and undocumented Afghans.
We are concerned that some of those returns are not
voluntary. Rather, refugees and undocumented Afghans
are returning due to harassment, problems with local
communities abroad and loss of opportunities for self-
reliance. Afghanistan's neighbours must maintain their
commitments to ensure voluntary and safe returns. We
also encourage partners to consider funding the just-
released United Nations $152 million flash appeal for
refugees, which the United States is reviewing now.

Secondly, addressing Afghanistan's security
challenges requires all of us to invest in promoting
the country's political stability. Of course, tensions
between President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah Abdullah have made that objective
harder to achieve. But establishing a more effective
working relationship between President Ghani and
Chief Executive Officer Abdullah was always going to
be a challenging effort. Despite their differences, the
two leaders remain committed to a vision of a more
secure, prosperous and inclusive future for the country.
Both entered into a political agreement to reach certain
goals. It remains up to the leaders ofAfghanistan to work
out their governing arrangements. They must remain
engaged and put the interests of Afghanistan first.

When they do, we see that progress is possible.
President Ghani and the National Unity Government
should be commended for taking steps to root out
corruption. The Government has worked to reopen
criminal cases against those who stole money from the
Afghan people, remove corrupt judges and other public
officials and establish the High Council on Governance,
Justice and Anti-Corruption, as Ambassador Saikal also
noted. Earlier this summer, the Government inaugurated
a new Anti-Corruption Criminal Justice Centre, which
is designed to shield investigators, prosecutors and
judges from political pressure in sensitive corruption
cases. If fully implemented, that will be an important
step towards fighting impunity. We must encourage the
Afghan Government to make similar efforts to resolve
other pressing issues, such as electoral reform, and to
follow through on its reform commitments.

Thirdly, turning to Afghanistan's development,
members of the Security Council share a strong interest
in making sure that the economic conditions are in
place to promote stability. That is why we are urging
countries to participate and make concrete pledges of
development assistance at the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan scheduled for next month. The Conference
will define the future of international assistance for
the next four years, through 2020. We recognize that
Governments already made generous commitments to
sustain security assistance to Afghanistan at the NATO
Summit in Warsaw in July. But security assistance is not
enough. Achieving stability in Afghanistan will require
us to renew our commitment to address the dire need
for education, health care and economic opportunity.
And it will require the Afghan Government to renew
its commitment to make the reforms necessary for
international investments in these sectors to generate
economic growth. Any precipitous decline in assistance
will put at serious risks the gains that Afghans have
achieved over the past 15 years. Members of the Council
and the international community cannot forget that
Afghanistan's security is our security. That was true
in 2001 and it remains true today. When we commit
to a more stable Afghanistan, we are committing to
an Afghanistan that never again serves as a safe haven
for terrorism.

There are many Afghans committed to forging a
better future. One of them was Sami Sarwari, a young
student who was starting as a freshman at the American
University of Afghanistan this year. Sami Sarwari was
a musician on a scholarship who was so talented that he
performed at the Kennedy Center in Washington, DC,
in 2013. Like many students arriving on university
campuses this fall, Sami was looking forward to
this new chapter in his life. And on Facebook, Sami
checked into the American university of Afghanistan
and posted "I'm in. Looking forward to a beautiful
and bright future". He died a short while later when
terrorists attacked his campus.

But Sami's vision is what should animate all of us
here today. With our sustained support, we will keep
working towards a more stable, democratic and free
Afghanistan, the future that so many young Afghans,
people like Sami, want to build.

