Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I too thank
Mr. Feltman and Mr. O'Brien for their briefings, amd
the delegations of France and the United Kingdom for
requesting this urgent meeting ofthe Council, following
the unprecedented escalation of violence taking place
in Aleppo. A city that has for millennia been the cradle
of rich cultures and civilizations, with a place on the
World Heritage List, Aleppo has borne the brunt of the
Syrian crisis since the end ofthe cessation ofhostilities.

The hope raised by the cessation of hostilities
agreement soon gave way to unrestrained attacks on
the civilian population due to multiple violations of
the February agreement, as has just been confirmed
by the briefers. With several hundred dead in the past
few days, the city has been the site of indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, including women and children,
and on medical facilities and markets by parties to the
conflict. Unfortunately, the same situation prevails in
Homs, Damascus and Deir ez-Zor, to name just a few,
where clashes have led to heavy civilian losses.

Given that alarming situation, the Senegalese
delegation strongly condemns those violations, which
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has rightly described as displaying monstrous
contempt for the lives of civilians. It is equally
important at this critical stage in the peace negotiations
to urge all parties to abide by the February cessation
of hostilities agreement, which was endorsed by the
Council in resolution 2268 (2016), and to meet their
obligations under international humanitarian law.

These clashes have come at a special juncture in the
negotiating process among the parties to the conflict,
led by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. Senegal therefore welcomes the
meetings among the Secretary of State of the United
States and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Russia,
Saudi Arabia, France and Germany in an effort to
promote an atmosphere conducive to a resumption of
the ceasefire. We dare to hope that, with the valuable
assistance of the International Syria Support Group,
those efforts will bear fruit for the civilian victims of
the crisis, which is now in its fifth year. Now more than
ever, it is the Council's responsibility to ensure that
peace talks resume, with a genuine ceasefire in place,
and that a political transition is led by Syrians in a spirit
of reconciliation.

In view of the ongoing significant impact of
terrorism on the conflict in Syria, my delegation wishes
to firmly condemn the persistent terrorist attacks on
civilians in Syria, as is currently the case in Aleppo.
Given the situation, Senegal believes it necessary that
we issue a statement to send a clear message to the
parties to the conflict.

In conclusion, Ireiterate my delegation's full support
for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. Likewise, we
welcome the agreement between Russia and the United
States, which has just been announced, and call on the
members of the International Syria Support Group to
continue to strengthen their meaningful contribution to
a political settlement based on the Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex) and resolutions 2254 (2015) 2268
(2016).

