Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this timely meeting and the
important information provided by Ms. DiCarlo.

Peru and the Governments of the region that
make up the Lima Group met yesterday in the city of
Bogota and adopted a declaration on the serious crisis
affecting Venezuela - which was transmitted to you,
Mr. President, for distribution as an official document
ofthe Security Council - the main points of which are
reflected in my statement today.

In that declaration, the Lima Group condemns the
violent repression of Nicolas Maduro's illegitimate
regime, which, ignoring the suffering ofthe Venezuelan
population and the appeals of the international
community, prevented the entry of basic necessities and
international assistance last weekend. Those deliberate
actions have caused deaths and injuries on the border
with Colombia and Brazil. Those actions have
aggravated the risk to the life, dignity and integrity
of the Venezuelan people, and have affected regional
peace and security.

This situation is compounded by the massive
migration crisis involving more than 3.4 million
Venezuelan migrants and refugees who have fled
tyranny, abuse, poverty and corruption, which has
forced almost every South American country to adopt
emergency measures to accommodate those people
in need.

Today Peru wants to be the voice of the almost
700,000 Venezuelans it has welcomed in its territory in
reiterating its unwavering commitment to democratic
transition and the institutional, economic and social
rebuilding of Venezuela, while expressing our solidarity
with its courageous and resilient brotherly people.
The continuation of this illegitimate regime in and of
itself represents an unprecedented threat to the peace,
security, freedom and prosperity of the entire region:

In the past month, ever since the Council met to
address the situation in Venezuela (see S/PV.8452), we
have observed a rapid deterioration of the humanitarian
and human rights situation in that country. More than
80 per cent of the population is experiencing food
insecurity as a result of the intentional policies of the
Maduro regime, which deprives its people of food and
medicine, as well as access to basic services, in order to
ensure that it remains in power.

We have also seen the use ofindiscriminate violence
by armed groups in the service ofa regime that has been
accused of the systematic and strategic use of murder,
imprisonment, torture, rape and other forms of sexual
violence, with the aim of terrorizing the Venezuelan
people and crushing opposition to the regime. We
condemn the use of violence by the dictatorship against
its population, which is expressed, among other forms,
in the unjust imprisonment of political prisoners and
arbitrarily detained journalists.

Against the backdrop of the ongoing commission
of those serious crimes with impunity, we renew our
request to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court to initiate a prompt investigation into the crimes
against humanity committed by the Maduro regime
in Venezuela since 12 February 2014. We also call on
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to address the situation in that country, and on
the Human Rights Council to initiate investigations to
bring those responsible to justice.

Peru, together with the Lima Group, reiterates its
conviction that a transition to democracy must be carried
out by Venezuelans themselves peacefully, within
the framework of the Constitution and international
law, and supported by political and diplomatic means,
without the use of force. We therefore back the need for
the prompt holding of free, fair and credible elections
open to the participation of all political forces, with
international support and monitoring, organized by a
neutral and legitimately constituted electoral authority.

That course of action is necessary given the
regime's repeated and proven lack of commitment to
promoting peaceful and negotiated solutions through
dialogue. Past attempts have been used only to gain
time and then engage in new abuses and violations of
human rights.

Consequently, Peru reaffirms its recognition
of, and support for, the National Assembly and the
interim President of Venezuela, Juan Guaido, and his
representatives in their efforts to restore democracy,
focus urgently on the humanitarian crisis and rebuild
the economy. In that connection, we join the Lima
Group in calling on the armed forces, the courts and the
justice system in Venezuela to recognize the interim
President, respect his constitutional powers and stop
being used as instruments of oppression against their
own people.

We welcome the growing support of a large
number of States that are committed to democracy and
have recognized President Guaido. We call on those
members of the international community that maintain
links with the Maduro regime to facilitate the search for
solutions that will allow for a democratic transition and
the holding of elections in Venezuela. The Lima Group
has also called on the Secretary-General, in accordance
with his competencies, to mobilize the United Nations
system to react to events in Venezuela. In the meantime,
we will continue to advocate for addressing this serious
situation in this forum, as well as in the Organization
of American States.

In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the
courage and determination of the Venezuelan people in
their heroic struggle to regain stability and democracy
in their country, as well as to reaffirm our solidarity
with, and full commitment to, Venezuelans' right to
live in democracy and freedom.

