The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Argentine Republic.

Argentina has repeatedly stated its commitment to a
solution of the Haitian crisis since the very beginning of
United Nations involvement; hence our participation, with
vessels of the Argentine Navy, in the embargo imposed by
this body, in the group monitoring the border between Haiti
and the Dominican Republic, and in the Multinational
Force, as well as support for the United Nations Mission
in Haiti (UNMIH).

We have also attached primary importance to trying
to solve the crisis, within the framework of the
Organization of American States (OAS) and in this
Organization - from the careful procedures concerning
humanitarian exceptions to the embargo, dealt with in the
Pan American World Health Organization (WHO) and the
former sanctions Committee of this Council, to increases
in the indicative planning figures of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP).

We are convinced that the political efforts made by
the Security Council should be accompanied by economic
and social measures in support of the efforts of the
Government of Haiti. In the context of post-conflict
peace-building, we should continue to promote every
effort and initiative to serve and assist the people and
Government of Haiti.

With respect to the particular circumstances that
bring us together today, my country, as one of the group
of Friends of the Secretary-General on Haiti, participated
in the drafting of the text that we have just adopted. Our
co-sponsorship of the resolution indicates the extent of
our commitment to, and involvement with, Haiti and our
agreement with the transfer of functions from the
Multinational Force to the United Nations Mission, as
well as with the level of military and civilian personnel
recommended by the Secretary-General.

The broad sponsorship in the Council demonstrates
the interest in the positive developments in the Haitian
situation. We wish to express our satisfaction over the
exemplary performance of the Multinational Force, whose
personnel have carried out the mandate of the
international community within the framework of the
United Nations Charter, a mandate given in resolution 940
(1994), in a responsible manner and in keeping with the
circumstances they had to confront.

Now more than ever before, the normalization of
Haiti requires the efforts of the United Nations. In the
Council, as well as on all other fronts, we shall continue
our work and reiterate our commitment to anything
intended to improve the situation of the people of Haiti.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
 

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda. The Security Council will remain
seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 11.45 p.m.
