Mr. Wolff (United States of America): My
Government is pleased to participate in this debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding. Foreign Minister Okada's
personal participation and the Secretary-General's
direct involvement illustrate the importance of this
debate. We are also pleased that the Managing Director
of the World Bank joined this discussion. We strongly
support closer cooperation between the United Nations
and the World Bank in the field of peacebuilding. We
also welcome the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and we are especially honoured by the
presence of the Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, the
Defence Minister of Sierra Leone and the Justice
Minister of Timor-Leste. We thank them for sharing
their insights. It is entirely fitting that the Security
Council should begin its debate by listening to those on
whose shoulders the success of peace processes rests:
the national authorities and peoples of conflict-afflicted
countries themselves.

National authorities in post-conflict countries
face some of the most difficult challenges on Earth.
They need to govern in ways that win the confidence
not only of their supporters but also often of their
former enemies. They must protect their citizens and
uphold the rule of law in situations emerging from
violence, where impunity and abuses have often been
the norm. They need to provide basic services and
economic opportunities for their population, while
often relying on poorly equipped and inadequately paid
staff. Like so many of our colleagues, we believe that it
is essential for peacebuilding agendas to be nationally
led and nationally owned.

Given the magnitude of the challenges that post-
conflict Governments so often face when they seek
assistance from the United Nations and other
multilateral and bilateral actors, we need to respond
more rapidly, more effectively and more efficiently.
The Secretary-General's June 2009 report (S/2009/304)
presented an agenda for doing just that, and we look
forward to receiving his progress report and further
concrete proposals on how to move forward. We look
forward to his forthcoming report on the role of women
in peacebuilding, and the review of the Peacebuilding
Commission will afford us a further opportunity to
reflect on the issues raised during this timely debate.

I would like to highlight three areas today:
personnel, peacekeeping transitions and the politics of
peacebuilding. First, we need to ensure that the
international personnel we send into post-conflict
environments, especially at senior levels, have the right
qualifications, arrive when needed and stay long
enough to make a difference. National authorities must
be able to count on the good offices of a wise special
representative and United Nations team to help keep a
political transition on track and to provide advice on a
comprehensive, long-term peacebuilding strategy. They
should be able to turn to development experts
experienced in post-conflict situations to advise them
on the best way to jumpstart an economy ravaged by
war. They should be able to call in experts to get a
district office, police station, local court, prison or
government payroll system up and running, to name
just a few of the governance and early recovery
challenges that require specific expertise.

The United Nations has seasoned experts in many
critically needed areas, but it does not have enough of
them. Recruitment systems are not nimble enough to
tap the potential found both inside and outside of the
United Nations system. Several Member States, mine
included, are developing national civilian response
capabilities. These respective efforts need to be
harmonized, and we are encouraged that the Secretary-
General has convened a senior advisory group to
review international civilian capacities for
peacebuilding. We look forward to the review's results,
which we hope will be fully synchronized with the
ongoing discussions on the global field support
strategy and continuing reform of the United Nations
human resources management system.

Secondly, we need to focus on peacebuilding
activities that pave the way for the responsible
departure of international peacekeepers and related
personnel. Last week in Dili, post-conflict countries
issued a declaration asking us to respect their unique
paths to lasting peace and to work with them to build
the national capacities to achieve just that.

We often hear, as we did from our speakers today,
that when national authorities seek external aid, they

do so within the context of achieving self-sufficiency.
In particular, post-conflict Governments prefer to
rebuild their own criminal justice sectors and security
institutions as quickly as possible, rather than rely on
the indefinite presence of even warmly-welcomed
peacekeepers and outsiders.

United Nations peace operations, United Nations
agencies, international financial institutions, regional
organizations and bilateral donors all play an important
role here. But we must do more to learn the lessons of
past successes and setbacks in our efforts together in
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Haiti and
elsewhere, and improve the coherence of our collective
response.

Thirdly, international peacebuilders can better
support national authorities when they understand the
political context in which they operate - another
theme we have heard from others today. Even in
countries far removed from armed conflict, the
adoption of a national budget, the financing of new
roads and bridges, or the overhaul of the defence sector
can be a complicated and contentious political
exercise. It can be even more so in ones where disputes
over national identity, wealth and power may have
recently triggered outright Violence.

It is tempting to approach institutional reforms or
resource allocation only as a technical exercise, but in
doing so one risks provoking conflict rather than
reducing it. When national actors warn us of lurking
dangers, we must listen. Similarly, the international
community must have the courage to share its own
concerns with our partners about ways in which their
actions could undermine a peace process or threaten
regional stability. To remain in a position to offer
critical yet constructive advice, United Nations
personnel, donors and Council members must pay more
attention to the political dimensions of peacebuilding.

I thank you, Sir, and the Government of Japan for
convening this important and timely debate.

