Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): We would like to join
others in extending a warm welcome to Ambassador
Jones Parry. We look forward to working closely with
him in a spirit of friendliness and the traditional
cooperation which characterizes our bilateral relations.

I would also like to thank Ambassador Mufioz for
his first briefing as the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) on the work of the Committee, the Monitoring
Group and its future plans. We have full confidence in
his leadership and capabilities and wish him good luck
during his term as Chairman.

We appreciate the role that the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) has been
playing in the fight against terrorism. The consolidated
list maintained by the Committee has been rightly
described as the key tool in this regard. We have also
noted the efforts of the Committee to improve the
content and format of the list.

As the Committee needs international cooperation
to fulfil its mandated tasks, it is important that Member
States continue to extend to it their fullest cooperation.
We believe that the improved guidelines of the
Committee will facilitate this process and encourage
Member States to comply with their obligations under
Security Council resolutions. The Committee's efforts
to bring more transparency to its work will also be
helpful in encouraging greater cooperation with the
Committee.

The clarification of the roles of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee would remove
confusion - if any - about the work that the two
committees perform. We also believe that this
clarification would lead to a better understanding of,
and appreciation for, the work of each committee.

We share the views of the Chairman about the
role country reports play in the analysis of the
Committee on how best to deal with the fight against
terrorism. However, we need to address the factors
which may lead to reporting fatigue and which are
responsible, at least in part, for a poor response from
Member States in submitting reports.

I would also take this opportunity to appreciate
the role the Monitoring Group has been playing in
furthering the work of the Committee and in
monitoring compliance with relevant Security Council
resolutions. We hope that the recent addition of support
staff to the Group will help improve its performance
further. We hope that the Group will maintain and
improve its analytical reporting to the Council.

When it comes to terrorism, Pakistan speaks from
its own experience, based on the sacrifices our citizens
and law enforcement officials have made, especially in
the past two decades. Pakistan has had to pay a heavy
price during this period for its principled position
against terrorism and in support of the right of people
for self-determination. But to the dismay of terrorists,
these incidents have served to strengthen Pakistan's
resolve to fight this menace with even greater
conviction and resolution. Our message to the terrorists
and their supporters is clear and unequivocal: we
cannot be cowed by acts or threats of terrorism and we
continue to stand undeterred in the face of terrorism.

Terrorism has become the bane of all countries
alike. It is no longer a localized problem which can be
solved through domestic actions alone. The modern
manifestations of terrorism endanger the peace and
security of the entire world. Measures to combat this
problem should therefore be based on international
cooperation and coordination.

As we proceed with the fight against terrorism, it
becomes increasingly clear that we will need long-term
solutions to address this problem. We will have to
move beyond administrative and legal responses. At
the policy level, the international community will need
to pay greater attention to factors which lie at the root
of most cases of terrorism. There is a certain
correlation between poverty, religious and political
persecution, injustice and terrorism.

Our policy response to terrorism should be broad
and multifaceted. It should not be limited only to
administrative, legislative or legal measures but should
also encompass measures that address factors which
are partly, if not fully, responsible for its growth. It
may not be possible to ensure the elimination of all
acts of terrorism through those policy measures. But at
least through the use of such measures we will have
deprived many potential terrorists of causes or
justifications for resorting to terrorism.

As noted at the open meeting of the Security
Council on 23 July, the emotional impact of the events
of 11 September 2001 is now decreasing. It is therefore
important that we sustain our fight along lines which
ensure maximum cooperation on the part of all States,
as this issue is no longer the concern of a few States
but of the whole of humanity.

A legal definition of terrorism is necessary in
order to prevent abuse by certain States that Visit all
kinds of hardships on innocent civilians in the name of
fighting terrorism. Unless we control our actions by
subjecting them to limitations based on a legal
definition, and make a political commitment to
addressing this problem in its entirety, it will not be
possible to avoid human rights abuses and the denial of
the right to self-determination, or to prevent State
terrorism. Securing consensus for a definition of
terrorism might seem difficult, but it is not impossible.

We need to prioritize our goals in the fight
against terrorism so as to ensure that we remain on
track and do not lose sight of our long-term objective
of ensuring and maintaining international peace and
security.

