Mr. Vento (Italy): Thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open meeting, which provides all United
Nations Member States with the opportunity to participate
in the debate on sanctions, an issue which is, indeed, of
major interest to the broader membership.

First of all, I associate myself with the statement
made by the Portuguese Presidency of the European
Union.

Just a few hours ago in a speech to a seminar on
sanctions, the Secretary-General reiterated his concern
that the target of sanctions should be the political
leadership and military structures responsible for grave
violations of human rights and threats to international
peace and security, and not the civilian population. Within
such countries, such initiatives can even lead to
humanitarian disasters by fostering the gradual unravelling
of the social fabric, which is often deprived of elementary
support structures and can fall prey to illegal activities
that have sprung up in response to sanctions. These
processes can, paradoxically, support the very leaders that
sanctions were supposed to bring down, since they can
take advantage of smuggling activities and aid distribution
to strengthen their grip on power and stamp out any and
all forms of democratic opposition.

 

Furthermore, the latest examples of sanctions regimes
show that they can also create mounting problems for the
neighbouring countries and trade partners of States
subjected to sanctions.

Therefore we need to rethink the sanctions
mechanisms and bring them more into line with the goals
they are supposed to achieve. We need to identify more
precisely the instruments sanctions should use, exercising
control over financial flows, military equipment and
strategic assets and isolating political leaders, while at the
same time guaranteeing the basic needs of the people. In
other words, we need to figure out how to combine
maximum effectiveness against political leaderships with
the minimum impact on civilian life. In every case this
selective, targeted approach should be backed up and
strengthened by appropriate public information campaigns
geared to help the democratic opposition and therefore
provide a viable political alternative to standing power.

What we must avoid at all costs is allowing the
unfortunate examples of recent years to prevent us from
approving new sanctions in the future when they are
opportune and useful out of fear that they might go beyond
the bounds of the initial intentions. Such a development
would in fact deprive the United Nations of an irreplaceable
instrument that is essential to its policies. Furthermore, we
must steer clear of the frankly troubling spectre of countries
reluctant to support resolutions that do not reflect their
sentiments or to which their national public opinion is
opposed. By the same token we must avoid public debates
which suggest that sanctions are adopted and maintained
against the will of a large number of United Nations
Members - not to mention reports by United Nations
agencies and organs that criticize the results of sanctions
and thus the work of the Security Council. Internal
divisions of this nature undermine the prestige and the
authority of the Organization and make it hard to grasp the
true orientation and aims of the United Nations.

This is why the debate over the criteria for sanctions
management should not remain within the walls of the
Security Council but should rather give rise to a moment of
collective reflection also by the General Assembly on a
concrete aspect of United Nations activity within the
general framework of the reform process of the United
Nations.

We believe that, in the interests of the United Nations
and of the sanctions instrument itself, we must define a
series of clear and precise rules through a broad and deeply
rooted consensus since every country is eventually called
upon to comply and to shoulder the resulting burden.

Allow me, as a final consideration, to recall the
importance that the specialized agencies can have in
monitoring the effects of sanctions. In this light, the
experience and competence of organizations such as the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF),
the World Health Organization (WHO) and the
Commission on Human Rights are unquestionable.
Therefore it would be advisable, in the context of revising
the rules that govern the application of sanctions, to make
sure that they are directly involved. Their participation
would lend authority, objectivity and competence to
reports on the social and human impact of sanctions and
on the most appropriate measures for dealing with it.

