Ms. Pierre-Antoine: I am deeply thankful to His
Excellency Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra of Peru
for inviting me to speak before the Security Council
today during this important debate on youth, peace,
and security.

My name is Sophia Pierre-Antoine. I was born in
Haiti in 1991, as a coup d'e'tat was unfolding. I was a
teenager when the next coup took place, in 2004. Like
many young women and men of my generation, my
childhood and adolescence were marked by periods of
violence and political instability. Many might be quick
to think that such challenging circumstances made my
fellow young Haitians frustrated, exasperated, violent
or helpless victims. Yet we are the ones leading a daily
struggle to ensure security in our streets, peace in our
homes and justice in our communities.

Following the 2010 earthquake, which killed
hundreds of thousands of people and displaced
over 1 million others, the World Young Women
Christian Association of Haiti, a locally led feminist
non-governmental organization for and by young
women, was quick to offer psychosocial support in
internally displaced persons (IDP) camps. During one
ofthe group therapy sessions in an area prone to conflict
among rival gangs, a young girl shared the fact that she
was not afraid of another earthquake, but afraid of older
men coming into her tent at night. Those girls were also
afraid of the ones who were supposed to provide aid but
in the end contributed to more abuse.

For years, young women organized discussion
groups and workshops to change attitudes and gender
norms that contribute to the high rates of violence
and impunity within IDP camps and neighbouring
communities. In the process, they became community
leaders and role models for younger girls to look up
to. That is a testament to the importance of adapting
peacebuilding work to a feminist and age-appropriate
framework. Effectively addressing the concerns of
young women and girls, including trauma healing,
empowers and fosters leadership skills. The narrative
of young women as powerless victims must be changed.

The rule of law was often not present in communities
with which I worked. Local Government and police
were either absent, overwhelmed or complicit. Young
men organized themselves and formed patrol groups
to block gangs from entering their communities.
Because of gender stereotypes, it would be easy to see
those young men as loitering or violent youth, when
in fact they were only trying to protect their loved
ones. Cultures that do not allow men to express their
feelings and that offer only violent role models foster
an atmosphere in which unhealthy and oppressive
behaviours are normalized and rewarded. That type of
toxic masculinity creates situations that fuel insecurity
in the home and streets and, ultimately, for the entire
community. The narrative of young men as perpetrators
of violence must be changed.

I am here before the Council today to talk about
the gender aspect of youth, peace, and security. I urge
everyone to recognize that transforming cities, public
spaces and homes into safe spaces for young women
and transgender youth is a human right. That is what
we are striving to achieve with the progress study. I
was privileged to be part of the consultations organized
within the framework of the progress study for the Latin
American and Caribbean region and at the global level. I
witnessed the passion and drive of young peacebuilders
globally. Discussing the topic of peace and security is
not easy and has led to deeply challenging, but also
profoundly honest, conversations. Although we shared
our experiences, failures and setbacks, we mainly shared
our lessons learned and victories. We were provided
with an appropriate platform and a caring ear, and were
therefore able to discuss openly. As a result, behind
each of the recommendations of the progress study are
multiple testimonies of pain, loss and disillusion, but
also stories of courage, hope and success.

Such inclusive platforms enabling young women
and men to take part in peace and security discussions
are rare. I hope that Member States can replicate
that inclusive participatory methodology so as to
further support the work of young peacebuilders in
their countries. All of us - the young people who
participated in the progress study - are very clear
that we do not want more weaponized forces that
terrorize the poor, the indigenous, the racial and ethnic
minorities, those with disabilities and illnesses and
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and questioning
youth. Much money is spent on military action globally,
when it could be spent on advancing the Sustainable
Development Goals. Instead, young people called for
investment in positive, peaceful and practical solutions.
On behalf of all of us, in particular on behalf of my
fellow young women peacebuilders, we expect the
following of the Security Council.

First, we ask for investment in and support for

young women, men and transgender youth fighting
racism, xenophobia, religious intolerance, homophobia,
transphobia, sexism and discrimination directed against
people with disabilities. That is indispensable to rethink
the power relations that are breaking down our societies
and contributing to extremism and terrorism.

Secondly, we ask for advocating for meaningful
inclusion by recognizing the strength in the multiple
identities of young people. The participation of diverse
youth at all levels will ensure that our race, gender,
sexual orientation, religion, ethnic background and
ability are not a systematic source of exclusion,
discrimination or being made invisible.

Thirdly, we ask that the Council work to ensure
that age and gender are always an integral part of peace
and security discussions. Almost 20 years ago, women
and men came together around resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security. Now people of all
ages are coming together around resolution 2250 (2015)
to ensure the inclusion of younger generations. That
is crucial to incorporating young women in all formal
conflict assessments, peacebuilding programming and
security processes, as well as recognizing, supporting
and ensuring the protection and safety of young
peacebuilders and human rights defenders.

Globally, we young people have achieved incredible
milestones and contributed to peace and security efforts
with very limited support and resources. Imagine what
we could do if we had access to additional data and
flexible funding and how we could contribute to policies
and projects if we held more positions in Governments
and United Nations agencies and leadership roles in
the public and private sectors. It is by supporting our
initiatives and movements, fostering partnerships,
strengthening meaningful, diverse and inclusive
participation, and ensuring the protection of young
women and men and transgender youth that sustainable
peace can become a reality.

