Mr. Meyer (Brazil): I thank Egypt for convening
today's important open debate on peacekeeping and
sustaining peace.

I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, Mr. Mahmoud and Ambassador Rosenthal
for their informative briefings and leadership in those
two relevant areas.

The role of United Nations peacekeeping operations
has evolved dramatically over the years. Their new tasks
include addressing the political, security, humanitarian
and development dimensions of complex crises, as well
as ensuring the implementation of comprehensive peace
agreements. Brazil supports a strategy that takes into
account the entire peace continuum, from prevention,
conflict resolution and peacekeeping to peacebuilding
and long-term development. Today's operations have
moved from the traditional military models of ceasefire
observation to become multidimensional, combining
military, civilian and political aspects that strive to
promote stability in the aftermath of conflict.

The Security Council must ensure that peacekeeping
operations are fully resourced and entrusted with the
appropriate mandate for the specific environment in
which they are deployed. It must also ensure that they
are adequately equipped to protect themselves and
discharge their mandates. The link between policy
formulation and implementation on the ground, as
well as consultations among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries, is also paramount to achieving success.

Development, peace and security and human rights
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. Therefore,
sustaining peace should flow through the three pillars
of United Nations engagement at all stages of conflict.
In all its dimensions, sustaining peace needs continued
international attention and assistance. Peacekeeping
operations have a clear and relevant role in that regard.
Preventing the relapse into conflict is also fundamental
to peacekeeping. As the Secretary-General's vision
on prevention states, prevention should permeate
everything we do and sustaining peace is essential to
long-term prevention. Peacekeeping operations are
situated within the process of sustaining peace across
the conflict cycle.

The High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (HIPPO), which carried out a review of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
made a number of convergent conclusions with the
Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Architecture. They agreed on
the primacy of politics, which recognized that peace
operations are a tool to support a political process
that must be conceived and planned in support of the
broader objective of obtaining political solutions.

The Panel also addressed lessons from past
peacekeeping operations in sustaining peace and
recommended that mission budgets should include
the pragmatic resources necessary for mandated tasks
to support the sustaining of peace. Programmatic
peacebuilding activities in peacekeeping operations
mandates should not depend solely on voluntary
funds. Community violence reduction activities and
quick impact projects are tangible examples of how
peacekeeping actions can address issues, such as
poverty, the exclusion of young people from the labour
market, gender inequality, institutional weaknesses and
disputes over land and natural resources. The report of
the HIPPO (S/2015/446) recommends that peacebuilding
objectives be incorporated into mission mandates at the
earliest possible stage of a peacekeeping operation.

Brazil has been supporting the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, the framework that birthed
the concept of sustaining peace, since the creation
of the Peacebuilding Commission, in particular as
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission since 2007, and Chair of
the Organizational Committee ofthe Commission from
2014 to 2015. We have been promoting, both bilaterally
and multilaterally, sustaining peace initiatives, such
as community violence reduction and quick impact
projects in different ways during the past decade,
including through the implementation of projects on
the ground, such as through the scope of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau,
support via the allocation of resources in the Fifth
Committee and the synergies between peacebuilding
and peacekeeping in the work of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations.

The sustaining peace approach adds considerable
value to peacekeeping missions, providing tools for
peacekeepers to act as early peacebuilders, beyond
overcoming the misconception of sequencing between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Brazil hopes that
sustaining peace will be duly considered in as many
United Nations peacekeeping missions as possible,
supported by an adequate allocation of resources and
strengthened coordination with the peacebuilding
architecture, in particular the Peacebuilding
Commission, while allowing for the continued
implementation of strategic activities, which are crucial
to sustaining peace and to ensuring a smooth transition
from a traditional peacekeeping operation to either a
special political mission or United Nations Country
Team. Brazil remains fully committed to those efforts.

