Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I, too, would
like to thank Special Representative Angelo for
presenting the Secretary-General's report on the
transition from the European Union-led military force
(EUFOR) to the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT). At the same
time, I would like to express my appreciation for the
statements made by the Permanent Representatives of
the Central African Republic and Chad.

The picture emerging from the Secretary-
General's report is indeed a mixed one. Instability
continues to prevail in the eastern provinces of Chad,
although it is mainly due to banditry rather than to the
activity of the armed opposition movements. On the
other hand, progress in Sudan-Chad relations, as
evidenced by the exchange of ambassadors as well as
by further steps towards the establishment of a joint
monitoring force along the border in the framework of
the African Contact Group, are encouraging signs of
possible further improvement in the security situation.

From what the Permanent Representatives of the
Central African Republic and Chad have said today, as
well as from what the non-governmental organizations
reminded us last week, it would seem important to
continue to provide a security framework in the eastern
part of Chad to ensure protection of the displaced and
refugee population and to allow for the safe delivery of
humanitarian assistance. The transition from EUFOR
to a United Nations operation will serve this objective,
and we are ready to start negotiations on a draft
resolution to this end.

At the same time, it has also been underlined that
it is essential that the root causes of instability in Chad
be addressed. My country supports the political process
based on the 13 August agreement between the
Government and the opposition, as well as the Sirte
agreement between the Government and the armed
opposition movement. As for the number of troops, we
appreciate the update in planning made by the
Secretariat in the substantial reduction of the mission's
size. We wonder whether additional cuts can be
envisaged in consultation with the Government, taking
into account the effectiveness of the mission, of course,
as well as the overall sustainability of peacekeeping in
Africa and the amounts of troops from other crisis
situations.

The Security Council, we believe, should apply
fair criteria in managing the limited resources at our
disposal. In this context, I would also like to draw the
attention of the Council once again to the situation in
Somalia and the need to urgently find a way to support
the African Union Mission to Somalia in the future.

For the same reason, we do not see a substantial
difference between the overall situation in eastern
Chad and the one in the Central African Republic. It
would therefore seem logical that, if we are going to
replace the European Union-led military force
(EUFOR) in Chad, we would do the same in the
Central African Republic. Besides, we need to take into
account the request of President Bozize to maintain
international troops in the north-eastern part of the
country. His efforts to pursue national reconciliation
and the political dialogue - which is proceeding well
in Bangui, as we know - should also be rewarded, as
should his cooperation with the United Nations.
10

I take this opportunity to confirm Italy's
readiness to keep the hospital in Abeche for the time
necessary to ensure a smooth transition.

Finally, I would like to commend the exemplary
collaboration that the United Nations and the European
Union have once again established in the maintenance
of peace and security. Chad and the Central African
Republic are important examples of our ability to
maximize our impact and ensure coherence between
different actors and different instruments.

