Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the President, the Secretary-General and Mr. Mladenov.
I would like to welcome President Abbas and thank him
for his address to the Security Council. I welcome his
stated commitment to non-violence and to engaging
constructively towards the two-State solution.

The United Kingdom remains committed to a two-
State solution that ends the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
and we will support all and any efforts to that end. Our
long-standing goal is a negotiated peace settlement
that leads to a safe and secure Israel, living alongside
a viable and sovereign Palestinian State, with secure
and recognized borders and with Jerusalem as a shared
capital of both States.

United States leadership on this issue is
indispensable to achieving a solution that meets the
aspirations of both parties, and we look forward to the
announcement of peace proposals when the United
States Administration judges them to be ready. United
States efforts offer a significant opportunity to deliver
peace, and they should be supported and encouraged
by all. We stand ready to provide political and practical
support to help achieve a viable agreement. We
encourage the parties to make a public commitment
to renewed peace negotiations based on a two-State
solution. In order to move forward, it is important
that they reaffirm their commitment to all previous
diplomatic agreements, which have taken us closer to
peace. Those agreements remain an important basis for
renewed talks. We welcome the Palestinian Authority's
continued recognition of the State of Israel and the
parties continuing security cooperation.

If a peace process is to succeed, it needs to be
conducted in an atmosphere free from violence. We
regret that too many people continue to undermine
efforts to achieve peace. We condemn the detonation of
an improvised explosive device along the Gaza border
with Israel on Saturday, which wounded four Israeli
soldiers, including two seriously. We also condemn
the recent terrorist attack in the West Bank settlement
of Ariel. There is never an excuse for terror, and our
thoughts are with the family and friends of the victim,
as they are with all those who have been affected by
violence. Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right
to live in peace and security. There is also a right to
dignity, and we condemn kidnappings, as well as acts
that prevent families from being able to properly grieve
for their loved ones.

We will continue to press all sides to refrain from
engaging in or encouraging incitement to hateful action
or language. That only serves to stir up prejudice and
takes us further from the goal of achieving peace.
In that regard, it is unacceptable for anyone to deny
the legitimacy of the connection of either the Jewish
or Palestinian peoples to the land. Inflammatory
and unhelpful rhetoric on both sides weakens trust,
corrodes mutual respect and undermines prospects for
peace. We call on both parties to act with restraint and
to show bold leadership. Only when both parties reject
violence and work together to ensure calm and stability
can peace have a chance to flourish.

We are concerned by the Israeli Government's
recent decision to establish a settlement deep in the
West Bank - the second in 12 months. Those plans
have also raised the possibility of the retroactive
legalization of the illegal outpost of Havat Gilad, and
there have been renewed threats from Israel to demolish
structures in Al-Susiya, in the occupied West Bank.
We call on Israel to immediately reverse its policies of
settlement expansion and demolitions. They undermine
the physical viability of the two-State solution and call
into question Israel's own commitment to peace.

The lack of Palestinian unity continues to be an
impediment to achieving peace. We therefore support
reconciliation efforts that lead to the full return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza. As Special Coordinator
Mladinov informed us last week, current conditions
in the Gaza Strip are dire. Further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation will not only continue to put
lives at risk, but would represent a threat to stability in
the region. It is essential that all parties work urgently
to improve the situation, and we call for an easing of
access controls for people and goods into an out of
Gaza. The United Kingdom remains a committed
supporter of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. It must
be able to continue its vital work to improve the lives of
Palestinian refugees and help maintain stability across
the region. It needs appropriate funding to do so.

All United Nations States Members have a role to
play in nurturing peace and rejecting violence. We are
therefore concerned by incursions across Israel's border
with Syria earlier this month. Our commitment to
Israel's security is unwavering, and we support Israel's
right to defend itself.
The United Kingdom's position on an Israeli-
Palestinian peace agreement has not changed. It should
be based on the lines as they stood on 4 June 1967, with
equal land swaps to reflect the national security and
religious interests ofthe Jewish and Palestinian peoples.
Jerusalem should be the shared capital of the Israeli and
Palestinian States, and its status must be determined
through a final-status agreement. A just, fair, agreed
and realistic settlement for refugees is needed that is
demographically compatible with the principle of two
States for two peoples.

In conclusion, like everyone in the Council, the
United Kingdom strongly supports peace. We want
to see renewed peace negotiations, supported by the
international community, that lead to a safe and secure
Israel - the homeland for the Jewish people - living
alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian State - the
homeland for the Palestinian people. Let us all work
together to lay the groundwork for peace.

