Mr. Lajeak (Slovakia): At the outset, I would like
to thank His Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov of the
Russian Federation for convening this debate.

The unprecedented rise of terrorism is perhaps the
most serious, shocking, painful and shameful reality
facing us at the beginning of the twenty-first century.
In the region of the Middle East and North Africa, but
not only there, terrorism is sometimes the last, and
sometimes the first, resort of individuals or groups that
no longer feel the need to respect authority and abide by
the rules. People resort to terrorism either because they
choose to or because they have to.

We shall focus here on those who are forced to
be a part of an extremist, radical and violent group.
Their previous experience is the key to understanding
them. Quite often, they belonged to a marginalized
community or ethnic or religious minority. The
problems they face - unemployment, poverty, the lack
of life prospects for them and their children and, most
important, no hope for a better future - have been
blatantly exploited by groups like Daesh, which is a
false, disillusioned and dangerous alternative form of
governance rooted in fear and violence. Yet the military
suppression of Daesh is only a fragment of the solution.
The main part of a solution must be a commitment to
better governance, better than Daesh's and also better
than the one they had before.
In order to reach a stage ofprevention, it is necessary
to end the stage of continuing conflict. The international
community cannot focus on preventive measures in an
environment full of terror and fear where, as we speak,
children hold weapons in their hands, and hospitals and
schools are subject to deliberate attacks.

Successful political transitions in the Middle East
require strong and consensual international support.
Any foreign involvement in favour of individual
parties can break the fragile trust in the political
track. A sincere, candid and regular exchange of views
produces an increase in understanding and, ideally, in
trust. That, in turn, might lead to a more flexible and
increased exchange of information and intelligence,
and police and judicial cooperation, which are all vital
components of counter-terrorism efforts.

In addressing the issue of foreign terrorist fighters,
it is crucial for each State to participate in order
to prevent gaps in implementation. Weak links are
windows of opportunity for foreign fighters. At the
same time, we need to keep in mind the balance between
security and respect for human rights. Security will not
be sustainable unless it is reached with respect for the
rule of law.

All the relevant resolutions must be fully
implemented in a timely manner, whether they be
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations or not. The consensus of Security Council
members is far too important not to focus all our efforts
on trying to achieve it. Monitoring by United Nations
entities and other relevant international organizations
with competence and expertise in the matter should
help to ensure better implementation by States of
their commitments. For that reason, I must say that I
appreciate the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General
and the relevant United Nations bodies.

The role of the Security Council in the fight
against terrorism remains crucial. It is a cornerstone
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
The General Assembly also has considerable potential
and an important role to play. We look forward to
the Secretary-General's global action plan against
Violent extremism. We hope it will reflect many of the
inspiring proposals raised at the regional conferences
on countering violent extremism.

