I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing and assure him of our full support in his tireless efforts to bring about lasting peace in the Middle East. The persistence of tensions between Palestine and Israel, the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip with the advent of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the continued annexation of Palestinian land, and the cycle of violence and reprisals in the Middle East must stop for negotiations in the framework of the Israeli- Palestinian peace process to resume. To that end, we call on both parties to renounce all unilateral action in order to strengthen mutual confidence. My delegation would like to stress that, if Israelis and Palestinians are to achieve their legitimate aspirations, respectively, to security and to the creation of a viable State, they must return to the negotiating table on sound, mutually acceptable bases, in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions. We call on Israel to respect the principles of international law in the occupied territories and take steps to end the occupation of Palestinian land, including in East Jerusalem, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016). The continuation of the occupation and threat to grab additional land will only jeopardize the two-State solution backed by the international community at large. I therefore express our hope that the spirit of 20 April consensus between Israeli political blocks regarding the formation of a coalition Government will carry over to the negotiating table so that the two parties may achieve tangible results on the road to sustainable peace. On the humanitarian front, my delegation welcomes the cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian Authority in bringing in medical equipment and products to control the COVID-19 pandemic in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. That cooperation must be broadened and strengthened in order to adequately address the crisis. We hope that this commendable rapprochement can continue and serve as a springboard for the relaunching of the political process. At this critical moment, my delegation appeals to the international community to strengthen its assistance to the Gaza Strip to alleviate the shortage of health workers, medicines, medical equipment and supplies, including through increased support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, so as to enable it to continue its useful activities on the ground. In conclusion, I would like to stress, for the attention of our Council and the international community, that there is no better place in the world to show compassion and forgiveness than the region of the Middle East, the cradle of the three great monotheistic religions. The Secretary-General's message in declaring that "the fury of the virus shows the folly of war" must be heard clearly by the protagonists in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
