Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to speak on behalf of the 120
States members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries to address an issue of such great importance,
given the fact that 88 per cent of the peacekeepers
deployed on the ground come from non-aligned
countries and that the 10 largest contributors of troops
and military contingents - including Indonesia - are
all members of our Movement.
We commend Foreign Minister Retno Lestari
Priansari Marsudi and wish her delegation every
success in guiding the work of the Security Council
this month.

Everything relating to the efficiency and
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations is important,
includingthetraining and capacity-building ofpersonnel
deployed on the ground. We therefore emphasize the
need for a partnership of shared responsibility between
the Security Council and troop- and police-contributing
countries, together with the Secretariat, in order
to objectively evaluate and harness the potential of
peacekeeping mandates and operations. We need a clear
and viable mandate commensurate with the challenges
on the ground. That will be possible if cooperation is
continuous, meaningful and representative, including
prior to the renewal of mandates.

In April 2018, the Ministers reaffirmed their
position on peacekeeping operations, which must be
carried out in strict compliance with the Charter of the
United Nations. At the same time, they stressed that
respect for the principles of the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of States, as well as that
of non-interference in their internal affairs, are key
to the promotion of international peace and security.
In that regard, respect for the basic principles of
peacekeeping i the consent of the parties, impartiality
and the non-use of force, except in self-defence and in
defence of the mandate f is necessary for the success
of operations, in particular those with protection of
civilians mandates. Peacekeeping operations must be
supported by a participatory and well-planned political
process, based on national ownership and supported by
the international community, as well as with the consent
of the parties concerned. In other words, peacekeeping
operations must not be used as an alternative means
to address the root causes of conflicts or to manage
conflicts themselves.

We welcome the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on Peacekeeping Operations, which is
aimed at ensuring that efforts are made to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of operations to address
changing realities. The Movement also stands ready
to work within the framework of the practical and
comprehensive implementation of the Cairo Roadmap
for Enhancing the Performance of Peacekeeping
Operations from Mandate to Exit. We reaffirm our
commitment to providing well-trained and well-
equipped uniformedpersonnel, as well as to participating
in a joint agreement to better prepare, train and equip
such personnel through innovative approaches.

We note that, although performance is related
to the safety and security of peacekeepers, the
performance of the mission as a whole, and not just
the performance of troops, must be evaluated. We
believe that well-defined, realistic and achievable
mandates, political will, leadership, accountability,
adequate human and financial resources, planning and
operational guidelines, capacity-building and training
are key to ensuring the effective implementation of
mission mandates.

On the eve of the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, we express our commitment to
increasing the number of female civilian and uniformed
personnel in peacekeeping operations, including in
key positions, as well as to ensure women's full and
equal participation in every stage of the peace process.
We are aware that the presence of women in military,
police and civilian roles on the ground sends an
important message to host communities with regard
to gender equality and empowering women, which can
help in preventing sexual exploitation and abuse. We
also reaffirm our support for the Secretary-General's
policy of zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and
abuse, including the voluntary compact and the circle
of leadership initiatives.

In conclusion, the Movement pays tribute to the
work of the men and women peacekeepers who carry
out their work, oftentimes in adverse circumstances
in armed conflicts, while risking their lives daily. Our
sincere appreciation goes out to all of them, as well as
to those who have lost their lives in the performance of
their duties, defending the United Nations flag and the
cause of peace.

