Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me in turn to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his briefing,
which supplements the Secretary-General's report.

Our common goal is to ensure that progress
should continue towards achieving a democratic and
multi-ethnic Kosovo that is a source of stability in the
region. In that respect, while we support the statement
shortly to be made by the presidency of the European
Union, I wish to stress three points.

First, the functioning of the Provisional
Institutions must improve significantly. In his report,
the Secretary-General notes several areas in which
progress has been made. We agree with his analysis.
Our demand that such improvements be made is
particularly strong given the fact that the gradual
transfer of new responsibilities to these authorities is
about to begin, pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999) and
the Constitutional Framework. The contribution of all
communities to the process of provisional self-
government is necessary. In this context, we support
the request of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General that, by the end of the month, the
Kosovo Assembly bring four bills into conformity with
the reference texts.

Secondly, the authority of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) must be respected. All communities
and political parties have a responsibility in this respect
and must work to that end in good faith. Their support
for the decisive action of UNMIK and the Kosovo
Force in promoting the rule of law is in their own best
interests. We support Mr. Steiner's initiatives to
promote direct dialogue between the Provisional
Institutions and Belgrade. We reaffirm our support for
the principle of standards before status, which the
Provisional Institutions should implement with
UNMIK's assistance. Standards are necessary to good
governance and to the modernization of Kosovo. We
need to continue to address the concrete and
respectable issues of multi-ethnicity, democratization
and freedom of movement that affect the daily lives of
the inhabitants of Kosovo.

Thirdly, violence of any kind, regardless of its
origin or motivation - be it criminal, political or
ethnic - must come to an end. Violence is
unacceptable and incompatible with building a
democratic, multi-ethnic and modern Kosovo. It
hinders the stabilization of Kosovo and the region as a
whole. We are therefore concerned by recent incidents
and we fully support the Special Representative's
condemnation of them. All communities must
denounce these acts and redouble their efforts to
deepen the political dialogue and the process of
reconciliation.

