Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Security
Council members held a very constructive dialogue
with the high-level Contact Group of the African Union
last month. We had hoped that that dialogue would
be the start of a discussion. We listened carefully
and respectfully to the African Union's concerns. We
fully understand the desire to allow the President and
Deputy President of Kenya to fulfil their constitutional
responsibilities. We are engaged and prepared to
address those concerns. But there is a right place to
do that, and that place is at the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and the Assembly of States Parties, not
here in the Security Council.

The Assembly of States Parties meets in five days'
time. A dedicated segment will be devoted to addressing
the African Union's concerns. Preparatory work is
already under way and a number of amendments have
already been submitted, including one by the United
Kingdom on presence through Video technology. The
Court itself has taken a number of decision that help
to mitigate the African Union's concerns, including
staggering the proceedings and excusing presence in
exceptional circumstances. On 31 October, the start date
of President Kenyatta's trial was put back, for the third
time, to February 2014. The Court rightly takes such
decisions independently, on the basis of applications
made by the defendants. Those developments
demonstrate a constructive, creative and legally proper
response to the concerns raised.

The ICC, by design, operates in and around conflict
situations where there is a threat to peace and stability.
It was established as a court of last resort, with the
strong support of African States, to deal with such
situations. Of the eight situations before the Court, five
were initiated at the request of African States parties.
Nobody, least of all the United Kingdom, underestimates
the gravity of the security challenges in the Horn of
Africa, but the question before the Council today was
whether or not continuing with the ICC proceedings
constituted in itself a threat to international peace and
security. In our view, it does not. We therefore do not
consider that the criteria for deferral under article 16 of
the Rome Statute are met, and we therefore abstained in
the voting on the draft resolution.

This assessment in no way changes the United
Kingdom's commitment to peace and security in the
Horn of Arica and across the continent. We have a long-
standing and deep relationship with Kenya. My Prime
Minister is personally engaged in supporting African
efforts to bring greater peace and stability to a region
that has been blighted by violent extremism for too
long. The United Nations is supporting over 100,000
peacekeepers in Africa. Just this week, the Security
Council authorized an increase of over 4,000 troops for
the African Union Mission in Somalia.

We are disappointed that the draft resolution was
unnecessarily put to a vote in a way that highlights
disagreements within the Council shortly before a
meeting of the States parties, the outcome of which we
hope will be to reduce those disagreements. Despite
that, the United Kingdom will continue to engage
through the Assembly of States Parties in a manner
as constructive and helpful as possible with a View to
addressing the concerns of the African Union, and we
encourage others to do likewise.

