Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): I wish to begin by
expressing my delegation's appreciation of the presence
of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
and Expatriate Affairs of Jordan, Mr. Nasser Judeh,
who presided over the open debate this morning.

Indonesia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and
Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.

At the outset, allow me to highlight the incident
that took place yesterday in Sana'a, Yemen, as I believe
it demands the attention of the Security Council, in the
light of the resolution 2216 (2015), which was adopted
just last week. On Monday, a bomb attack struck
Sana'a, resulting in considerable physical damage
upon the premises of the Embassy of Indonesia. The
incident also caused physical injuries to two members
of our Embassy Staff and one other Indonesian citizen.
Indonesia condemns that bomb attack and any attacks
that result in casualties among civilian population and
damage to properties protected under international
law. The bomb attack is a clear example that the use
of violence will only result in civilian casualties. In
that regard, we re-emphasize that the best solution to
the situation in Yemen is through peaceful means of
diplomacy and negotiation.

We urge all parties to immediately halt violence
and abide by the prevailing international norms
and laws on the protection of civilians in times of
conflict. Indonesia also urges the Secretary-General
and all concerned parties to immediately implement
humanitarian pause to allow all civilians, including
foreign nationals, to evacuate Yemen as well as to
allow humanitarian assistance to enter the country.
While reaffirming the principle of the inviolability
of diplomatic and consular premises, we also urge all
parties to take all necessary steps to protect diplomatic
and consular premises against any intrusion or damage,
and to prevent any disturbance of the peace of these
missions or impairment of their dignity, as stipulated in
the resolution 2216 (2015).

On the question of Palestine, I want to highlight
that we are holding this meeting at a time of a near-
total absence of traction in the Middle East peace
process. Only last month, Israel held a general
election. During the election campaign, the world
was presented with various comments from Israel
disparaging the Palestinian people and demonstrating
contempt for the peace process as well as the prospect
of a Palestinian State. Needless to say, those comments
only strengthened our criticism of Israel and further
question its commitment to peace.

It is the belief of my delegation that only by a
return to the peace process and a demonstration of
goodwill and seriousness by the Government of Israel
can we find out if those comments were nothing more
than the convenient posturing of politicians. However,
as we know, nothing has changed. Israel continues to
commit the same grave and systematic violations of
international law that it has done for the past 60 years.
The establishment and expansion of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories continues, along with
the associated restrictions on movement and access
to land. The excessive use of force by Israeli forces
towards the Palestinian people continues, in a climate
of impunity.

The Gaza Strip remains a tragic and empty husk,
shelled out last year and suffering from the effects of
the Israeli blockade. Israel has also continued to play
games with the Palestinian tax revenues, as a means
of blackmailing the Palestinian Government and seeing
to its economic collapse. In other words, the Security
Council today faces a challenge that is no different
from those of yesterday or years before. That challenge
is for the Council to act courageously to end the Israeli
occupation of Palestine and implement the two-State
vision. It is time that the Council honoured the Charter
of the United Nations and its mandate under it by
refusing to be, in effect, a tool for the perpetuation of
decades of injustice and impasse in the Middle East.

A comprehensive, just and lasting settlement can
be achieved peacefully and on the basis of international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
road map of the Quartet and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We reiterate our position that the Council cannot afford
to play the part of just another actor, or worse still, the
role of a spectator, in the search for a comprehensive
solution to the question of Palestine. We also call on the
United Nations, as a member of the Quartet, to stand
with the children of Palestine and to restart the peace
process to ensure that they and the children of Israel
enjoy the peace and stability that has been denied to
their predecessors.

Before concluding my statement, I cannot fail to
bring to the Council's attention the fate of the Palestine
refugee camp in Yarmouk, Syria. The camp's takeover
earlier this month by a terrorist group has worsened the
lives of the refugees remaining there. This development,
along with the suffering inflicted on the refugees in
the more than two-year siege of the camp, adds to the
list of injustices being borne by Palestinian refugees.
Indonesia calls on the Council to act urgently to address
that tragedy and at the same time to work expeditiously
and without further delay towards reaching a political
solution to the conflict in Syria.

