Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): May I first thank you,
Sir, for this opportunity to address this body on behalf
of the Group of African States.

I wish to express our appreciation to you for
convening yet another important meeting of the
Security Council on cross-border issues in West Africa.
It is heartwarming for us that this subject is being
discussed under the Beninois presidency and steered by
you. That is an indication of your country's
commitment to the goals of peace, security, stability
and progress in our subregion and the African
continent as a whole.

We are also grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his continuing interest in the best
approaches towards the resolution of conflicts in the
region. His exertions reflect the shared desire to make
West Africa and, indeed, Africa as a whole crisis-free.

Conflicts in the West African subregion have
claimed many lives and rendered thousands of people
traumatized and homeless. Generations of our youth
have been sucked into those conflicts and lost their
childhood and innocence. Women have been abused
and exploited. Indeed, the devastation wreaked by
those conflicts is writ large on the destroyed cities and
infrastructure of affected countries. Worse still, their
consequences have been felt beyond the immediate
theatres of operation, compounding the challenges
created by the spread of HIV/AIDS and other
infectious diseases, increasing desertification and
environmental degradation, and a crippling debt
burden.

While significant progress has been and continues
to be made in resolving those conflicts, the subregion
remains vulnerable. We therefore share the Secretary-
General's assessment of the desirability of an
integrated and coordinated approach to conflict
prevention. Elements of that approach, identified in the
report, include better collaboration among the United
Nations entities in the region through the exchange of
information and analysis and joint planning; the
reactivation of the Mano River Union; the consolidated
appeals process for West Africa; and joint action by the
United Nations, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the European Union.

For our countries, the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons remains a major scourge. The
unrestrained access to those weapons by individuals
and groups has fuelled conflicts with attendant cross-
border crimes, including armed banditry. Those
weapons have also proved to be a great disincentive to
non-State actors to follow the path of peace through
negotiation.

On our own, we, the States members of ECOWAS
and the African Union, are constrained in effectively
countering the consequences of proliferation of those
weapons, which are manufactured outside the region
and imported into our countries by non-State actors, in
collaboration with arms producers and suppliers. Our
current efforts, amply demonstrated by our strict
adherence to the ECOWAS moratorium on the
importation, exportation and manufacture of small
arms and light weapons in West Africa, as well as by
the creation of the new ECOWAS Small Arms Unit,
need the clear support and action of other members of
the international community to achieve the desired
goal.

The progress made so far in the negotiation of a
draft treaty on marking and tracing by the ad hoc group
constituted for that purpose should spur Member States
to overcome the remaining obstacles to the early
conclusion of those negotiations. That would ensure
that an agreed text can be presented for adoption by the
General Assembly this year. Meanwhile, we join the
Secretary-General in inviting our development partners
to provide funds to ECOWAS to enable its new Small
Arms Control Programme to effectively take off.

The time has also come to identify individuals,
corporations, groups and countries that have been
implicated in the illegal exportation of small arms and
light weapons to our subregion, in violation of arms
embargos imposed by this Council and in clear
disregard of the ECOWAS moratorium. We share the
Secretary-General's assessment of the need for the
Council to produce a "naming and shaming" list of
such individuals, corporations, groups and countries,
cognizant that this would help reduce, if not totally
stamp out, the traffic in small arms and light weapons
in our subregion. By our subjecting such culprits to
prosecution for attendant crimes, the cause of peace
and justice in our region would be well served.
Moreover, it would serve notice of the determination of
the Council to stop that blood trade and to act
consistent with its interest in the subject.

The need to take into account specific local
socio-economic and geopolitical factors in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
has been recognized in the Secretary-General's report.
Obviously, such an approach would have to incorporate
such groups or areas as child combatants, foreign
combatants, female combatants, military groups,
monitoring components and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in countries not at war
but deeply affected by armed conflicts in the region.
The ultimate goal should be the social and economic
reintegration of former disarmed combatants, including
women and children, into society so as to ensure the
stability and security of the affected States. We wish, in
that regard, to draw attention to the success stories in
Sierra Leone and Liberia, where demobilized child
soldiers have been reunited with their families and/or
repatriated to their countries of origin. Those are
success stories rarely reported in the mainstream
media, but they attest to the valuable work of the
United Nations and the engagement of the Security
Council.

It is evident from the report of the Secretary-
General that West Africa is confronted with a major
refugee and displaced persons problem. Only a
comprehensive view of those problems will facilitate a
permanent solution, with affected countries driving the
process. As stated in the report, such a solution should
include security sector reform, including support for a
regional position on "the phenomenon of violent
military adventurism to seize power" (S/2005/86, para. 34). It should also be consistent with the ECOWAS
protocol on the free movement of people and goods.
We believe that close cooperation between the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
ECOWAS on investigation techniques used by national
law enforcement agencies will complement current
efforts by the Governments of the subregion in those
areas. In addition, the existing initiative entitled
"Integrated strategies for sensitive border areas in West
Africa" - which includes the participation of the
United Nations Office for West Africa, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, ECOWAS,
development partners, civil society groups and
concerned United Nations country teams and peace
missions - is focusing attention on those problems in
sensitive border zones. If fully implemented, the
initiative should help prevent possible outbreaks of
violence, restore trust and confidence in inter-State
relations and promote peace and stability in West
Africa.

Finally, the challenges of cross-border problems
in West Africa can be effectively addressed only when
opportunities for economic growth and development
are enhanced. Like most other developing countries,
the countries in our region are concerned not only with
the visible consequences of conflicts, human rights
abuses and poor governance, but also with the state of
our economies, and especially that of our young
people. The graphic picture painted of youth
unemployment and its potential negative impact on the
social fabric, peace, stability and security of our
subregion is indicative of the scope of the challenges
we face. It is therefore our expectation that this debate
will strengthen the resolve of the Council, as well as
that of the international community at large, to take
action on these issues.

