Ms. Azoulay (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2347 (2017) as a
historic step in our common fight to protect endangered
cultural heritage. We meet this morning in the Security
Council, in the heart of a global city that symbolizes
modernity - In the Shadow ofNo Towers, to borrow
from the work by Art Spiegelmann. But this morning,
given the subject of our meeting, we also are gathering
in the lost shadow of the Buddhas of Bamiyan, which
were ripped from our world and blown to smithereens,
whereupon their mute power to move and inspire was
lost. We are gathered in response to appeals for the
manuscripts and mausoleums of Timbuktu, the stone
colossi and the statues of the human-headed bulls
from Mesopotamia.

Deliberate attacks on human cultural heritage are
rooted in a desire to obliterate memory, reject the past
and strip history of its meaning and lessons. It is the
same destructive desire that targets the living bodies
of women, men and children, but also the stone and
clay of our heritage treasures held in museums. It is
the same macabre desire, the same willingness to break
what might have existed in the past in order to snuff
out the hope of a future. We owe those people 4 the
women and men - respect for their past. We must pass
on their history to our children and to our children's
children, because that history is part of the common
heritage of humankind. We must stand with all of those
who, sometimes at the cost of their own lives, seek to
salvage those treasures of humankind from the abyss.

The international community would thus be
supporting what Leon Blum rightly called the
"conscience of the United Nations", namely, UNESCO.
I wish to pay tribute to UNESCO's essential role in the
protection of heritage and the promotion of cultural
diversity as an instrument of peace and the moral
conscience of humankind to remind us all that culture
links people to their history and their regions. Thanks
to UNESCO, States have committed themselves
by adopting texts useful for the preservation of our
common heritage. UNESCO's global mandate is more
relevant than ever in a world where its fundamental
values are often in jeopardy.

I also welcome the work of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL, which
play a key role in preventing trafficking in cultural
property by promoting judicial cooperation and raising
awareness among States on issues that are still often
misunderstood. I would also like to commend the
presence this morning in the Security Council of the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs and of
the Director-General of UNESCO, as well as to thank
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime for his briefing.

I would also like to thank the British presidency,
without whose efforts the joint invitation of France
and Italy would never have seen the light of day. Allow
me to express once again France's solidarity with our
British friends who were attacked in the very birthplace
of democracy, which is their Parliament.

The protection of heritage is a matter of civilization
and an ethical issue that unites us all by way of our
diverse affiliations. However, it is also a security issue,
because illicit trafficking in looted cultural property
during conflicts finances terrorist networks and is a
factor in the development of armed conflicts themselves.
Armed groups, in particular terrorist organizations, are
strengthened by revenue derived from trafficking in
cultural heritage. Stolen cultural objects in a country
where war is waging then serve to perpetuate and
intensify said conflict. Even after conflict, when peace
is restored, heritage continues to play a major role in
restoring peace as a symbol of resilience and unity
for peoples whose blood has been shed. For all of the
reasons I mentioned, the international community must
take steps to act. This is a human imperative, a just
cause and a key component ofpeace.

At this groundbreaking meeting this morning,
the international community is taking action by way
of the Security Council, which, for the first time,
has adopted a comprehensive resolution devoted
exclusively to the protection of at-risk heritage in
armed conflict. This organ, whose responsibility is to
ensure the maintenance of peace and security, is now
fully equipped to deal with this particular issue through
the text submitted by France and Italy. Of course, this
issue has featured in other resolutions adopted by the
Council in the past, but those provisions were limited
and focused on specific areas, especially in the context
of the fight against terrorism. For example, resolution
1267 (1999) calls for respect for Afghanistan's cultural
and historical heritage, while resolution 2199 (2015)
condemns the destruction of cultural heritage in Iraq
and Syria - especially by Da'esh and the Al-Nusra
Front - and urges Member States to take appropriate
measures to prevent the trafficking of cultural property
from Iraq and Syria.

The urgency of the issue has led the Council today
to underscore the importance of those resolutions and
to become more broadly seized of the issue. In that
regard, the Council can count on the contribution of the
43 States that met in December 2016 at the Abu Dhabi
International Conference on Safeguarding Endangered
Cultural Heritage, organized by France and the United
Arab Emirates, which I would like to commend for
its decisive commitment. In their outcome document,
those countries called on the Security Council to
support the achievement of two main goals identified
by the conference, namely, establishing an international
fund for the protection of at-risk cultural heritage and
creating a network of safe-havens.

Today's unanimous resolutionisboth comprehensive
and balanced. It reflects the international community's
full determination at the highest level. I am proud to
have presented it along with my Italian colleague.

The resolution addresses the issue of at-risk
heritage in situations of armed conflict by for the first
time dealing with all the threats - destruction, theft
and trafficking - without geographical limitation
and regardless of whether or not those acts are carried
out by listed terrorist groups or other armed groups.
It explicitly links the financing of terrorist groups
with trafficking in cultural property and strengthens
the operational tools put in place to deal with this
issue in previous Security Council resolutions. It also
better encapsulates the link between terrorist groups
and organized crime. It makes mention of the main
outcomes of the Abu Dhabi Conference with regard
to international law. And it strengthens cooperation
among the relevant agencies and bodies dealing with
this issue, without duplicating or replacing their work,
while also encouraging States to cooperate further and
to take operational and substantive measures. Finally,
it calls on the Member States to ratify the 1954 Hague
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property
in the Event of Armed Conflict and its Protocols, as
France has done, havingjustjoined the United Kingdom
as the first permanent member of the Security Council
to ratify the 1999 Second Protocol. As part of this
mobilization effort and, above all, its cooperation on
this issue, France intends to continue to play its full
part, in particular by providing $30 million for the fund
announced at the Abu Dhabi Conference, which already
has more than $75 million in its coffers.

To believe that the modern era can be based on
forgetting the past is a dangerous path to take. This new
age can come about only by building on the shoulders of
the giants who preceded us. Today we need to preserve
the integrity of the "great book" of humanity, as referred
to by Victor Hugo in Notre-Dame de Paris. He talked
about heritage as the "great book of humanity, the key
expression of what it means to be human". Of course,
heritage is a living organism, one transformed through
the ages. But the passage of time will determine what
must endure in history, not the destructive passions
of men.

This resolution calls us collectively to wisdom and
to respect the passage of time, of history. Working for
the cause of peace means preventing the destruction
of cultural heritage in a murderous attempt to rewrite
history. And it means preventing the heritage of peoples
from being hijacked to finance violence and crime
against their own history. That is the meaning of the
historic resolution that we just adopted this morning.

