Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express my delegation's regret that today we had to vote on Mr. Bustani's participation in order to brief the Security Council. We would have preferred it if we all had shown flexibility and tried to reach consensus without tensions and divisions. That does not help the Security Council to make progress in addressing this very complex and sensitive dossier. I would also like to start by thanking High Representative Nakamitsu for her comprehensive briefing. I would like to reaffirm Tunisia's commitment to ensuring the prohibition of chemical weapons via the regime set out in the Chemical Weapons Convention and its implementing body, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Tunisia reaffirms its firm, principled position and condemns in the strongest terms the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and for any reason. Tunisia stresses that those involved in such crimes should be held accountable. The use of chemicals as weapons is a threat to international peace and security and violates resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons Convention. Tunisia supports the important technical activities of the OPCW, in line with its mandate, which led to the elimination of the chemical stockpile declared by Syria. We welcome the ongoing cooperation between the Syrian Government and the OPCW Technical Secretariat despite the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease. Tunisia also welcomes the fact that the Declaration Assessment Team has resumed its work in Syria. We stress the need to ensure the safety and security of its staff. We urge the Government of Syria to continue its dialogue and cooperation with the OPCW in a spirit of constructive engagement and mutual trust so as to expedite the resolution of outstanding issues and ensure its full compliance with its international obligations. Tunisia reaffirms the need to investigate - in a comprehensive, impartial and transparent manner - all allegations of the use of toxic chemical material as weapons. There is therefore the need for attention and caution with regard to the plots of terrorist groups, including those listed by the Security Council, in particular given the increased threat of terrorism in Syria. I would like to recall that chemical terrorism in Syria has become a reality, as it has been proved that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams used chemical weapons in Syria and Iraq in 2015 and 2017. Tunisia emphasizes that the Chemical Weapons Convention is a comprehensive and balanced multilateral framework based on consensus and cooperation, with a view to putting an end to the use of toxic chemicals for offensive purposes and the prohibition of that kind of weapons of mass destruction. It is incumbent upon the international community and the Security Council to work collectively and in unity to ensure the continuation, independence and effectiveness of the non-proliferation regime and to close the Syria chemical weapons dossier. We reiterate that ending the crisis in Syria must be a Syrian-led process, facilitated by the United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), which puts an end to external interference and the presence of terrorist groups, while respecting Syria's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
