Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her comprehensive briefing.

Allow me also to align myself with the statement
to be delivered later by the representative of Croatia on
behalf of the European Union member States.

Despite our constant calls for the resumption of
meaningful negotiations between the parties and the
restoration of the political horizon for the resolution
of the conflict, we have not witnessed any progress
at all. On the contrary, the situation on the ground is
becoming extremely worrisome. Recent developments
in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank remind us of the
looming threat of a full-scale escalation, which should
be avoided at all costs.

The priority of the international community should
be to restore a political horizon for the resumption of a
meaningful peace process. We believe that a negotiated
two-State solution and a resolution of all final status
issues, including Jerusalem, settlements, the future of
Palestinian refugees, borders and security arrangements
remain the only way to fulfil the legitimate aspirations
of both parties and achieve long-term peace.

We continue to support the essential agreed
parameters that are based on respect for international
principles and international law. The parameters
for the resolution of the conflict are well known and
internationally recognized and have been set out in
detail on numerous occasions by our delegation. We
appeal to both sides to refrain from unilateral steps that
prejudge the outcome of final-status negotiations and
expect them to demonstrate, through their actions and
policies, their commitment to peace. We condemn all
acts of violence, terrorism and incitement to violence
and hate, which are fundamentally incompatible with
advancing a peaceful two-State solution.

We still believe that it is only by returning to
meaningfulbilateralnegotiations,based oninternational
law and the relevant resolutions, which encapsulate
internationally agreed parameters, that it will be
possible to make a positive contribution to the process.
That is the only path towards a two-State solution and
the resolution of all final-status issues. Regrettably, the
situation on the ground continues to deteriorate, with the
two-State solution in effect continuing to be dismantled
piece by piece, in particular by the relentless expansion
of settlements. Currently, we are very close to the point
at which the establishment of a viable Palestinian State
would be difficult, if not impossible.

Poland's position on the Israeli settlement policy in
the occupied Palestinian territory is clear and remains
unchanged. It is also the European Union's well-
known stand. All settlement activity is illegal under
international law. Not only does it erode the viability
of the two-State solution and the prospects for a lasting

peace, but it is an obstacle to peace.

In addition to actions aimed at advancing
settlements, the demolition of Palestinian property
by Israeli authorities, the forced transfer of residents
and attempts to legalize West Bank outposts continue
to severely undermine the possibility of a viable two-
State solution. In this context, we are very worried about
the planned demolitions of the Palestinian villages of
Khan Al-Ahmar and Sur Bahir, and we again ask Israel
to entirely abandon these plans entirely.

We are closely following Egyptian-led discussions
on intra-Palestinian reconciliation and hope that the
process will be successful. Accordingly, we urge
all Palestinian factions to work together to achieve
sustainable progress and allow the Palestinian Authority
to resume its full responsibilities in Gaza. A single and
legitimate Palestinian Authority is a crucial element for
the unity of a future Palestinian State and a basis for a
sustainable peace agreement.

In conclusion, let me underline the role of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in the region. We praise
the international community's collective efforts to
allow UNRWA to fulfil its mandate of providing
essential relief, development and protection services to
Palestinian refugees and those displaced by the conflict.
In our opinion, UNRWA remains a key contributor that
provides humanitarian assistance, stability and security
to the region.

