Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over
our work for this month. I wish also to express our
admiration for the intelligent and dignified manner in
which Ambassador Mamady Traore conducted the
work of the Council during a particularly difficult
month.

My country welcomes the report submitted to the
Council by Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock concerning
the first 18 months of the existence of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), which he chaired during
that period in a very skilful and responsible manner.
We also welcome the new work programme that he is
presenting, jointly with the new Chairman of the
Committee, for the seventh 90-day period.

However, before touching on the programme and
its future development, I should like to voice my
delegation's feeling of gratitude, which we in the
Council all share, to Sir Jeremy for his outstanding
performance. It fell to him to put into operation a
Committee that was unprecedented in terms of the
scope of its mandate and its jurisdiction. He faced the
challenge of mobilizing the whole of the international
community behind the common objective of a global
and systematic anti-terrorism campaign. That was a
massive task, delicate and replete with difficulties. The
Committee today is indebted to the zeal, seriousness,
transparency and boundless enthusiasm that
Ambassador Greenstock brought to the task.

We sincerely wish Ambassador Inocencio Arias
of Spain every success in the function which he is now
undertaking. He can count on the fullest support of the
Chilean delegation.

To date a tremendous effort has been made in the
implementation of the resolutions established in this
forum. Member States have contributed to this effort,
as have regional, subregional and international
organizations, the Secretariat and, naturally, the
Committee, as I have already stated, and its team of
independent experts. We are on the right course to
expand the scope of work to cover the operational
aspects of resolution 1373 (2001), as set out in the new
quarterly work programme. We should also keep in
mind the guidelines set out in the ministerial
declaration adopted in resolution 1456 (2003).

In this same vein, we would highlight the need to
continue to cooperate with States in order to enhance
their capacity to combat terrorism. Technical assistance
and guidance also play an important role in terms of
the level of response that we expect from those States.
The guidance notes and the information on sources of
assistance to combat terrorism prepared by the
Committee, which can be consulted on the Committee
Web site, is a very valuable online information
instrument which will help to facilitate the provision of
assistance.

Another aspect that we need to bear in mind in
developing the future work of the Committee, as
rightly proposed in the new programme of action, is
intensifying contacts with international, regional and
subregional organizations in the wake of the successful
meeting, held on 6 March, between the Committee and
a group of such organizations. This will lead to
improving the flow of information on, among other
things, best practices, codes and international
standards.

I wish also to express my thoughts about the
origin of terrorist activities in various regions. In this
regard, we look forward to the follow-up meeting that
the Organization of American States will be holding
shortly for representatives of regional and subregional
organizations.

The recent meeting held by the representative of
the Group of Experts with the Commission on Human
Rights and those that the Committee will be holding
with technical agencies and organizations whose
activities relate to the control of the use of nuclear,
chemical, biological or other kinds of lethal materials
to assess how to enhance the effectiveness of global
activities to combat terrorism in these areas indicate
the dynamism that we desire to achieve in our dialogue
with these organizations.

The Ministerial Declaration of 20 January urged
member States to cooperate in resolving all the
outstanding issues, with a view to adopting, by
consensus, the comprehensive draft to combat
international terrorism and the draft convention to
combat nuclear terrorism.

It is regrettable that the Special Committee,
which met recently at Headquarters to pursue these
negotiations, did not make significant headway in its
work. Nonetheless, we hope that the effort will
continue and that action in the normative area will not
be paralysed.

Lastly, I wish to repeat what my country stated at
this Council to the effect that in a globalized world the
fate of each and every one of our countries is that of all
peoples of the world. For this reason, combating
terrorism is not merely an issue for Governments, but
must involve the commitment of our civil societies, and
it must take place in a framework of legitimacy, respect
for the law and full observance of human rights.

In our Latin American region, marked for two
decades by State terrorism, we well understand the
need for maintaining the validity of these principles.
For all who decide to combat terrorism using its
methods degrades their own cause and proliferates the
threat of terrorism. We are concerned that this principle
be accepted by everyone.

Again, as a member of this Council, I reaffirm
Chile's full commitment to the efforts of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and all the initiatives that the
United Nations may undertake in order to eradicate this
scourge.

As Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), I would
state once again that we intend to promote closer
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
with all the members of this body and with all the
members of our Organization.

