Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela abstained in the
voting on resolution 2220 (2015) despite the efforts
made by Lithuania in leading the negotiations.

Venezuela participated actively and constructively
in the process. We believe that the resolution has some
positive but weak elements with respect to establishing
clear objectives for lifting arms embargoes and
providing for international cooperation, including in
the areas of technology transfer, the management and
control of stockpiles, marking and tracing, and the
collection and destruction of stockpiles. However, we
regret that we did not take into account the position of
many countries in the discussion on the urgent need to
prohibit the transfer of small arms and light weapons to
non-State actors, whose definition is clearly established
to achieve the purposes set forth in resolution 1540
(2004), as well as the prohibition of the unauthorized
re-export or the sale of these weapons without a licence
or with an expired licence.

The seriousness of the problem of the illicit
trafficking in weapons is reflected in the alarming
statistics presented by certain sources, which estimate
that at least 875 million of these weapons are available,
many of them in the hands of private individuals
and non-State actors. It is believed that between
7 and 8 million such weapons are produced each year.
Furthermore, legal international sales of such weapons
account for at least $8.5 billion annually. In addition,
according to the World Bank, the illicit sale of such
arms could account for an additional 20 percent of that
figure.

Therefore, the resolution that the Council has
approved has limited effectiveness because it fails to
provide for measures to prevent hundreds of thousands
of small arms and light weapons, including heavy
machine guns, grenade launchers, ground-to-air
missiles and portable air-defence systems, inter alia,
continue to stoke conflicts in Africa and the Middle
East.

Finally, in future, we would like to see greater
openness on the part of those Member States that
have opposed measures designed to prevent the illicit
transfer of small and light weapons to non-State actors,
because this continues to propagate Violence in many
regions throughout the world.

