Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, at the beginning of your presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. I
wish you every success. We also thank Ms. Nakamitsu
for her briefing.

We trust that, with the assistance of the United
Nations Office for Project Services and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the
two remaining above-ground Syrian chemical-weapon
facilities will be promptly destroyed. The Syrian
side has repeatedly demonstrated its interest in that.
The pending issues related to the initial declarations
should be dealt with as part of the dialogue between
the OPCW and the Syrian Government. We welcome
such cooperation, by which Syria, as a conscientious
party to the Chemical Weapons Convention, provides
the necessary assistance, complies with its obligations
and facilitates access to the relevant documents.

Many people have raised false issues that should
now be closed and put aside. Syria's chemical-weapon
capacity was destroyed under the oversight of the
OPCW. However, it seems that there are some who wish
to contrive to fan the flames on the issue. The Syrians
have provided exhaustive explanations. However,
issues are being raised and questions are being asked
in a endless cycle. The Syrian side consistently
reports to the international community, including the
Security Council, about the detection of toxic chemical
substances in areas liberated from the terrorists. There
are reports from Syria about possible provocations that
may be used by representatives of foreign intelligence
services. All such reports must be investigated
immediately by the experts of the OPCW.

However, we note that, in general, tremendous
efforts are necessary for The Hague to duly respond
to the important message. There are numerous pretexts
being put forward not to travel there and decisions
are being delayed. In the light of last year's story of
Khan Shaykhun and the Shayrat air base, such conduct
suggests deliberate sabotage.

However, the statements today have left us with
the impression that it is not Syria that some delegations
are interested in. The United States and the United
Kingdom have used today's meeting to slander Russia,
and it is quite clear why that is happening. Someone
cannot tolerate the success of the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress in Sochi and the prospects it offers
for injecting new momentum into the political process
in Syria. That requires launching a major campaign
of slander against Russia in order to try, not for the
first time, to cast doubt on Russia's role in the Syrian
political settlement. As always, the statements of these
representatives contain a grain of truth mixed with
mountains of lies. Russia has never contested the use
of sarin in Khan Shaykhun. But who it was used by is
still a mystery, because the absurd conclusions of the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) have not convinced us.
In the past few days there has been general uproar
about alleged incidents involving the use of chlorine
in some Damascus suburbs. There has already been
talk of the use of sarin. Where? When? By whom?
The outlines of this propaganda campaign are not new.
The terrorists, through the social associations that
are closely linked to them, foremost among them the
notorious White Helmets, spread rumours via social
networks. These are instantly picked up by the Western
press, and then we get representatives speechifying in
the Security Council, making unproved accusations
about the so-called Syrian regime and spreading
slander about Russia. I have said it before and I will say
it again: has anyone thought to ask the basic question as
to why the Syrian Government needs to use chemical
weapons? What do we suppose that could do for it?

The first thing we should do, and various speakers
today, particularly the representative of Sweden,
have discussed this, is to send an OPCW fact-finding
mission to those areas to investigate. Where is the
presumption of innocence? The speakers are blaming
the so-called regime for everything in advance, before
any investigation. What do they want an independent
investigative mechanism for? Surely at least they know
that an investigation has to precede any conclusions.
But apparently they do not need one. In my opinion,
it should be completely clear to everyone that that
the capitals that these representatives represent in the
Council have absolutely no interest in any investigation.
They do not need facts or precise evidence. They need
to see a political order carried out.

On 23 January, Russia announced the launch in the
Security Council of expert efforts to draft a resolution
establishing a new investigative entity for incidents
involving the use of chemical weapons to replace the
defunct OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, which was killed by the United States
and its allies when they blocked the draft resolution
(S/2017/968) that we proposed, together with China and
Bolivia, designed to ensure that the Mechanism could
be genuinely independent and professional. Not only do
they not recall that episode, they have made strenuous
attempts to convince the Security Council and the world
community of the opposite. It has become clear that
some of our partners are not prepared to consider this
possibility. They want a second JIM. that would continue
to rubber-stamp the scientifically and technically
ridiculous anti-Damascus conclusions on the basis of
disinformation generously supplied by militant groups.
They have long had a persistent allergy to the pressing
need to pay close attention to the activities of terrorist
groups, both in Syria and beyond its borders, in the
context of manipulating toxic substances.

In the realization that we will not allow the
now entirely discredited JIM. to be revived, Syria's
opponents are now attempting to take alternative
routes, cobbling together narrow groups of like-minded
people. However, they are forgetting that in doing that
they are undermining the authority of international
bodies, particularly the United Nations and the OPCW,
and destroying the international architecture on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Any
initiatives in the context of the use of chemical weapons
that circumvent the OPCW would be illegitimate. We
certainly hope that the leadership of the United Nations
Secretariat and the OPCW Technical Secretariat will
make a firm show of will and distance themselves from
such dubious projects.

We are ready to accept a press statement on the
Syrian chemical issue, but not the one proposed by
its sponsors, because in its current form its purpose
is quite clearly to blame the Government of Syria for
what is so far the unproved use of chemical weapons.
Somehow the draft statement does not say anything
about the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, but
the reference to Article 7 of the Charter of the United
Nations leaves no doubt as to its essence. We cannot
accept any still unconfirmed references to the use of
chemical weapons without a credible investigation,
nor can we accept any threats to a sovereign State for
unproved actions. For some reason, eastern Ghouta
has been dragged into the statement. I would like to
remind the Council that last week we were prepared
to accept an agreed-on draft presidential statement on
the humanitarian situation in Syria. But our partners
preferred to reject it. We are ready to accept a press
statement, but not as it is proposed by our colleagues.
We have proposed amendments to it that we are ready
to circulate and agree on in that form.

