Mr. Cooney (Ireland): First of all I'd like to say
what a pleasure it was to have the Secretary-General
here with us on what is clearly his day. Secondly, to
thank you for your dynamic and courteous leadership
of the Council during this month and for the very
effective work of your team. We welcome today's
wrap-up discussion. We think this is a useful initiative,
not necessarily for the end of every month, but
periodically it does do us well to reflect on our work,
and in that spirit I would just like to pick up a couple
of highlights of the month, which I feel have particular
implications for the work of the Council.

The first was the mission to Kosovo, which was
clearly a considerable success and, I think, underlined
the usefulness of these Security Council missions.
Preparation of these missions is particularly important,
and I was privileged enough to participate in the
preparation of the visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Great Lakes Mission, at Pocantico, and
I certainly feel that there is a role for Pocantico-style
meetings. As I've said before, they don't have to take
place outside Headquarters, but if this kind of meeting
involving the Secretary-General and a wider range of
people in a kind of private environment could take
place more often, I think it would make a significant
contribution.

On conflict resolution, I think the Secretary-
General's report offered a challenge to the entire
United Nations system and the Member States and we
look forward to the General Assembly debate and to
discussing the draft resolution prepared by Bangladesh.
This brings home, I think, the importance of following
up on the discussions in the Security Council, and
indeed of monitoring the follow-up.

On the resolution on the relations with troop
contributors, I think this was a very good initiative, a
very good piece of work by the working group, very
ably chaired by Ambassador Ward, but we do feel we
can go further. We are looking forward to discussing
the proposal put forward by the six troop-contributing
countries. Again, the lesson we would draw here is
how important it is to reinforce the sense of
involvement of troop contributors in the decision-
making on peacekeeping operations.

On the Great Lakes and Burundi, we are coming
up to interesting times here because we are working
now to develop a relationship between the Security
Council and regional organizations and initiatives. It is
clear that, while that Security Council is keen to
encourage and support these initiatives, it does not
want to be seen to impose solutions. The problem we
face as a result is that if and when things go wrong, the
Security Council or the United Nations is going to a
certain extent be blamed and will be invited to pick up
the pieces. So it will be useful in our discussions over
the next month in this area to reflect on this
relationship and how it can evolve.

Finally, on Western Sahara, we adopted a
resolution this morning that clearly offers a change of
tack in the policy to date, and it may be that the next
time the Secretary-General reports to us we might want
to reflect on whether to have an open discussion on the
Western Sahara. In terms of procedure, I would pick up
on the point that was raised by Singapore. We feel that
the Group of Friends is a very valuable instrument in
terms of bringing in the views of Members of the
Organization who are not members of the Security
Council, but we do feel, as I have said before, that
these views should be shared, and the work should take
place with all 15 members of the Council so that we all
come to the resolution with the same sense of
ownership and same sense of having an input into the
resolution.

