Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I too wish to
welcome Mr. Carlsson and thank him and the other
members of the Independent Inquiry for the clear-sighted,
courageous and informative report he submitted to us.

Let me recall that in this context the Organization of
African Unity has also established an International Panel
of Eminent Persons to analyse the Rwandan genocide and
related events. Mali is proud to participate in that work
through General Amadou Toumani Toure, former head of
State of Mali.

The main conclusion we can draw from the analysis
of the report of the Independent Inquiry into the actions
of the United Nations during the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda is that the Organization and its Member States
were not able to prevent or to halt the genocide in
Rwanda. This conclusion is based on what the report
deems to be an absence of capacity for analysis, which is
the reason for the excessive and incomprehensible caution
shown in the face of information regarding preparations
for genocide. It also condemns the lack of political will
to halt the genocide, which was partly the result of
resolution 912 (1994) of 21 April 1994, which reduced
the force level of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda, and partly of the weakening of the mandate
of that Mission.

These considerations were discussed at length in
Mr. Carlsson's briefing today, and I will not repeat them.
I would like to point out, however, that in addition to
pointing out the failings of the Organization and its
Member States, the report draws lessons from the tragedy
of Rwanda and contains many proposals and
recommendations. Today's meeting gives us a useful
opportunity to engage in public and constructive reflection
so that we can formulate guidelines to enable the United
Nations to respond effectively to various types of conflict.

I should like in this respect to make a few brief
comments.

My first comment relates to the capacity of the
United Nations in the area of peacekeeping, in particular
regarding the mobilization of resources, the strengthening

 

of the means of the Secretariat in the area of operations
planning, logistical support to the contingents of developing
countries, the definition of mandates and of rules of
engagement, coordination and cooperation between
peacekeeping operations and the non-govemmental
organizations that are active in the area of operations, and,
finally, cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.

We support the recommendations contained in the
report, which were mentioned earlier by Mr. Carlsson.

My second comment relates to the decision-making
process in the Council, in this case the question of the
indispensable political will in the Council to give effect to
resolutions and the fairness it must show in dealing with
issues concerning Africa in particular compared to other
conflict areas. Indeed, the political will to act, and in
particular to prevent acts of genocide, such as in the case
of Rwanda, or massive violations of human rights, such as
in Sierra Leone or the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
should be clear and should not be subject to double
standards. Attempts to advance national interests at the
expense of international peace and security should cease.

My third comment relates to the system for gathering
and dealing with information in crisis situations. It is
imperative, we think, that the early warning capacity of the
United Nations be enhanced, particularly its capacity to
analyse information and react effectively to it. While we
welcome the measures already taken at various levels of the
Secretariat, we still must enhance the circulation of
information among the United Nations agencies, in
particular information relating to human rights.

Fourthly, with respect to efforts to rebuild society in
Rwanda after the genocide, we believe that the international
community must continue to give aid and assistance to
Rwanda, devoting particular attention to efforts aimed at
reconstruction and at bringing about reconciliation and
respect for human rights, in order to realize the hopes that
have begun to emerge.

Fifthly and lastly, with respect to the relationship
between the Organization and Rwanda, we believe that the
Organization should acknowledge its share of responsibility
in the tragedy in Rwanda, and we welcome the resolve of
the Secretary-General actively to seek a new beginning in
the relationship between the United Nations and Rwanda.

