Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like first to join my
colleagues in expressing our appreciation to
Ambassador Shen Guofang for his work on the Council
and to wish him well in his new assignment. We look
forward to seeing him again.

Secondly, on behalf of my delegation, I would
like very warmly to thank Mauritius for what we
thought was an outstanding presidency this month with
regard to the substance of the issues we addressed, the
clarity of focus that the presidency brought and the
way in which we addressed important issues, such as
the meetings on counter-terrorism and on Africa. For
all of those reasons, we thought that this was a
presidency of real achievement. We also appreciated
the courtesy and openness of the presidency and
everyone on the Mauritian team to other members of
the Council, as well as the wider membership.
With regard to the wrap-up, my delegation has
always taken the view that these discussions are very
useful exercises. They are important on their own
merits because they provide a chance once a month to
stand back and look at the wider picture. They are
important because of the engagement of the Council
with the wider United Nations membership. There is
one caveat; as you, Mr. President, pointed out, each
month the presidency, of course, sets the background to
many issues through the manner in which it approaches
the agenda, and so it is important in looking at the
wrap-up exercise also to bear in mind how we
approach the issue of continuity - the complexity of
issues. For that reason, my delegation would support -
and we have been discussing this in the Council in
recent weeks - a more interactive approach to the
wrap-up debate, with involvement of the wider United
Nations membership and a strong thematic focus in
terms of the issues that we address. But the wrap-up
opportunity is important, and we think it should be
built on.

In terms of the past month, I would like to make
two or three broad points. Ireland welcomed the policy
of openness which the presidency brought this month
to our work. We had very useful public meetings on
Kosovo, terrorism, East Timor and, of course, Africa.
Openness and transparency serve a dual purpose. On
the one hand, transparency is important for its own
sake and for a level of engagement with the wider
United Nations membership. But, from the point of
View of the Council, there is also the important point
that it is a listening opportunity, and many of the points
made are in turn integrated into our own work. A
balance must always be struck - as Ambassador
Strommen said - between what Walter Bagehot would
have called the efficient and the dignified elements of
how structures work. The efficient element is, of
course, the need for workability, coherence and
coordination, while at the same time showing openness
to the views of the wider membership, as well as the
United Nations family of institutions, in terms of the
insights that they bring to the different issues and to the
agenda of the Council.

On the substantive issues before us this month,
my delegation regarded two in particular as being of
great importance. We found the open debate on the
situation in Africa to be enormously valuable, partly
because of the strong level of representation by
ministers from Africa and elsewhere, partly because of
the quality of the contributions to the debate and partly
because this is a moment of transition in Africa and
one of real hope, as a result of the transition of the
Organization of African Unity to the African Union
and the New Partnership for Africa's Development.
Other contributing factors were the Council's own
work in the area of addressing issues of conflict and
conflict resolution and the OAU's increasing
engagement in Africa in these areas.

All of this meant that the debate was marked by a
real sense of new beginnings. One important issue that
did come out - Minister O'Donnell from Ireland also
emphasized this point - was the interlinkage between
conflict prevention and development cooperation
issues. Development funds, the issue of debt, the issue
of trade opening for African countries - it is not
possible, in our view, to address one set of issues
without the other. This was a point that came very
strongly across in the contributions made in the debate
and, indeed, it is reflected strongly in the presidential
statement that we just adopted and which we very
much welcome.

Two other issues that did come up in the debate
were the importance of coherence in terms of the
United Nations role in the wider international
community and how issues are addressed in relation to
conflict prevention and development. My delegation
has consistently argued that there is a need for a closer
working relationship with, in particular, the Economic
and Social Council. We therefore welcome the
reference in the presidential statement to the
consideration that will be given to setting up an ad hoc
working group. We think this is important because the
Economic and Social Council, in its own Charter
domain, has a strong role in areas of development and
coordination. The Council, as it addresses issues of
conflict, peace and security, needs to have an
interlocutor with which we can mutually consider the
differing roles in these areas. So we think that was
important.

The other issue that we found very helpful this
month in terms of the agenda was, of course, the debate
on counter-terrorism. It was an important debate partly
because of the importance of having a genuinely
interactive dialogue between the Council and the wider
United Nations membership on where we are now in
terms of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The way
the presidency structured the debate by alternating
members of the Council with others we found to be
especially useful.

On this, I would also - as other speakers have
done - wish to pay tribute to Ambassador Greenstock
for the way he has approached the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee through the briefings of Member
States and others. This has created a very broad
understanding, which was reflected in the debate on the
way ahead in terms of the operation of the Committee.

Finally, other issues of importance during the
month were, of course, the emphasis on African issues
generally in terms of particular situations, such as those
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea-
Bissau and so on. We also welcomed the opportunity to
have the open debate on East Timor and the briefings
on Afghanistan. We especially welcomed yesterday's
consultations on the Middle East and look forward to
seeing that continued. We also welcomed the number
of meetings with the troop contributors, which you, Sir,
mentioned in your opening remarks, and the agreement
on the new mechanism for consultation to be chaired
by Ambassador Strommen, which we regard as
important.

In conclusion, both in terms of the presidency's
programme of work and how it was handled and of the
openness to differing views and to the wider
membership, we thought this was a month of very real
achievement and very much appreciated it.

