Mr. Christiane (spoke in French): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate country Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

Due to the trauma and suffering caused by
conflicts around the world, since the first day of
his mandate, the Secretary-General has called for
greater diplomatic efforts to put an end to crises. This
year, he also reminded us that prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding are and will remain
top priorities for the entire United Nations system.
In response to that call, we have focused our efforts
on the critical importance of conflict prevention
during several high-level meetings, such as the high-
level debate on peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
as well as the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit. In the
political declaration that we unanimously adopted on
that occasion (General Assembly resolution 73/1), we
expressed our full support for the work of the United
Nations and said that we would make every possible
effort to support peace processes, conflict prevention
and resolution, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction and development. We also commended
the establishment of the High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation and intend to support its future contributions
to the maintenance of international peace and security
and the prevention of armed conflict, in particular by
exercising its good offices.

Achieving peace and conflict prevention and the
promotion and protection of human rights are priorities
for the European Union. Those principles are at the
heart of multilateralism. In that context, I would like
to focus on the first guiding question in the concept
note prepared by the Council presidency (S/2018/1064, annex), which looks at how the United Nations,
States and subregional and regional organizations
can strengthen their cooperation on the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts in practice.

The strategic vision of the European Union is to
support the multilateral system and join forces with
our partners through international cooperation. The
European Union and the United Nations have a long
history of cooperation in the area of conflict prevention,
including through support for mediation. We have
initiated a dialogue on conflict prevention, focusing
on both thematic and geographical issues. We have
also engaged in similar dialogues with other partners,
including the African Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. In October,
the United Nations Mediation Support Unit and the
European Union Mediation Support Team jointly
organized an informal seminar on mediation support
structures in international organizations. That allowed
us to take stock, exchange experiences and discuss the
possibilities for joint missions.

We continue to assess the complementarity of
our actions with a view to improving their impact on
the ground. Those priorities are within the broader
context of the partnership between the European Union
and the United Nations, within which we continue to
promote the rules-based international order as the most
effective means of strengthening conflict prevention
and resolution. As part of our strategic cooperation, the
twenty-fourth meeting of the United Nations-European
Union Steering Committee on Crisis Management
concluded last week, having identified eight priority
areas for action over the coming three years. Those
priorities are aligned with United Nations reform
efforts, in particular the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. The pre-eminence of politics is the common
theme of our partnership, with conflict prevention as a
guiding principle. In that regard, strengthening the use
of preventive instruments in peace operations, such as
mediation, early-warning systems, consistent political
messages and strategic communication are high on
the agenda. In all those priority areas, respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, international
humanitarian law and the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda remain essential.

Despite all those efforts, there is room to improve
efficiency. We have all nurtured strong relationships
with international and regional organizations, such
as the African Union. Partnerships are a catalyst for
achieving our common goals. Therefore, at the trilateral
meeting between the African Union, the European
Union and the United Nations, our leaders decided
to increase and broaden trilateral cooperation at the
political, economic and operational levels in the area
of peace and security, including conflict prevention
and mediation; on implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union's
Agenda 2063; as well as with a view to ensuring
inclusive and sustainable growth, the promotion of
human rights and the fight against climate change.

Together, we will seek to translate our common
priorities into concrete actions by strengthening
our cooperation and making it more operational, as
recommended at the joint meeting between the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union and the
Political and Security Committee of the Council of
the European Union in October. Over the past year,
the Security Council has adopted mandates calling for
joint assessments of climate security risks, particularly
in Africa. Similarly, both the African Union and the
European Union have confirmed the link between
climate and security. By working together across
regional and international organizations to analyse and
assess risks, we can ensure that we are using the same
benchmarks.

Instability is no longer the result of open conflict
alone, but increasingly of the unmet political and
economic expectations of a young and growing
population, compounded by challenges such as violent
extremism and organized crime. We must continue
to focus on empowering women and young people
and bolstering social cohesion, while responding to
precarious situations. We must also focus more on
strengthening the link between peacebuilding and the
participation of local populations, particularly through
civil society organizations on the ground. Our action
must adapt to that new reality and take into account the
complex dynamics of conflict by adopting an integrated
approach that applies to all phases of the conflict cycle.

Beyond our peacebuilding aspirations, we must
also aim to make peace sustainable, particularly in the
pursuit of our 2030 Agenda commitments. Inclusive
economic development and building resilience are
at the heart of prevention. Our cooperation with the
United Nations and the World Bank on joint recovery
and peacebuilding assessments in a number of post-
conflict countries is a promising development in that
regard.

The European Consensus on Development, in line
with the 2030 Agenda, considers peace as one of the
main priorities. The European Union-United Nations
joint communique issued in September emphasizes
strengthening the link between humanitarian assistance
and development and its relationship with sustaining
peace. Joint efforts by the European Union and the
United Nations must address the root causes of conflict
and promote economic and social stability.

The new momentum for United Nations reform
seeks to ensure better coordination between the
pillars of peace and security, development and human
rights. In that context, we attach great importance
to the implementation of the Secretary-General's
recommendations on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. We also stress the need to make maximum use
of the unifying role of the Peacebuilding Commission,
as well as its advisory role to the Security Council.

The Charter of the United Nations encourages
us to take effective collective action and to pursue
international cooperation to strengthen universal peace.
To that end and for the benefit of present and future
generations, we would like to once again stress the need
to work towards establishing new partnerships in an
effective and coherent way and in close collaboration
with key international and regional partners.

