The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Nigeria.

First, let me lend my voice to those who have
expressed their appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his very lucid briefing. I believe that the Secretary-
General captured the very essence of our deliberations
today.

We know that the contemporary challenges to global
security are increasing, both in complexity and severity.
Threats - such as extremist ideologies, terrorism, the
illicit transfer and proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, humanitarian disasters, human trafficking,
environmental hazards, drug trafficking, the criminal
use of cybertechnology and global pandemics * are
critical factors that have profoundly shaped international
security in contemporary times. Today's global security
challenges have assumed a transnational character and
are often beyond the capacity of any one country to
resolve. That is why we need collective cooperation
and collective action. While the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security

resides with the Security Council, regional actors share
and lighten the burden of the Council and provide an
added layer of legitimacy to multilateralism. Regional
efforts enhance the prospects for inclusiveness and
consensus in addressing the challenges to global peace
and security.

The drafters of the Charter of the UnitedNations were
very perceptive in envisioning a world where the United
Nations and regional organizations would work together
to prevent, manage and resolve crises. Over the years,
multiple instances of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations - particularly in the
areas of peacekeeping and conflict prevention - have
yielded significant dividends. We believe that those
gains hold a lot more promise for the future. In today's
world, international security has assumed a distinct
regional and institutionalized character. That has been
manifested in the advocacy for the greater recourse to
Chapter VIII of the Charter, to which a number of my
colleagues have referred - to create a decentralized
United Nations-led system of global security
management.

Over the years, it has become evident that regional
organizations are often the first responders to conflict
situations. That point resonates more poignantly
in Africa, where subregional organizations have
consistently demonstrated remarkable commitment to
regional peace and security by deploying peacekeepers
to theatres of conflict. Several of the speakers who
spoke before me this morning acknowledged that
regional and subregional organizations have a deeper
understanding of the sensitivities and sensibilities of
the actors in conflict situations, the values and norms
of their societies and the dynamics, as well as the
root causes, of local conflicts. Those ingredients are
crucial for fashioning a mediation strategy that parties
to a conflict could more easily recognize and agree to
implement.

In West Africa, for example, the Economic
Community of West African States has made
landmark achievements in the maintenance of peace
and security - particularly in addressing conflicts
in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau, among
other places. That underscores the success of that
organization's framework for conflict management.

There are other instances where regional
organizations have relentlessly demonstrated their
capacity to act in the interest of regional peace
and security. The Intergovernmental Authority on
Development in East Africa has been unwavering
in its conflict resolution efforts, especially in South
Sudan. The East African Community is playing an
active and constructive role in Burundi. The Economic
Community of Central African States has made
significant contributions to stabilizing the situation in
the Central African Republic. The Mano River Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union (AU) have demonstrated remarkable
leadership in the fight - as we heard last week (see S/PV.7502) - against the recent Ebola virus disease
outbreak in West Africa.

The establishment of the multinational joint task
force by the Lake Chad Basin countries and the Republic
of Benin - with the aim of fighting the Boko Haram
terrorist group - bears eloquent testimony to the
possibilities that exist for regional arrangements - not
only to seize the bull by the horns, but especially to
advance the cause of peace and security. The successes
achieved by the Task Force thus far validate the regional
approach to dealing with the threat of terrorism.

Today, it is evident that the regionalization of global
security is rapidly gaining remarkable momentum. In
our view, it transcends a first response to crisis situations
and an understanding of the people, the environment
and the nuances of the conflict. Indeed, it is about all of
those and more. Regional organizations - considering
the contiguity of their component States - are vital
stakeholders in the success - or otherwise - of peace
efforts within their spheres of influence.

In our times, regional States bear the burden
of the first displacements. They bear the burden of
food insecurity, the recruitment of child soldiers, the
sexual exploitation of women and children and other
consequences of violent conflicts. While at a national
level those States may have limitations - in terms
of their capacities and resources to address those
challenges-theirmembershipinregionalorganizations
has allowed them to act in concert with other States in
order to mitigate the effects of those challenges.

It is important that, while we highlight the role
of regional organizations in meeting contemporary
challenges of global security, we should not overlook
the contributions of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). I think that a number of my colleagues have
mentioned that issue this morning, and it is worth
repeating. The advocacy of NGOs - in terms of peace
of security - especially in Africa, is well documented.
Non-governmental organizations have made, and
continue to make, direct interventions in humanitarian
crises and other emergencies. They assist in the
mobilization of resources to address issues linked to
conflicts. The contributions of the independent
humanitarian aid group Medecins sans frontieres were
crucial in containing and eventually rolling back the
recent Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa. A11
of that demonstrates the importance of NGOs in the
emerging architecture, not only in Africa but also in
other areas of conflict in the world. It would therefore
be beneficial for the continent if African regional
and subregional organizations incorporated NGOs as
significant and vital partners in meeting contemporary
security challenges and strengthened their cooperation
with them accordingly.

A critical important dimension of the role of
regional organizations in meeting global security
challenges is the way and manner in which they
cooperate with the United Nations. African regional
and subregional organizations have worked together
with the United Nations in the maintenance of peace
and security in several parts of the continent, as we
heard this morning. There are several examples of the
potential for cooperation between the United Nations
and African regional organizations. The United
Nations and the then Organization of African Unity
(OAU) cooperated in the deployment of peacekeepers
in Ethiopia and Eritrea after the OAU had mediated
an accord, which the United Nations was requested to
implement. In Ethiopia and Eritrea, as in Western Sahara
and Rwanda, the OAU was the principal early mediator.
The United Nations itself complemented that mediation
by deploying peacekeepers on the ground. Within
the framework of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the AU and the United
Nations are working together to stabilize the situation in
Darfur. The United Nations is also making substantial
contributions to the African Union Mission in Somalia.
All those joint actions and all those concerted actions
and their positive outcomes demonstrate the value of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

It is also essential to ensure that the comparative
advantages of each region be thoroughly harnessed
and mobilized in the pursuit of peace. In that regard,
the triangular cooperation to which my colleagues
have referred among the AU, the United Nations and
the European Union (EU) is exemplified by the United
Nations-EU joint programme of support to the AU on
security sector reform. That is an example of the vibrant
interregional cooperation that has yielded tangible
results and has the potential to yield even more.

In the face of the increasing gap between the
demand for the involvement of the United Nations in
conflict situations, on the one hand, and the ability
of the United Nations to respond effectively, on the
other hand, regional organizations become even more
compelling as enablers of peace. That is why we
believe that greater consideration should be accorded
to expanding and enhancing regional approaches to the
pursuit of international peace and security. Regional
approaches, in essence, represent a critical bridge
between the international and global dimensions of
conflict. It is a bridge that we must continue to build,
no matter how challenging that will appear at times. I
believe that today's debate is not only a call to greater
action, it is an urgent demand to accelerate regional and
international cooperation in a world that is ravaged by
conflict, by humanitarian crisis and by disease.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Iwish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to conduct its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I would also like to
appeal to speakers to deliver their statements at a very
reasonable speed so that accurate interpretation may be
provided.

I give the floor to the representative of India.

