The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for her twenty-third report and her briefing
to the Council.

As has been noted, it has been 11 years since the
Security Council adopted resolution 1593 (2005).
That decision had the clear objective to prevent new
atrocities by fighting impunity and thereby promoting
the reconciliation and stability that are prerequisites of
development. The goal of fighting impunity remains
not only fully valid today, but fully necessary.

As emphasized by the Prosecutor's report, the
situation in Darfur remains marked by ongoing
violence. The aerial bombing by the Government of
the Sudan has intensified since the beginning of the
year, indiscriminately and disproportionately affecting
civilian populations. These ongoing attacks on
civilians remain intolerable, as are violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Women
remain the targets of completely unacceptable sexual
violence. Assaults and harassment against the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and humanitarian actors, as well as the
obstacles that are placed on their movements, prevent
these organizations to carry out their mission to protect
civilians and assist the most vulnerable populations.

In this context, more than ever, justice must be
handed down and responsibilities identified so as to
prevent and deter such acts. Impunity for past crimes
and its implications for possible future crimes are
unacceptable. We therefore regret that the arrest
warrants issued by the International Criminal Court
remain unenforced. This refusal to investigate and
prosecute perpetrators can only feed the future cycle
of violence in Darfur. And yet, the Council and the
international community know the right direction and
decisions to take in order to allow Darfur to regain
peace and stability.

First, there can be no military solution to this
conflict. The settlement of the conflict in Darfur is
political by nature, and must involve the Government
and rebel groups. We regret in this regard the lack of
real progress towards establishing an inclusive process
to work for lasting peace. The African Union Peace
and Security Council has called for a comprehensive
political solution, including in its regional aspects. The
path to this goal begins with the cessation of hostilities
by all parties. France supports the efforts of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel to advance in
this direction.

Secondly, the protection of civilians must be
fully ensured. The continuing violence and insecurity
prevent any prospect for long-term stabilization and
reconstruction. We regret that UNAMID remains
subject to access restrictions and supply and operation
blockages. It is essential that the Sudanese authorities
fully cooperate to allow UNAMID to fulfil its mandate,
in accordance with decisions of the Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council .

Thirdly, unimpeded humanitarian access to civilian
populations and the displaced must be facilitated and
guaranteed. The needs of over 2.6 million displaced
are enormous. Humanitarian actors must be able to
respond. The expulsion of the head of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is of concern in
that regard.

Fourthly and lastly, it remains essential that the
perpetrators of the crimes be prosecuted and that
justice be done. I recall the importance ofthe obligation
of all United Nations Member States to cooperate,
in accordance with the resolutions adopted by the
Council, without which the prosecution of the most
serious crimes by the ICC will remain dead letter. This
obligation rests primarily with the Sudan, which must
execute the arrest warrants issued against its nationals
for offences committed on its territory and cooperate
with the Court, as required by resolution 1593 (2005).
State parties to the Rome Statute also have a key
role to play in terms of their statutory obligation to
cooperate with the ICC and execute arrest warrants
against persons within their territory. In that regard, we
regret the fact that this requirement has not been met
by some States in recent months. We are grateful to
the Office of the Prosecutor for monitoring this major
issue. In that context, the Council's responsibility is
clear and twofold.

On the one hand, the Council must make
cooperation with the Court effective and ensure
that arrest warrants are carried out. As emphasized
by the Prosecutor, it is up to the Council to respond
to instances of non-cooperation with the Court. In
that regard, we are a ready to consider modalities
for action by the Council. It is also essential that the
Assembly of State Parties remain engaged on cases of
non-cooperation with the ICC, as well as international
organizations. In that connection, it is appropriate to
continue limiting contacts with persons subject to an
arrest warrant of the Court to those deemed essential
in line with the Secretary-General's policy. France
recalls the importance of the United Nations as a whole
continuing to implement those guidelines and apply the
relevant provisions of resolution 1593 (2005).

On the other hand, the Council must pursue efforts
for an end to violence against civilians, as well as the
search for an inclusive political solution. That is the only
way to achieve long-term peace and stability in Darfur.
To do that end, UNAMID has a significant role to play
and should be able to fulfil its mandate. It is essential
that free and unrestricted access be guaranteed to the
mission throughout the entire territory of Darfur. That
will be a point to which we pay particular attention
during the next renewal of the mandate of UNAMID.

I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

