Mr. Garcia Belaunde (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to congratulate and thank you,
President Juan Manuel Santos Calderon, as well as the
Government of Colombia, for this important initiative
of convening an open debate of the Security Council to
address the situation in our sister republic of Haiti. I
also wish to avail myself of this opportunity to thank
President Preval for his presence here today and
congratulate him on an electoral process conducted
with seriousness and transparency.

Peru attaches particular importance and attention
to the process of stabilization and reconstruction being
conducted by the Haitian Government with the support
of the United Nations and other institutions of the
international community. In that regard, Peru is
contributing a contingent of over 300 troops to the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), including officers to the Mission's
military command. We have also expressed our
intention to deploy a female contingent to that effort,
which we are confident will contribute to combating a
scourge currently affecting Haiti, namely, violence
against women and children.

In addition to its presence on the ground, Peru
participates constructively in the Group of Friends of
Haiti, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the
Economic and Social Council, the Group of Friends of
Haiti of the Organization of American States and the
Latin American Political Coordination Mechanism for
Haiti, known as the 2x9 Mechanism.

The devastating earthquake that struck Haiti on
12 January 2010 reconfigured the setting and context
in which the international community's efforts were
deployed to stabilize Haiti. We face the challenge of
implementing a strategy that will, under the leadership
of the Haitian Government, effectively address the
problems of security and development that the country
faces today. More than a year after the earthquake, the
challenge remains. To overcome it, it is necessary to
reaffirm the principle of national ownership. Peru
therefore reiterates that at all times it should be the
Haitian Government itself that leads the process of
reconstruction and consolidation of its institutions, in
accordance with the strategy and priorities established
in the consensus national action plan for recovery and
development in Haiti, including the various sectors of
Haitian society, intergovernmental consultation and the
support of the international community.

The countries of South America are firmly
committed to the process of Haiti's reconstruction and
recovery. During the special summit of the Union of
South American Nations on the situation of Haiti, held
in the city of Quito in February 2010 under the
initiative of Peruvian President Alan Garcia Pe'rez, it
was agreed to establish a special fund for Haiti of $100
million, which included contributions from the
countries of the region. To date, 65 per cent of that
amount has already been disbursed, of which Peru,
which pledged $10 million, has already disbursed more
than $4.5 million, nearly half of its pledge. The current
situation in Haiti compels us to spare no effort in
continuing to provide robust support to the Haitian
people as they face the challenges that lie ahead.

In that context, it is imperative to further improve
coordination between the various agencies operating on
the ground, be they national, regional or part of the
United Nations, and the Haitian Government. Equally
important and, in our opinion, essential is the
development of linkages with the country's local
Governments so as to ensure the efficient use of
resources and avoid duplication of efforts. International
financial assistance must be channelled with maximum
efficiency and coordination, in accordance with the
national priorities established by the Haitian
Government and the principles of national ownership,
inclusiveness, the rule of law, social well-being and, of
course, respect for human rights.
Peru commends the Government of Haiti for its
efforts to achieve political stability and economic
recovery. That task should be continued, hand in hand
with the international community, by the new,
democratically elected Government, which will soon to
take over.

I reiterate that the Haitian people need ongoing
support to build and strengthen solid national
institutions so as to effectively establish the rule of
law, close the gaps in weak institutional capacities, and
remedy the country's shortage of human and material
resources. In that regard, I believe that it is important
to highlight three areas that have a direct impact on the
current reconstruction and recovery process in Haiti.
Those are governance, security and development.

Peru believes that it is important to maintain the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti so that it
can continue its work with a focus on reconstruction
and development, taking into account the
interdependence between those tasks and security
activities. My country therefore believes that, as the
Security Council considers the renewal of
MINUSTAH'S mandate, it should consider not only the
national priorities established in the action plan for
national recovery and development, but also those set
forth in the new United Nations integrated strategic
framework for Haiti.

With that goal in mind, Peru attended a meeting
of Ministers of Defence and Foreign Affairs of South
American countries with troops in Haiti, held in
Montevideo in March. At that meeting, an agreement
was reached to assemble a special assessment mission
to Haiti in order to evaluate the position and
requirements of the new Haitian Government in
relation to MINUSTAH, and subsequently make
proposals for the renewal of the Mission's mandate in
October.

We are facing a complex and difficult situation
that compels us to continue supporting Haiti so as to
consolidate peace and security and ensure the stable
reconstruction of the country. In that regard, all actors,
public and private alike, must be included in the
process by means of a strategic alliance. With a view to
carrying out those tasks, I wish to emphatically
reaffirm that Peru will continue to provide strong,
committed and unwavering support to the Government
and people of Haiti.
