The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council recalls its
presidential statement of 3 August 2011 and its
press statement of 1 March 2012.

"The Security Council expresses its gravest
concern at the deteriorating situation in Syria,
which has resulted in a serious human rights
crisis and a deplorable humanitarian situation.
The Security Council expresses its profound
regret at the death of many thousands of people in
Syria.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria, and to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter.

"The Security Council welcomes the
appointment of the Joint Special Envoy for the
United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Kofi Annan, following General Assembly
resolution 66/253 of 16 February 2012 and
relevant resolutions of the League of Arab States.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the efforts of the Envoy to bring an
immediate end to all violence and human rights
violations, secure humanitarian access, and
facilitate a Syrian-led political transition to a
democratic, plural political system, in which
citizens are equal regardless of their affiliations
or ethnicities or beliefs, including through
commencing a comprehensive political dialogue
between the Syrian Government and the whole
spectrum of the Syrian opposition.

"To this aim, the Security Council fully
supports the initial six-point proposal submitted
to the Syrian authorities, as outlined by the
2

Envoy to the Security Council on 16 March 2012,
to:

"(l) commit to work with the Envoy in an
inclusive Syrian-led political process to address
the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the
Syrian people, and, to this end, commit to appoint
an empowered interlocutor when invited to do so
by the Envoy;

"(2) commit to stop the fighting and
achieve urgently an effective United Nations
supervised cessation of armed violence in all its
forms by all parties to protect civilians and
stabilize the country. To this end, the Syrian
Government should immediately cease troop
movements towards, and end the use of heavy
weapons in, population centres, and begin
pullback of military concentrations in and around
population centres. As these actions are being
taken on the ground, the Syrian Government
should work with the Envoy to bring about a
sustained cessation of armed violence in all its
forms by all parties with an effective United
Nations supervision mechanism. Similar
commitments would be sought by the Envoy from
the opposition and all relevant elements to stop
the fighting and work with him to bring about a
sustained cessation of armed violence in all its
forms by all parties with an effective United
Nations supervision mechanism;

"(3) ensure timely provision of
humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by
the fighting, and to this end, as immediate steps,
to accept and implement a daily two-hour
humanitarian pause and to coordinate exact time
and modalities of the daily pause through an
efficient mechanism, including at local level.

"(4) intensify the pace and scale of release
of arbitrarily detained persons, including
especially vulnerable categories of persons, and
persons involved in peaceful political activities,
provide Without delay through appropriate
channels a list of all places in which such persons
are being detained, immediately begin organizing
access to such locations and through appropriate
channels respond promptly to all written requests
for information, access or release regarding such
persons;
12-27000
"(5) ensure freedom of movement
throughout the country for journalists and a
non-discriminatory visa policy for them;

"(6) respect freedom of association and the
right to demonstrate peacefully as legally
guaranteed.

"The Security Council calls upon the Syrian
government and opposition to work in good faith
with the Envoy towards a peaceful settlement of
the Syrian crisis and to implement fully and
immediately his initial six-point proposal. The
12-27000
Security Council requests the Envoy to update the
Council regularly and in a timely manner on the
progress of his mission. In the light of these
reports, the Security Council will consider further
steps as appropriate."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.10 am.
