Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): As this is the first
time that I am speaking before the Security Council
this year, I would like to congratulate your country,
Mr. President, on its election as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council and I wish you a
successful chairmanship in the month of February. I
would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this open
debate, and I also thank Mr. Martin for his briefing.

Improving and streamlining the ways in which
the Security Council conducts its work is important
for the effective and efficient work of the Council
in maintaining international peace and security, as
well as for the implementation of its decisions by the
wider membership.

The year 2016 marked the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the first note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/507) on the working methods
of the Council, after intensive work by the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. My delegation had an
opportunity to be a part of that important effort, and
subsequently to chair the Informal Working Group in
2007, following the able leadership of Japan. In fact,
Slovakia was the first Member State appointed to
chair the Informal Working Group for a full year. Our
chairmanship aimed to ensure broader implementation
of the first note. We are happy to observe that since
then two subsequent versions of the note, notably in
2010 and 2017, were elaborated, also under the Japanese
chairmanship. Presidential note S/2017/507, adopted in
August last year, now addresses nearly all aspects of
Council practice.

I would like to acknowledge the ongoing efforts of
the Security Council to improve its working methods
and commend to the work of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. It is important to continue to strengthen
efforts to fully implement the existing measures and
commitments set out in the updated note and other
relevant documents. At the same time, the pursuit for
more transparency, inclusiveness, representation and
accountability of the Security Council must remain a
continuous and consistent process. While recognizing
achievements and being mindful of existing challenges,
my country is of the view that more attention could be
given to the following areas in future.

First, efforts aimed at enhancing the openness of
the work of the Security Council, including the work
of its subsidiary bodies, should continue. Interaction
and dialogue between the Security Council and other
Member States, in particular those directly concerned
and affected, should be further enhanced and expanded.

Secondly, the substantive engagement of the
Council with the troop- and police-contributing
countries should be further improved to strengthen
the basis for decision-making in the Council as well
as the incentive for the general membership to support
peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, we believe that further development
of more active and meaningful relationships and
interactions with the Peacebuilding Commission and
its configurations and the Human Rights Council,
where appropriate, could increase the effectiveness of
Security Council response to conflict and strengthen
its role in conflict prevention and sustaining peace.

Fourthly, there must be further consideration of
ways to improve the work of the subsidiary organs
of the Security Council - which are crucial for the
implementation of Council decisions - as well as
inter-committee coordination. That is especially relevant
to the working methods of sanctions committees, given
the impact and scope of the Council's sanction regimes.

Lastly, I fully concur with your observation,
Mr. President, in the concept note that you circulated
for this debate, that

"[i]t is important for the Security Council
to conduct constructive debates on its working
methods continuously and periodically."(S/2018/66, annex, para. 7)

The role of non-permanent members in shaping
and codifying Security Council working methods has
proved to be very valuable and constructive. They bring
fresh ideas and are instrumental in adopting decisions
on new working processes.

I would like to wish you and your country,
Mr. President, only the greatest success in your
chairmanship of the Informal Working Group for
the current year, building on previous development
achievements and making further improvements
where possible.

