We thank Germany and Ms. Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, German Federal Minister of Defence, for holding this debate at a time when human rights are under great pressure, multilateralism is facing its most serious challenge and peace is under threat everywhere in the world - making peacekeeping a necessity. Whether clearly stipulated in their mandate or not, peace operations protect and promote human rights every day. As Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary- General for Peace Operations, has explained: "We should not forget that our peacekeepers - civilian, police, men and women, military personnel - are saving lives every day. They are protecting civilians ... It is important to recognize the added value of peacekeeping and what we bring to the societies and nations that are destabilized." As a country hosting a peacekeeping mission, we can testify to the impact of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in terms of human rights. Present in Lebanon since 1978, over the decades UNIFIL has contributed to the protection of countless civilian lives that otherwise would have been lost. Outreach by UNIFIL personnel to the local population has proved useful and impactful, particularly through quick-impact projects that provide better access to basic services for the local population. States bear the primary responsibility for ensuring respect for human rights for their citizens, but peacekeepers have a role to play in protecting human rights. Enhanced coordination and dialogue among host countries, the population and the leadership of peacekeeping missions are paramount to the safety of mission personnel and to their ability to perform their duties to protect civilians, thereby helping them to attain the main basic right to be safe and to live in peace. That entails granting peacekeeping missions the necessary means, human and financial, to perform their mandate, with the necessary predeployment training to carry it out, especially if it includes human rights elements. Moreover, the full backing and support of the Security Council members for peacekeeping missions are indispensable to the implementation of their mandates. Nothing is more effective than the unity of the Security Council in upholding international law and acting as a deterrent to human rights violators in an area of conflict. Those who violate human rights depend on divisions within the international community to continue committing human rights atrocities with impunity. The Security Council should deprive the violators of this tool by uniting around human rights as one of the most important tasks of any operation that has the word peace as part of its name. Human rights are intrinsically linked to peace and security. There can be neither peace nor security in the absence of human rights or when these rights are trampled. This makes it essential that peacekeeping missions monitor human rights abuses and support the vulnerable, especially women and children. Women have proved to be a great asset to peacekeeping missions for many reasons. They are easy to approach and bond with; they are trusted, which makes them more effective in dealing with the host community; and they empower women and girls by their mere presence. As the world celebrates the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, we need to acknowledge the important role that women peacekeepers have played, and play every day, in promoting human rights to allow for real peace and sustained security to take hold. Lebanon is grateful to have one of the most successful peace operations - UNIFIL. The UNIFIL leadership understood early on the importance of working with the local population, not only to help them preserve their most important right to live in peace but also to assist them in making their daily lives more sustainable through environmental, health and educational projects. Women peacekeepers in UNIFIL play an important role as a bridge with the local community, where trust is indispensable for implementing the mandate. The access that the population, especially children, have to United Nations information and educational training teach the children about their rights and about the importance of working together in the community, as well as with the peacekeepers to preserve peace. There is no peace and security without preserving human rights and the basic rights to live in peace and in liberty, free of fear or want. Peacekeeping operations should keep this as the most important task to inform the implementation of their mandates. A security approach alone can bring neither peace nor security.
