Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): It is an honour to
have Their Excellencies the Vice-President and the
Foreign Minister of Colombia with us today.

On behalf of the British people and Government, I
too would like to begin by expressing my condolences
to our colleagues of Cote d'Ivoire, to the family and
friends of Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue, and to our friends
in Cote d'Ivoire and its Government and people. It is
indeed a great loss and we send them all our condolences
and sympathy.

Turning to Colombia, it is very good to have the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia with us again. He and I have known each
other for a very long time. I would like to thank him for
his work and that of his entire team on the ground. This
is a historic peace agreement. I think Colombia is to be
congratulated on taking this tremendously important
and historic step that ended 50 years of conflict. It is a
huge achievement and serves as a global inspiration for
others. It shows what can be done for peace when there
is bold leadership.

From its experience with Northern Ireland, the
United Kingdom knows that the implementation of
such agreements is very challenging. I think that it has
proved to be no less challenging for Colombia. The
United Kingdom is proud to stand with Colombia in
support of the implementation process and the country
can rely on us to do so in the months and years ahead.

I was very interested to hear from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General about some of
the remarkable progress that has been achieved over the
past three months, in particular his remarks with regard
to the ruling and the banks. Those were an important
steps forward. We also welcome the congressional
elections in March, which saw the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC) participate in
Colombia's democratic process for the first time. We
believe that this is indeed a key point in FARC's political
transformation and a truly remarkable achievement,
given the short time since the signing of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace in 2016. We also welcome
the progress that has been made in implementing the
Agreement, notably on structures for truth, justice
and reparations for the victims of the conflict and the
activation of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the
Special Unit for the Search for Persons - two very
important steps.

On the resumption of talks with the National
Liberation Army, we welcome the return to dialogue,
but I would also like to mention the very real
challenges that remain for the implementation of the
Final Agreement. Those challenges include continued
insecurity in some of the areas affected by the
conflict, and they can include violence and threats
against former members of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP). The protection measures, including FARC
participation and close protection of its leaders, are
key steps in helping address that, and it is vital that
the Government's strategy for security guarantees is
properly resourced and coordinated with the police, the
Office of the Attorney General and judicial authorities.
I was reassured by what the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General had to say about the arrest of
the FARC leader. We would like to echo those calls for
calm and for ensuring that the provisions of the Peace
Agreement continue to be followed.

One of our other concerns is the levels of violence
against community leaders and human rights defenders.
It is very good that the Special Investigation Unit of
the Office of the Attorney General will be able to
investigate those attacks.

The launch of plan Horus represents a bold and
comprehensive response to security challenges in
vulnerable areas and we look forward to seeing an
ongoing approach to stabilization that is coordinated
with police and civilian agencies. I think that will be
vital for long-term stability.

Turning to the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, we would like to thank its staff, and
Mr. Todd Howland in particular for his leadership at the
Office. We welcome the appointment of his successor,
Mr. Alberto Brunori. The Office has played a key role
in supporting the peace process and we will continue to
watch its work very closely.

In the next weeks and months, it is vital that
reintegration projects are active in all 26 areas for
training and reintegration. That will help prevent further
former FARC-EP members from joining dissident
groups. We look forward to seeing resources unlocked
and timelines accelerated for crop substitution, rural
development and the reintegration of former combatants.

The United Kingdom encourages further progress
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement over
the coming months to support continued progress
towards a sustained peace in Colombia. Colombia can
definitely count on the United Kingdom's continued
and deep support.

