Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on having
convened this open debate of the Security Council on a
subject of great importance: the draft resolution on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors.

Peru entirely shares the concern of all countries
that weapons of mass destruction could fall into the
hands of non-State actors. To a certain extent, we also
recognize the gaps in the current international regime,
which is binding solely on States. That is a fact we
acknowledge. My country is fully aware of what it
means to be the victim of terrorist attacks and in that
regard understands the fears about the possible use by
terrorists of weapons of mass destruction, which have
led to the submission of this proposal.

We do not believe, however, that we ought
therefore to forget the quid pro quo between the current
international non-proliferation regime and
disarmament. A draft resolution advocating the non-

proliferation of weapons of mass destruction should not
be isolated from the issue of nuclear disarmament.
Those concepts have been united since 1965.

I reiterate that there are gaps in the current non-
proliferation regime with respect to non-State actors. If
the intention is to establish a more rigid, stricter non-
proliferation regime, that gap should be bridged, but
not to the detriment of disarmament. We also believe
that, in the final analysis, a regime intended to be
stricter and to apply to non-State actors must not be
established to the detriment of countries' ability to
legislate in that area through an international treaty on
an equal footing.

We believe that the current text of the draft
resolution remains ambiguous in its following
elements. First, it is not clear with regard to sanctions
or coercive measures that may be taken in cases of
non-compliance. Secondly, it does not include a
specific list of materials for the production of weapons
of mass destruction that are subject to control, which
could lead to conflicting interpretations. Thirdly, it
raises a number of questions regarding follow-up and
monitoring mechanisms.

I know that Peru's concerns are shared by many
States. In that connection, we believe that consultations
must continue in order to arrive at a realistic, well-
balanced solution. It should be very clear that my
country has no argument with the idea that there is an
urgent need for concrete action, given the threat posed
by the relative ease with which non-State actors can
gain access to weapons of mass destruction. We
believe, however, that the adoption of the text before us
should be subject to further consultations in order to
ensure broader support. A critical mass of countries
must support the draft resolution in order to give it
legitimacy, which is always necessary in countering
terrorism.

