Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, as well as for calling this meeting on an
important item to debate the basic tasks of the Security
Council. I also wish to thank you for your efforts to
prepare the draft presidential statement and to preside
over the negotiations on it.

We also wish to welcome Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who is
participating officially in a meeting of the Security
Council for the first time as Secretary-General. I would
also like to take this opportunity to congratulate him on
his appointment. I wish him every success in
discharging the tasks entrusted to him by the Charter
and in contributing effectively, through his unique
position, to international efforts designed to uproot the
numerous evils that threaten international peace and
security and the welfare of peoples. We are confident
that his experience, wisdom and skill will lead to the
attainment of the goals to which we aspire.

We are also pleased at the enthusiasm Mr. Ban
has demonstrated in leading the international
Organization. We shall be quite prepared, through our
membership of the Security Council, to cooperate with
him as regards the matters before the Council.
Effective cooperation between the Council and the
Secretary-General is a sine qua non for the success of
our work. In the efforts to maintain international peace
and security, there must be concerted action between
the Secretary-General and the Secretariat, on the one
hand, and between the Security Council and the other
bodies of the United Nations, on the other hand.

Given that under the Charter of the United
Nations, which established the Security Council, the
Council's basic responsibility is to maintain
international peace and security, it is fitting that the
Council should comprehensively address threats to
international peace and security. This is an opportunity
to underscore the Council's efforts to deal with such
threats. It is also an opportunity to examine new
threats, for the changing world is subject to
unpredictable threats. The Council accorded this issue
the attention it deserves when it convened a high-level
meeting in September 2005 to take up the matter at the
level of heads of Government.

The concept of security has evolved over the
years and become more comprehensive, broadening to
include issues such as collective security and others
that were overlooked by established concepts
pertaining to armed conflict. Wars are not the only
thing that threatens people's security. We should do our
best to prevent conflict and to make peace. All United
Nations bodies should work together to achieve that
goal, and the Council should cooperate with other
organs to achieve that objective. According to the
Charter of the United Nations, the main task of the
Security Council is the maintenance of international
peace and security. That should be in line with the
principles enshrined in the Charter regarding the
maintenance and development of peaceful relations
between States and the prevention of conflict. The
Council has a great responsibility in that connection.

We cannot deny the complementary link between
development and peace, on the one hand, and human
rights, on the other. In fact, the United Nations cannot
confine itself to the maintenance of international peace
and security; it should also focus on socio-economic
development and the protection of human rights. None
of those goals can be achieved in isolation from the
others. The establishment last year of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights
Council illustrated the interest of the international
community in that regard.

New challenges have emerged recently in the area
of threats to international peace and security, including
the threat of terrorism. The international community
must stand against such scourges, including the threat
posed by weapons of mass destruction, whose
proliferation we must do our best to prevent. We come
from a region that has been plagued by conflict for a
long time. We look to the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to achieve just and lasting peace and
development in our region.

In conclusion, we once again wish every success
to the Secretary-General and his aides, and reiterate
our support for and cooperation with the Organization
and him.

