Mr. Osvald (Sweden): Let me, first of all, say that
my delegation stands fully behind the statement of the
Netherlands made this morning on behalf of the European
Union.

The decision today to establish the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA), marks the
beginning of a new phase in the United Nations
involvement in the support of the Angolan peace process.
This is an important and challenging step, made possible
by recent progress in the peace process.

MONUA will play an important role in ensuring a
more secure and stable political environment in Angola.
Sweden welcomes the fact that the main focus of this new
mission will be the civilian aspects of the peace process.
The tasks given are appropriate to the circumstances now
prevailing in Angola. Not least important is the fact that
the mandate of MONUA complies with the parties'
request for an enhanced presence of human rights
observers in the country. Respect for human rights is
essential to the process of national reconciliation.

The international community will continue to assist
the people of Angola, as it has in the past. For its part,
Sweden has committed itself to continuing to provide
assistance to Angola. However, the ultimate responsibility
for restoring peace and stability in the country rests with
the Angolans themselves. We urge the parties to seize the
opportunity before them and implement fully their
remaining obligations under the Lusaka Protocol, thereby
enabling the true consolidation of the peace process.

There are crucial challenges ahead. Progress in the
normalization of State administration will be key to
progress in other areas of the peace process. Particular
attention also needs to be given to the rapid completion
of remaining military tasks. The resolution before us
demands that UNITA provide the Joint Commission with
full information about the armed personnel under its
control, so that they can be disarmed and demobilized in
accordance with the Lusaka Protocol.

Despite significant progress in the peace process, we
remain deeply concerned about the reports of clashes
between the parties in the northeastern parts of Angola.
The parties must refrain from any military or other action
which could jeopardize lasting peace in the country.

 

The security situation is still far from satisfactory in
many parts of Angola. In its decision today, the Council
underlines the need to make sure that developments on the
ground and progress in the peace process are taken into
account when the scheduled withdrawal of the United
Nations formed military units is implemented. This will be
important to the success of MONUA. We therefore
welcome the review of the situation scheduled for August.
The parties must guarantee the freedom of movement and
safety of the personnel of the new mission, as well as of
other United Nations staff. In particular, recent harassment
of United Nations personnel by UNITA must end.

Clearly, it is now time for President dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi to show their continued commitment to the
peace process by meeting in person as soon as possible and
on national territory. We urge them to do so. It is our firm
belief that such a meeting could lead to further progress on
the road towards national reconciliation.

In conclusion, Sweden reiterates its gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre
Blondin Beye, the three observer States - Portugal, the
Russian Federation and the United States - as well as the
personnel of UNAVEM. III for their efforts to assist the
parties in Angola to advance the peace process.

