The Secretary-General: I am honoured to be
with you today. The subject you are debating - threats
to peace and security - is a broad and complex one.
There are any number of aspects fully deserving of
your attention, including the need to prevent conflict in
Africa. On the latter, crucial issue, I consider it
thoroughly appropriate that at this summit you have
reflected the priority it deserves, as is the case in the
daily work of the Security Council.

On this occasion I will focus my remarks on
efforts to combat international terrorism in all its
forms. Terrorism constitutes a direct attack on the
values for which the United Nations stands: the rule of
law, the protection of civilians, the peaceful resolution
of conflicts and mutual respect among people of
different faiths and cultures.
We must be at the forefront of the fight against
terrorism. That is why, this year, on the anniversary of
the Madrid bombings, I proposed, as you heard earlier,
a comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy for the
United Nations.

I am heartened that the world summit outcome
document (General Assembly resolution 59/314, annex) has welcomed elements of that strategy and has
committed to their early consideration at the sixtieth
session of the General Assembly. The strategy consists
of actions in five areas.

First, we must work to dissuade disaffected
groups from choosing terrorism as a tactic. That means
that the international community should complete a
comprehensive convention that outlaws terrorism in all
its forms. It also means that civil society and religious
leaders must raise their voices against terrorism. We
must all make clear, as all Member States affirm in the
summit document, that terrorism, "committed by
whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes"
(Ibid., para. 81), can never be accepted orjustified.

Secondly, we must deny terrorists the means -
above all, weapons of mass destruction - to carry out
their attacks. The ongoing implementation of Security
Council resolutions is critical. Five months ago, the
General Assembly reached a milestone by approving
the International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. I hope States will accede to
that convention without delay.

Thirdly, we must deter States from supporting
terrorists. All States must know that if they provide
support for terrorists in any form, this Council will not
hesitate to take coercive measures against them.

Fourthly, we must develop State capacity to
prevent terrorism. That includes promoting good
governance and the rule of law. In that context, I
welcome the establishment of the United Nations
Democracy Fund, and I thank the nearly 30 States that
have provided it with generous support.

Fifthly, we must defend human rights. That is
essential if we are to prevent terrorists from
unravelling the very fabric of the societies they attack.

Finally, let us never forget the victims of
terrorism. The Council has agreed to explore the
possibility of an international fund to compensate
victims and their families, to be financed in part with
assets seized from terrorist organizations. I hope you
will give this your active consideration.

I hope too that you will give your full backing to
all points of the strategy I have outlined. Let us ensure
that the United Nations plays its role in this fight to the
full.

