Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Representative Jan Kubis for introducing
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security (S/2014/163), as well as the representative
of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for sharing with
the Security Council the vision and priorities of his
Government, which are essential to our work.

Today Afghanistan is preparing for the 5 April
elections, which the Secretary-General rightly considers
to be a landmark event, as they will be the first transfer
of power in Afghanistan from one president-elect to
another. Argentina wishes to express to the people
and the Government of Afghanistan its desire that the
presidential and provincial elections will allow the
country to consolidate its political transition, which
will form the basis for strengthening its stability,
reinforcing its national unity and promoting its
sustainable development in an equitable manner.

In order for the political transition to be legitimate,
the elections of 5 April must be transparent, inclusive
and credible. The role of the United Nations in
providing technical support and in facilitating
coherence in international support for the electoral
process, including international observers, is certainly
important. But it is the Afghans themselves who have the
primary responsibility for making the electoral process
complete and inclusive and for making the results
truly representative. In that context, the responsibility
incumbent upon electoral officials is clear, as it is on
the candidates and their followers to comply with the
electoral laws and accept the results from the polls,
channelling their complaints through the institutions
established for that purpose. Fundamentally, it is
necessary that the qualified Afghan citizens come
together en masse to vote in order to ensure the
representativeness of the elections and the elected
authorities that result therefrom.

The participation of women as voters, candidates
and elected officials is crucial. We are concerned
about the disqualification of candidates by the
Independent Electoral Complaints Commission on the
basis of education, not least because such decisions
principally affect women. The number of women on
the Commission, which represents less than 8 per cent
of the Commission as a whole, in a country where the
female population is larger than the male population,
is insufficient, although we recognize the efforts
undertaken to increase the participation of women.

Finally, citizens should exercise their rights in a safe
environment, not only in Kabul but also in the interior
of the country. Security will be critical to ensuring
that voters trust that they can express their will. The
challenges in that regard cannot be underestimated.

The challenges that the authorities elected in
the 5 April elections will face are both known and
overwhelming. They include achieving the generalized
desire for peace of the Afghan people through the
realization of agreements that prevent or mitigate in
the short term the growing cost in lives of civilians as
a result of the complex conflict affecting the country.
In that context, a peace process or direct talks among
the Government of Afghanistan and the principal
armed opposition groups is essential, as is continuing
to strengthen bilateral ties between Afghanistan and
countries of the region at a time when the international
community is reducing its presence in the country.
There is no substitute for meaningful discussions that
include the Taliban and other insurgent groups to bring
an end to the spiral of violence that continues to bloody
Afghanistan, as is seen in the number of attacks that
took place in 2013 - the second highest number in
terms of levels of violence since the fall of the Taliban
regime.

A modern, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan
depends in large measure on the success of the
reconciliation process in the framework of a
comprehensive strategy for the protection and promotion
ofhuman rights and access to education, health care and
employment for all Afghans. In that respect, prioritized
efforts should focus on the acceleration and consolidation
of Afghanistan's progress on human rights since 2001.
It is the absolute responsibility of the Government of
Afghanistan to ensure the full implementation of the
law on the elimination of violence against women
and that perpetrators of violence, particularly against
women, are held accountable for their actions.

It is no surprise that a country with the human, cultural
and natural resources of Afghanistan is considered one
of the least developed countries in the world, when
its security sector demands nearly 50 per cent of its
annual budget. In that context, the implementation of
the Kabul process and the coordination of development
assistance remain essential. It is important that the
international community continue to provide for the
5.4 million Afghans lacking access to health care and
the 2.2 million facing food insecurity.

Argentina voted in favour of resolution 2145 (2014)
because it believes that the role of the United Nations
will remain equally critical in the election process,
in assisting the future Government to coordinate
international aid, in good offices and the peace process,
as well as in human rights and humanitarian assistance
and economic and social development in the long term.

