Mrs. Baghirova (Azerbaijan): It is an honour for
the Republic of Azerbaijan to take the floor on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries at this
quarterly open debate on a matter to which we have
historically attached special importance, namely, the
situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine.

At the outset, it is a great privilege to convey
our profound respects to Her Excellency Mrs. Naledi
Pandor, Minister for International Relations and
Cooperation of the Republic of South Africa, a fellow
non-aligned country, and to congratulate her delegation
on its presidency and leadership of the Security Council
throughout this month.

Just five days ago, the Ministerial Committee ofthe
Non-Aligned Movement on Palestine was convened in
Baku to review the latest developments in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
Regrettably, the situation remains critical and clearly
unsustainable. In its unanimously adopted political
declaration, the Ministerial Committee renewed, inter
alia, the Movement's abiding solidarity with, and
unwavering support for, the inalienable rights and just
cause of the Palestinian people and called once again
for a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the
question of Palestine, which has been delayed for too
long and caused too much human suffering and tragedy
over the decades. In that regard, the member States
of the Movement seize this opportunity to once again
reaffirm that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict - with
the Israeli occupation at its core - continues to pose
a serious threat to regional and international peace and
security and requires urgent attention and action, in
accordance with international law, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and, of course, the Charter of the
United Nations itself, as well as the tools provided
by multilateral diplomacy for the peaceful resolution
of conflicts.

The Security Council has a clear responsibility

to ensure the maintenance of international peace
and security. It must uphold its Charter duties and
act to implement its own resolutions, which not only
constitute the foundation for a peaceful, just and lasting
solution to the conflict but are also legally binding on
all States Members of the United Nations. The question
of Palestine cannot be the exception. Hence we remain
deeply concerned that this organ has for too long been
unable to fulfil its mandate on this important question,
owing to the use of the veto by one of its permanent
members. The members of the Movement called on the
Security Council to overcome its paralysis and fulfil
its Charter duties on the Palestine question in order to
restore its credibility and uphold its obligations towards
the achievement of ajust and peaceful solution.

The Non-Aligned Movement still believes that
resolution 2334 (2016), which reaffirmed many other
relevant Council resolutions on the matter, provides
the only Viable path to peace, setting forth the essential
requirements and parameters for achieving a just
settlement on the basis of the two-State solution based
on the pre-1967 borders and in accordance with the long-
standing terms of reference for peace endorsed by the
international community, namely, the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles - including
the principle of land for peace - the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, and ensuring the
fulfilment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their rights to self-determination
and independence within their own State of Palestine
and with East Jerusalem as its capital. Hence we
call for full respect for resolution 2334 (2016) and
the effective implementation of its provisions and
obligations, particularly on the part of the occupying
Power, including States' obligations with regard to
distinction - a matter that is central to accountability.

Similarly, the member States of the Movement
continue to call for full respect for and the implementation
of all other relevant resolutions, including with regard
to the complete cessation of all Israeli settlement
activities and the status of occupied East Jerusalem,
as that would create the necessary conditions to put an
end to the occupation, justly resolving the conflict in
all its aspects and making Palestinian-Israeli peace and
security a reality, which would be to the benefit of both
peoples, the region and the international community
as a whole. It is imperative that action be taken
immediately, in line with international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions, in order to redress
the situation on the ground, de-escalate tensions and
foster an appropriate environment for the pursuit of
peace, including by averting unilateral, provocative or
arbitrary measures that serve only to embolden Israel
in further pursuing its illegal policies and practices
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. Actions that violate Security Council
resolutions and the historic status quo of Jerusalem and
its holy sites are provocative and dangerous and destroy
the prospects for peace. They should not be supported
or celebrated by any country. Threats of annexation by
Israeli officials must be unequivocally condemned, and
any measures taken in that regard must be forthwith
rejected as null and void and without any legal effect
and must be met with firm measures of accountability
for such grave breaches.

In relation to the Gaza Strip, the situation remains
of great concern to the Movement, particularly the
grave humanitarian situation, which regrettably
continues to deteriorate day by day. The Non-Aligned
Movement reiterates its call for the complete lifting of
the Israeli blockade, which continues to impose untold
humanitarian, social and economic suffering on the
more than 2 million Palestinian children, women and
men in Gaza. This crisis must be comprehensively
addressed in accordance with international law,
including international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. That should be done in the context of the
overall situation regarding the continuation of the
illegitimate and belligerent Israeli foreign occupation
of Palestinian territory since 1967, including East
Jerusalem, and the unequivocal calls to put an end to
that more than half-century occupation.

In the absence of a solution, the member States
of the Movement reiterate their call for the continued
provision of needed humanitarian and socioeconomic
assistance to the Palestinian people, including
Palestinian refugees. The Non-Aligned Movement
therefore stresses the importance of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), along with other United Nations
agencies and international organizations, in alleviating
the plight of the Palestinians. We call for full support for
the renewal of UNRWA's mandate in order to ensure the
continuity of its vital programmes and its contribution
to regional stability. Given that Israel - the occupying
Power - has clearly abdicated its obligations to protect
the Palestinian civilian population in respect of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, we also reiterate
our long-standing call for the international community
to ensure the protection of the Palestinian people. That
is urgent in order to alleviate the dire state of insecurity
of the occupied population and prevent the further

loss of innocent human lives. Failure to do so can lead
only to further escalations and the tragic loss of more
civilian lives.

In that connection, we reiterate our grave concern
about the lack of accountability for all the violations
committed by Israel, many of which may amount
to war crimes. The absence of justice fosters greater
levels of impunity, leads to the recurrence of crimes
and destabilizes the situation on the ground, thereby
further diminishing the prospects for peace. We
continue to call for international action, particularly on
the part of the Security Council, in order to ensure a
cessation of, and accountability for, the violations that
are being systematically committed by the occupying
Power against the Palestinian civilian population under
its occupation. Israel must comply with its duties
and responsibilities under international law and must
be held to account should it continue to show blatant
contempt for the Council and its own international
legal obligations.

With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all
measures and actions that have been or will be taken by
Israel - the occupying Power - that purport to alter its
legal, physical or demographic status or its institutional
structure, such as its illegal decision of 14 December
1981, as well as any Israeli measures to apply its
jurisdiction or administration there, are null and void
and have no legal effect. In that regard, in line with our
principled position, we once again demand that Israel
abide by resolution 497 (1981) and fully withdraw from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967,
in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). In addition, we reiterate our condemnation of
the unilateral and arbitrary proclamation of the United
States of America in recognizing the Golan Heights as
part of Israel, and we renew our call for the Security
Council to unequivocally condemn that provocative
act. Moreover, the member States of the Movement
emphasize the necessity that Israel withdraw from all
Lebanese territories, including the Shaba'a farmlands,
the Kfar Shuba Hills and the Lebanese part ofAl-Ghaj ar
village up to the Blue Line, in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular
resolution 1701 (2006).

To conclude, we take this opportunity to reiterate our
call for the international community to act collectively
and with responsibility to uphold international law and
to exert and intensify all necessary efforts in support
of the Palestinian cause, the ultimate goal of which is
to bring an end to this historic and grave injustice. We
reaffirm our commitment to promoting a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the question
of Palestine in all its aspects, including the plight of
the Palestine refugees, and reaffirm our support to the
Palestinian people in their struggle to achieve justice
and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national
aspirations, including to self-determination, freedom
and independence in their sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

