Mr. Hammond (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy,
Staffan de Mistura, for all that they are doing to bring
the Syrian parties together. Allow me to also thank you,
Mr. Secretary, for the characteristic drive and energy
that you have brought for months to this process in
establishing the International Syria Support Group.
That has given new momentum to the resumption of
Syrian-led talks and has brought us to this important
occasion today.

Resolution 2254 (2015), which we have adopted
unanimously today, is a further step in that work.
Sadly, it is far too soon for any of us to predict an end
to the Syrian conflict, but I hope that we will look
back on today as a significant step in that direction.
Frankly, on Syria, the Council has too seldom found
the unity it needed to live up to its responsibility for
delivering peace and security, despite some useful
but only partially implemented resolutions. That has
to change. No country, nor any person who has been
involved in Syria's destruction over the past four years,
can take any satisfaction from what has been happening
there. On the Syrian dossier, we have to concede that
we have all failed. We have all been losers, but by far
the greatest losers are the people of Syria themselves.
We have to do better, and we have to do better fast, if
there is not to be still more suffering.

The participants in the International Syria Support
Group came together behind a single aim: to support
the Syrian parties in their efforts to find an end to the
conflict and to tackle the terrorists currently operating
in their country. We all share the sense of urgency that
comes from witnessing the ongoing deterioration of
the humanitarian and security situation in Syria. The
Syrians - over 250,000 of whom have been killed
and millions more forced from their homes - have
borne the brunt of that conflict. It is not a humanitarian
disaster. It is a humanitarian catastrophe. The ongoing
and indiscriminate use of weapons on civilians,
especially artillery and aerial bombardments, including
barrel bombs, continues to cause terror, destruction
and civilian deaths. While Daesh poses a real threat to
Syrians, as well as to the wider region, it is Al-Assad
who bears the responsibility for the majority of the
deaths in Syria.

I commend Saudi Arabia for convening a
broad cross-section of representatives of the Syrian
opposition groups in Riyadh earlier this month. The
agreement reached at that meeting in Riyadh and
the formation of a high-level negotiating committee
showed the determination of the Syrian opposition
groups to come together, whatever their differences, to
play a crucial and constructive role in the talks. They
reaffirmed their commitment to the implementation of
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), working
towards a managed transition away from Al-Assad and
a pluralistic future for Syria. I also welcome Jordan's
efforts aimed at building consensus on identifying the
terrorist groups operating in Syria. While it is for the
Council ultimately to decide to designate any such
groups, theInternational Syria Support Group is in a
privileged position to provide information, analysis
and advice to the Council to assist it. We believe that it
will take time for that review to mature, enabling us to
test which groups are willing to commit to a political
process and a ceasefire.

I would now like to turn to the content of the
resolution just adopted and highlight the areas that will
be critical to the progress of talks.

First, all ofus, both in the Council and in the broader
international community, want to see an national
ceasefire established. To have a realistic chance of
success, a ceasefire must be closely aligned to making
progress on a political transition and on talks between
the Syrian parties under United Nations auspices. We
have seen previous attempts to end the conflict in
Syria undermined by a lack of determination on the
part of the parties to contribute productively to talks.
It is critical that the voices of all Syrian are heard in
this process, including Syrian women and members of
Syrian minorities.

Secondly, there needs to be confidence among
the parties that the political process will deliver real
results, without which neither the talks nor the ceasefire
will be successful. That will not be easy. Five years
of conflict has eroded confidence. Therefore, all the
parties must undertake confidence-building measures,
some of which are identified in the resolution that
we have adopted today. We welcome the work being
undertaken by the United Nations to that end, with
the aim of arriving at modalities for a ceasefire, as
mandated by today's resolution. All parties have a duty
to take care, in their military operations, not to cause
the deaths of civilians, whether by deliberate or by
reckless targeting. The indiscriminate use of weapons,
especially the use of artillery and aerial bombardments,
including barrel bombs, must stop. Medical facilities
and schools have increasingly become targets for aerial
bombardment, something that is abhorrent to all of us
and must stop. All parties must adhere to their duties
under international human rights and humanitarian
law. They must allow humanitarian agencies rapid, safe
and unhindered access throughout Syria by the most
direct routes. There are 13.5 million Syrians in need
of humanitarian assistance. Those people need to see a
change in their lives, if they are to have confidence in
this political process and to feel its benefits. The United
Kingdom is the second-largest bilateral donor to the
humanitarian effort in response to the Syrian conflict,
after the United States. But let us all do more on that
front.
The resolution also reiterates a commitment to
political transition in Syria, following the principles of
the Geneva communique in full, and leading to free and
fair elections under a new Syrian constitution within
18 months. That will involve the establishment of a
transitional governing body with full executive powers
and representative of all Syrians, all of which provides
the framework for talks and an end to the conflict.
That process necessarily involves the departure of
Bashar Al-Assad, not only for moral reasons, given the
destruction that he has unleashed upon his own people,
but also for practical reasons, because it will never be
possible to bring peace and unity to Syria as long as
he remains in office. But we must and will protect the
institutions that are necessary for the future governance
of Syria. That will be possible with a representative
transitional governing body and with the support of the
International Syria Support Group.

While we must seek to end the conflict in Syria,
especially the violence that is directed against civilians,
we must also join in confronting the threat posed by
Daesh and other extremist groups in the country. An
end to the civil war in Syria is critical to tackling Daesh
in the long term. We all agree that terrorist groups must
not and will not benefit from the ceasefire that we are
promoting. A key consideration for the Syrians in the
establishment of the transitional governing body will
be the fight against terrorism. In that fight, they will
have the full support of the International Syria Support
Group and the global coalition to counter the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. Following the appalling
attacks in the Sinai, Beirut, Ankara and Paris, the
Council unanimously decided to adopt resolution
2249 (2015), which calls on all countries to use all
the necessary means to combat Daesh. The United
Kingdom responded to that resolution by extending into
Syria the air strikes that we were already carrying out
in Iraq against Daesh. In that regard, it is vital that all
countries that claim to be fighting Daesh do what they
say rather than direct the bulk of their attacks against
non-extremist opposition groups. There has been clear
evidence over the past weeks that the weakening of such
groups has created opportunities for the expansion of
Daesh in certain areas, the very opposite of the stated
objective.

As well as focusing on the immediate threats, we
must also prepare for the future in Syria. We must
reaffirm our commitment to assist in the post-conflict
reconstruction of the country. Next February, in close
partnership with Germany, Norway, Kuwait and the
United Nations, the United Kingdom will co-host a
conference in London on humanitarian support for
Syria, including a focus on civilian protection, as well
as planning for stabilization. Of course, that conference
will seek to raise the funding that is necessary to meet
the United Nations appeal to support those displaced
by the humanitarian crisis. The United Kingdom is also
committed to supporting post-conflict reconstruction
efforts in Syria, and has already committed to
providing at least $1.5 billion to that work in the long
term, in addition to the more than $1.64 billion we
have so far given in humanitarian aid. I hope that in
February we will see others committing to both the
immediate challenge and the long-term challenge of
reconstruction.

In conclusion, the conflict in Syria is now almost
five years old. During that time, more than 250,000
Syrians have been killed. We all have a duty to prevent
further slaughter. Despite the important step that we
have taken with today's resolution, despite the progress
we have made in Vienna, despite the important steps
forward at the meeting in Riyadh the week before last,
there is still a very long way to go. In order to have
a chance of success, the United Nations will need the
clear and continued support of the International Syria
Support Group, and I know that I can say that it will
have the support of that group. But above all, we need
Syrian leaders of all persuasions to take responsibility
for the future of their country and to take the tough
decisions needed to bring about a lasting political
settlement and an end to the conflict. We can help, but
only the Syrians themselves can bring an end to Syrian
suffering.

