Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this very important
debate. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing. Allow
me also to join others in condemning the terrorist
attack that took place in Burkina Faso, which has
claimed the lives of 29 people. Indonesia would like to
extend its sincere condolences to the Government and
the people of Burkina Faso, in particular to the families
of the victims.

As we mark one year ofthe Action for Peacekeeping
(A4P) initiative, it is an opportune time to take stock
of what has been achieved and what needs to be done
to move the reform process forward. The complex
challenges in the area of peace and security today
require us to work harder and faster to ensure that
United Nations peacekeeping is fit for purpose.

In that context, let me underline three points.

First, we must maintain the positive momentum
on A4P and ensure its effective implementation. The
endorsement by 152 Member States ofthe Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations reflects the wide and strong support for this
reform. Indonesia has been part of this reform since
the beginning and is fully committed to ensuring its
effective implementation.

Indonesia volunteered to become A4P champion
on training and capacity-building while contributing
actively in the context of other clusters. We believe
that all A4P clusters are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing and thus that implementation must cover all
of them equally.

Secondly, peacekeepers must be equipped
effectively and provided with the necessary training, as
training correlates with stronger performance. With the
requisite training, peacekeepers will be able to better
protect themselves and the local population. That is
why Indonesia chose training and capacity-building as
the theme of the open debate held during its presidency
last May (see S/PV.8521), which resulted in the adoption
ofa presidential statement (S/PRST/20l9/4).

As part of its commitment, last June Indonesia
also conducted an international seminar on preparing
modern armed forces for peacekeeping operations.
We were honoured to have Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix attend that seminar in Jakarta as well as visit
the Indonesia Peacekeeping Center in Sentul, and I
would like to thank Mr. Lacroix for his presence there.
Next year Indonesia will host a triangular partnership
project to provide training for peacekeepers in South-
East Asia and beyond.

Thirdly, we must increase the participation of
women in peacekeeping. It is evident that women bring
significant added value to the success of peacekeeping
as well as to peace processes in general. As Minister
for Foreign Affairs Retno Marsudi said in this Chamber
last May, investing in women equals investing in peace.

For our part, we are proud that there are now 126
Indonesian female peacekeepers in eight missions, and
we are committed to increasing their number. As part
ofits commitment, Indonesia hosted a regional training
session on women and peace in Jakarta last April
that aimed to establish a strong network of women
peacekeepers in South-East Asia. We are working
actively inside and outside United Nations forums to
ensure a greater role for women in both peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.

Finally, let me underscore that United Nations
peacekeeping missions can best fulfil their mandates
when they are fully supported - politically, financially
and materially. This also requires that all peacekeeping
stakeholders be consulted properly and work
synergistically on the basis ofa common understanding.
United Nations peacekeeping is by nature a collective
undertaking, and therefore, as Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix underlined earlier, partnership among
all stakeholders, including regional and subregional
organizations, is key to moving the reform forward.

Indonesia, as the largest troop- and
police-contributing country in the Council in its
current composition, deploys approximately 3,000
peacekeepers in various missions and remains fully
determined to do its part to contribute to and strengthen
United Nations peacekeeping. We will stand against
any weakening of this venerable and collective flagship
enterprise of the United Nations.

